The Art of SURGERY Explained in SIX PARTS.

Part I. Of Tumors, in forty six Chapters. Part II. Of Ulcers, in Nineteen
Chapters. Part III. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails, in Two Sections, and Nineteen
Chapters. Part IV. Of Wounds, in twenty four Chapters. Part V. Of Fractures, in
twenty two Chapters. Part VI. Of Luxations, in thirteen Chapters.
Being the whole FIFTH BOOK OF Practical Physic.

By Daniel Sennertus Doctor of Physic: And R.W. Nicholas Culpeper Physician
and Astrologer. Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic, and the Liberal Arts.


Above Eight thousand of the said Books (in Latin and English) have been sold
in a few Years.

LONDON. Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers, at
the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1663.

Physic Books Printed by Peter Cole at the Exchange in London. Viz.
1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physic; plainly discovering the Kinds, with the
several Causes of every Disease And their most proper Cures, in respect to the
Causes from whence they come: after a new, easy and plain Method of Knowing,
Foretelling, Preventing, and Curing all diseases Incident to the Body of Man.
Full of proper Observations and Remedies-both of Ancient and Modern Physicians.
Being the Fruit of One and Thirty years Travel, and fifty years Practice of
Physic. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper.

2. Sennertus Practi^al Physic; the fir^^ Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head.
2. Of the Hurt of the internal senses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five
Sections.

3. Sennertus Practi al Physic; the second Book, in four Parts 1. Of the Jaws
and Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart.

4. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physic in fourteen Parts, treating, 1.
Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Mesentery, Sweetbread and
Omentum. 4. Of the Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7 and 8. Of the
Liver 9 Of the Ureters. 10 Of the Kid^es. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and
14 Of the Privities and Generation in men.

5. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physic in three Parts. Part 1. Of the
Diseases in the Privities of women. The first Section. Of Diseases of the
Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of
the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb. The second
Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other Fluxes of the Womb. The third
Section. Of the Symptoms that befall al Virgins and Women in their Wombs, after
they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which are in
Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of Women with Child, and
preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symptoms
that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section Of the Government of Women in
Child bed, and of the Diseases that come after Travel

The first Section. Of Diseases of the Breasts. The second Section. Of the
Symptoms of the Breasts.

To which is added a Tractate of the Cure of Infants. Part 1. Of the Diet and
Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children.

6. Sennertus fif^h Book o Practical Physic, Or the Art of Chyrurgery in six
Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers 3. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds,
with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of
Luxations.

7. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical Physic in nine Parts. 1. Of
Diseases from occult Qualities in general. 2. Of occult, malignant, and
venomous Diseases arising from the internal fault of the humors. 3 Of occult
Diseases from water, Air, and Infections, and of infectious Diseases. 4. Of the
Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poisons in general. 6. Of Poisons from Minerals and
Metals. 7. Of Poisons from Plants. 8. Of Poisons that come from Living
Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charms.

8. (...) Treatise of Chym^^^ (...) ^^ving the Agreemen^ (...) Disagreement of
Chym^^^ (...) G^lenists.

9. (...) ^wo Treatises. 1. Of the (...) 1. Of the Gout.

10 Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: Or the Nature of all things
in the World.

11. Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor Lazarus Riverius Physician and Counselor to the
late King, etc.

12. Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books.

13. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Fi^ures, than any other
Anatomy in English.

14. Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man

15. Riolanus Anatomy.

16. A Translation of the new Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians
of London, in Folio and in Octavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's
Method of Physic.

17. A Directory for Midwives, or a guide for women The First and Second Part.

18. Galens Art of Physic.

19. A new Method both of studying and practicing Physic.

20. A Treatise of the Rickets.

21. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physic for the C mmon People.

22. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic

23. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo.

24. A Treatise of Pulses and Urins.

25. A Treatise of Blood-letting, and Cures performed thereby.

26. A Treatise of Scarification, and Cures performed thereby.

27. The English Physician enlarged.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Character in Latin.

28. The London Dispensatory in Latin, a small Book in Twelves.

29. Chemistry made easy and useful: Or the Agreement and Disagreement of
Chemists and Galenists. By Dr. Cole etc.

30. A New Art of Physic by Weight, or five hundred Aphorisms of Insensible
Transpiration. Breathing or vapor coming forth of the Body. By Dr. Cole, etc.

Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, etc.
Eighteen Several Books of Mr. Burroughs's viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Chr^sts Call to all those that are weary and heavy laden, to come to him for
rest.

2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

3 The only easy way to Heaven.

4 The Excellency of Holy Courage in Evil times.

5 Gospel Reconciliation.

6 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment.

7 Gospel Worship.

8 Gospel-Conversation.

9 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly.

10 An Exposition of the Prophecy of Hoseah.

11 The sinfulness of Sin:

12 Of Precious Faith.

13 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5.15.

14 A Catechism.

15 Moses Choice, etc.

Dr. Hills WORKS. Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. Viz.
1 Of Christ's Intercession,

2 The high Privilege of Believers, That they are the Sons of God.

3 Faith the means to feed on Christ.

4 Of Self-denial.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, collected into two Volumes,
Viz.
1 Scripture Light, the most sure Light.

2 Christ in Travel.

3 A lifting up for the cast down.

4 Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

5 Of Sins of Infirmity.

6 The great things Faith can do and suffer.

7. The great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

8. Satan's Power to tempt and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation.

9. Thankfulness required in every Condition.

10 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

11 Evangelical Repentance

12 The Spiritual Life, and In being of Christ in all Believers, etc.

Four New Books of Mr. Sydrach Sympson.
1. Of Unbelief.

2. Of not going to Christ

3. Of Faith.

4. Of Coveteousness.

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.

Mr. Rogers on Naaman.

A Godly and fruitful Exposition on the first Epistle of Peter: By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The wonders of the Lodestone: By Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew: By Mr. Ward.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Art of Surgery, Explained in SIX PARTS.
PART I. Of Tumors.
CHAP. 1. Of the Nature, Causes, and Differences of Tumors. Page 2401 Chap. 2.
Of Tumors arising from Humors in general. Page 2407 Chap. 3. Of Impostumes.
Page 2411 Chap. 4. Of extreme Corpulency, or overmuch fleshinss. Page 2416
Chap. 5. Of an Inflammation. Page 2420 Chap. 6. Of the Sinus in the Tumor. Page
2441 Chap. 7. Of the Tumor Erysipelas or Rosa. Page 2445 Chap. 8. Of a Bubo.
Page 2446 Chap. 9. Of the Tumor Furunculus. Page 2448 Chap. 10. Of the Tumor
Phyma. Page 2449 Chap. 11. Of the Tumor Phygethlon. Page 2450 Chap. 12. Of the
Tumor Parotis. ibid. Chap. 13. Of a Carbuncle. Page 2453 Chap. 14. Of the Tumor
Paronychia. Page 2459 Chap. 15. Of Perniones or Kibes. Page 2460 Chap. 16. Of
the Tumor Ecchymoma. Page 2462 Chap. 17. Of the Tumor Herpes Page 2467 Chap.
18. Of the Tumor Oedema Page 2470 Chap. 19. Of a Scirrhus. Page 2473 Chap. 20.
Of a Cancer Page 2476 Chap. 21. Of a Watery Tumor Page 2481 Chap. 22. Of
Exanchemata, Ecchymata, Papulae, Pustulae, Phlyctenae, and Eczesmata. Page 2482
Chap. 23. Of Vari or Pimples. Page 2484 Chap. 24. Of Sudamina, and Sirones.
Page 2485 Chap. 25. Of Epinyctides, and Terminthi. Page 2486 Chap. 26. Of
Essere. Page 2487 Chap. 27. Of Scabies, or Scabiness. Page 2488 Chap. 28. Of
Lepra of the Greeks. Page 2495 Chap. 29. Of Vitilligo, or Leuce, and Alphus.
Page 2497 Chap. 30. Of the Tumors, Impetigo, and Lichen. Page 2500 Chap. 31. Of
Gutta Rosacea. Page 2502 Chap. 32. Of Crusta Lactea, Achores, Favi, Tinea,
Ficus, Helcydrium, Psydracia, and Phthiriasis. Page 2504 Chap. 33. Of Strumae,
and Scrofulae. Page 2506 Chap. 34. Of Ganglium, and Nodi. Page 2507 Chap. 35.
Of Meliceris, Atheroma, and Steatoma Page 2510 Chap. 36. Of Testudo, Talpa or
Topinaria, and Natta Page 2513 Chap. 37. Of Verrucae or Warts. Page 2514 Chap.
38. Of Cornua Page 2517 Chap. 39. Of Fungi Page 2518 Chap. 40. Of Tumors
Malignant and Poisonous, and in special of Elephantiasis. Page 2520 Chap. 41.
Of a flatulent or windy Tumor. Page 2527 Chap. 42. Of Tumors proceeding from
the solid parts falling down into, or resting upon some other parts, in
general, Page 2528 Chap. 43. Of Aneurysma Page 2529 Chap. 44. Of the swollen
Veins, called Varices Page 2533 Chap. 45. Of the Elephantiasis of the Arabians
Page 2537 Chap. 46. Of Particular Tumors Page 2538
PART II. Of Ulcers.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature and Differences of an Ulcer Page 2544 Chap. 2. Of a
simple, or single Ulcer. Page 2546 Chap. 3. Of an Ulcer with a Distemper. Page
2553 Chap 4. Of an Ulcer with the afflux of Humors Page 2556 Chap. 5. Of the
Sordid, Putrid, and Corroding Ulcer Page 2557 Chap. 6. Of an Ulcer with Tumors.
Page 2559 Chap. 7. Of proud flesh growing forth in Ulcers Page 2560 Chap. 8. Of
an Ulcer that is wan, and Callus ibid. Chap. 9. Of Ulcers that are hallowed and
furrowed. Page 2561 Chap. 10. Of Fistula's Page 2563 Chap. 11. Of an Ulcer,
with Vermin, or Worms breeding therein. Page 2568 Chap. 12. Of a Varicose
Ulcer ibid. Chap. 13. Of an Ulcer with the rottenness of a Bone. Page 2569
Chap. 14. Of Ulcers hard to be cured, commonly called Cacoethe, Telephium, and
Chironium Page 2572 Chap. 15 Of the Ulcer Phagedaena Page 2574 Chap. 16 Of an
Ulcer with pain Page 2576 Chap. 17 Of the Ulcers of the Legs, and other
particular Ulcers ibid. Chap. 18 Of Burnings Page 2577 Chap. 19 Of a Gangrene
and Sphacelus Page 2584
PART III. Of the Vices of the Skin, Hair, and Nails.
SECT. I. Of the Vices of the Skin.
Chap. 1. Of the color of the Skin changed, (in general) and in special
touching that blackness that is contracted from the Sun Page 2598 Chap. 2 Of
the Ephelides in Women with Child Page 2600 Chap. 3 Of Lentigines, Pimples, or
specks in the Face ibid. Chap. 4 Of Cosmetical, or Beautifying Medicaments Page
2601 Chap. 5 Of those they call Mother Spots, or Blemishes Page 2604 Chap. 6 Of
the Volatick or flitting spots of Infants Page 2605 Chap. 7 Of the spots and
blemishes that the Germans call Hepatick, or Liver-spots ibid. Chap. 8 Of the
Itch Page 2606 Chap. 9. Of the ill and offensive Smell Page 2608
PART III.
SECT. II. Of things amiss in the Hair and Nails.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature of the Hairs Page 2611 Chap. 2 Of things amiss in the
Hair; and first, of Baldness and want of a Beard. Page 2613 Chap. 3 Of the
shedding of the Hair Page 2616 Chap. 4 Of Alopecia and Ophiasis Page 2618 Chap.
5 Of Tinea or Worms eating off the roots of the Hair Page 2621 Chap. 6 Of the
Cleaving of the Hair Page 2622 Chap. 7 Of hoariness in the Head and Beard ibid
Chap. 8 Of the Scurfiness and Dandrif of the Head Page 2626 Chap. 9. Of Plica
Polonica Page 2627 Chap. 10 Of the Vices of the Nails Page 2643
PART IV. Of Wounds.
Chap. 1 Of the Nature, Causes, and Differences of a Wound Page 2593 Chap. 2 Of
the Diagnostick Signs Page 2595 Chap. 3 Of the Prognostics, and the
foretelling of the Event of Wounds ibid. Chap. 4 Of the Cure of Wounds, and
first of all, touching the Indications Page 2614 Chap. 5 Of things extraneous,
and from without, that are to be taken forth of a Wound. Page 2616 Chap. 6 Of
the Provision that is necessarily to be made for the binding up of Wounds. Page
2619 Chap. 8 Of the Swathing of wounded parts. Page 2622 Chap. 8 Of those
Medicaments that are necessary for the Curing of Wounds Page 2628 Chap. 9 My
Judgment touching the Method of Caesar Magatus, and Ludovicus Septalius, in
their Curing of Wounds Page 2639 Chap. 10 Of the Weapon Salve Page 2654 Chap.
11 Of altering Medicaments, and Vulnerary Potions Page 2663 Chap. 12 Of the
Diet of Wounded Persons. Page 2667 Chap. 13 Of keeping the flux of humors from
the Wounded part Page 2669 Chap. 14 Of the Wounds of the Veins and Arteries;
and of the stopping the Haemorrhage in Wounds Page 2671 Chap. 15 Of the Wounds
of the Nerves, and Tendons, in general, and of the pricking of the Nerves Page
2674 Chap. 16 Of the downright Wounds of the Nerves, as also of the Ligaments,
by Cutting. Page 2683 Chap. 17 Of the Wounds of the Joints. Page 2685 Chap. 18
Of a Wound with a Contusion. Page 2687 Chap. 19 Of Wounds caused by the biting
of Living Creatures Page 2689 Chap 20 Of Wounds by Gunshot Page 2691 Chap. 21
Of Poisoned Wounds Page 2704 Chap 22 Of Particular Wounds Page 2710 Chap. 23 Of
the Diseases, and Symptoms that happen unto Wounds ibid. Chap. 24 Whether it be
Lawful for a Christian by Amulets (the Greeks call them Periapta, we
Preservatives) or else by hanging Seals about their bodies, or by the like
means to defend and preserve themselves from all danger by Weapons. Page 2716
PART V, Of Fractures.
Chap. 1. Of Fractures, and the Cure of them in General Page 2727 Chap. 2 Of a
Fracture with a Wound Page 2739 Chap. 3 Of a Fracture with a Wound in which
there is no bone made bare, and yet nevertheless a Cause to fear the falling
forth of some fragments of the broken bone Page 2742 Chap. 4 Of the
preternatural Affects that happen unto Fractures Page 2744 Chap. 5 Of Distorted
and ill set Bones. Page 2745 Chap. 6 Of Correcting the Callus that is greater
or less then what it ought justly to be. Page 2746 Chap. 7 Of the Slenderness
and Weakness of the Member Page 2747 Chap. 8 Of the Fracture of the Arm. Page
2748 Chap. 9 Of the Fracture of the Shoulder. Page 2749 Chap. 10. Of the
Fracture of the Leg Page 2750 Chap. 11 Of the Fracture of the Thigh. Page 2751
Chap. 12 Of the Fracture of the Nose Page 2753 Chap. 13 Of the Fracture of the
Jaw bone Page 2754 Chap. 14 Of the Fracture of the Channel bone, or the Bone of
the Throat Page 2755 Chap. 15 Of the Fracture of the Shoulder Blade Page 2756
Chap. 16 Of the Fracture of the Sternum, or Breast Bone. Page 2757 Chap. 17 Of
the Fracture of the Ribbs. Page 2758 Chap. 18 Of the Fracture of the Spina
Dorsi, or Back bone Page 2760 Chap. 19 Of the Fracture of the bones of the Hand
Page 2761 Chap. 20 Of the Fracture of the Hip-hone. ibid. Chap. 21 Of the
Fracture of the Whirlbone in the Knee ibid. Chap. 22. Of the Fracture of the
Bones of the Foot Page 2762
PART VI. Of Luxations.
Chap. 1 Of Luxations in general Page 2669 Chap. 2 Of a Luxation with Pain,
Inflammation, Wound, Fractures Page 2672 Chap. 3 Of a Luxation of the Mandible.
Page 2674 Chap. 4 Of a Luxation of the Channel Bone. Page 2675 Chap. 5 Of a
Luxation of the Back bone and Ribs Page 2676 Chap. 6 Of a Luxation of the
Shoulder. Page 2677 Chap. 7 Of a Luxation of the Elbow and Radius Page 2681
Chap. 8 Of a Luxation of the Hand and its Fingers Page 2682 Chap. 9 Of a
Luxation of the Thigh. ibid. Chap. 10 Of a Luxation of the Patel Bone. Page
2685 Chap. 11. Of the Knee Luxated ibid. Chap. 12 Of the Distraction of the
Bracer. Page 2686 Chap. 13 Of a Luxation of the Foot and its Bones, and of the
Toes bid
Books Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of LONDON, at the
Exchange.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper and A. Cole, etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books.

2 Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy.

3 Sennertus two Treatises. 1 Of the Pox. 2 Of the Gout.

4 Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius.

5 Riolanus Anatomy.

6 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man.

7 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galens Method of Physic.

8 The English Physician Enlarged.

9 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women.

10 Galens Art of Physic.

11 New Method both of studying and Practicing Physic.

12 A Treatise of the Rickets.

13 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People.

14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin,

Mr. Buroughs WORKS. viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest.

2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

3 Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to him.

4 The only Easy way to Heaven.

5 The excellency of holy Courage.

6 Gospel Reconciliation.

7 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment.

8 Gospel Worship.

9 Gospel-Conversation.

10 A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness.

11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea.

12. The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin.

13 Precious Faith.

14 Of Hope.

15 Of Walking by Faith.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light.

2 Christ in Travel.

3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down.

4 Sin against the Holy Ghost.

5 Sins of Infirmity.

6 The false Apostle tried and discovered.

7 The good and means of Establishment.

8 The great things Faith can do.

9 The great things Faith can suffer.

10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation.

12 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

13 Grace for Grace.

14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

15 Evangelical Repentance

16 The Spiritual Life, and in-being of Christ in all Believers.

17 The Woman of Canaan.

18 The Saints Hiding place, etc.

19 Christ Coming, etc.

20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief; or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ.

2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great Sin, yet
Pardonable.

3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And receiving Christ is
Believing.

4 Of Covetousness

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto,
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England. Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the sevententh of John.

Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God.

Dr. Hills WORKS.

The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice.

Wise Virgin, Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England.

Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Cure: Discovering the
Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

Mr. Rogers his Trearise of Marriage.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there.

Mr. Brightman on the Revelation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortallity of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech

Woodwards Sacred Balance.

Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.

Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord
Major of London.

Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance

Englands Deliverance. By Peter Sterry.

The Way of God with his People in these Nations. By Peter Sterry.

Mr. Sympson's sermon at Westminster

Mr. Feaks sermon before the Lord Major.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A sermon.

A Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen Marshal. A sermon.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen of
Dedham. A sermon.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity.

2 The high Privilege of believers, They are the Sons of God.

3 Faith the Means to feed on Christ

4 Self-Denial.

5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc.

6 The Mystery of spiritual Life.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF Practical Physic. OF THE EXTERNAL DISEASES.
THE FIRST PART. Of Tumors.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature, Causes, and Differences of Tumors.
The names of a Tumor.
THAT External Affect which by the Latins is termed a Tumor, Tuber and
Tuberculum, i. e. a greater or a less Swelling; the same do the Grecians call
Onchus; it is likewise by Hippocrates and the ancient Greek Physicians named
Oedema. Oedema
For although in the account of latter Physicians, yea, and in Galen's time
also, such tumors as were soft, and though roughly handled were yet altogether
void of pain, these only were said to be Oedemata, which the Ancients with an
addition called Oedemata Malthaca, and Anodyna, that is, soft and painless
Swellings: Yet this word Oedema with Hippocrates and the more ancient
Physicians signifies in general all, and every particular preternatural Tumor;
as is observed by Galen in the 1. Prognost. text 29. in his Comment upon B. 4.
of the Aphorisms, Aph. 34. on the fifth of the Aphorisms, Aphor. 65, 66. and
elsewhere very frequently. Sometimes also by a general name they call it Phyma,
Phyma.
and then generally it signifies every Tumor that of its own accord, and
without any external cause breaks forth, especially into some one or other
outward part of the body; even as a Plant shoots out of the Earth: the truth of
this will soon appear, if we consult Galen in the sixth of his Epidemicks,
Comment. 1. text. 23. In the Books of the more modern Latins, theirs
especially whom they usually style barbarous, or illiterate, al sorts of
whatsoever Tumors are comprised under the name of an Apostem: nay more, Tumors
whether rightly called Apostems
among these latter Physicians there want not some, who happily ignorant enough
of the Greek Tongue, make bold to write that all those are very much mistaken
who assign any difference between the name of a Tumor and an Apostem: which
Magisterial Censure of theirs notwithstanding clashes both with the Authority
of all the more ancient Physicians, and the propriety of the Greek Tongue.
Apostem, what it is
for the Greek Physicians will have only that Tumor or Swelling which is come to
a suppuration, to be called an Apostem, as after in the third Chapter shall be
shown; and by the Latins this Tumor is termed Abscessus and Vomica; but by the
more Modern and ignorant Authors it is rendered Exitura, from a word taken out
of the Interpreter of Avicen. But now, all Swellings (or Tumors) come not to a
suppuration; as for instance, that which we commonly call Erysipelas or St.
Anthonies fire, Herpes, and oftentimes Phlegmone, which is an unnatural
Swelling hot and red, and of such like Tumors diverse others.

Neither is this confusion and promiscuous use of names to be charged upon the
Arabians, but upon the illiterate Interpreters of them, who have unskilfully
tendered the Arabian words by such as are very unfit and improper. For the
Arabians altogether as exactly as the Grecians have made a distinction in name
betwixt Tumors and Apostems; calling Tumors by a general name Bothor, but an
Apostem they termed Dubellet and Dubellatum. And therefore for the due and
proper signification of each word, the Authors that have written in the same,
and not in a differing Language are to be consulted; that is to say, as Galen
in his small Tract to Thrasybulus (whether or no the art of preserving the
health relate to Physic) in the thirty second Chapter tells us; if it be a word
of the Assyrian Tongue, we must for the right understanding of it have recourse
to those who were the Authors thereof; or if it be a word in the Persian,
Indian, Arabian, or Ethiopian Language, or any other Tongue, we must
accordingly apply our selves to such as are skilful therein.

A Tumor
Now then, what a Tumor may properly be said to be, we will here make an exact
inquiry, with thi^ proviso, of which the Reader is desired to take notice, that
our chief and main drift is here to treat of such Tumors as are besides Natures
intention, and may therefore be justly ranked among the several kinds of
Maladies, or Diseases. Now therefore every swelling or augmentation of a part
beyond its natural habit may not be reputed a preternatural Tumor. For although
some men that are fat and gross grow to a breadth and thickness beyond their
Natural habit; yet notwithstanding, whenas hereby there is not the least hurt
or detriment of any one action caused in them (in which case only something is
said to be preternaturally affected) these may not be said to have in them any
thing that is beside the intent of Nature, Every Tumor is not a Disease
or preternatural, but only something that is not Natural, and above that which
is according to Nature, as Galen says. For there is this middle constitution
betwixt those bodies that are in all points according to Nature, and those that
have in them somewhat that is preternatural, or besides Natures intention, as
the same Galen gives us to understand in his Book of this sort of Tumors, in
the first Chapter thereof. So then, albeit happily the growth of some one part
may be extended beyond its natural habit, yet so that this notwithstanding its
operations may not be impeded, and that there be not the least sense of pain
accompanying it; in this case we say, that such like Tumor or Swelling is nor
besides Nature, neither as yet is it to be termed a Disease, but rather a
symptom. And hence it is also that Galen in his Book of Tumors, entitles it,
not of Tumors simply so called, but of Tumors preternatural. And much less
reason is there that the Breasts of Nurses when they are distended with the
abundance of milk, and hereupon are wont to appear far greater than in tho^^
that give not suck; and likewise in child bearing Women that the lower belly
though exceedingly dilated in such especially who are near their time of
Delivery, should be said to be affected with a Disease; in regard that these
things happen according to the course and Laws of Nature.

But what a Tumor is, A Tumor what it is
and unto what kind of Disease it belongs, is not altogether so manifest. For
many and differing definitions hereof we find given by several Authors, which
here particularly to recite is not requisite, nor worth the while; and Galen
himself seems now and then to thwart himself, and not always to be of one and
the same judgment in giving us the definitions of this Tumor we are now
treating of. For in his thirteenth Book, and first Chapter, of the Method of
Physic, he tells us that a Tumor is a Disease wherein the parts have receded
from their natural habit and quantity. And in his first Book of the causes of
Symptoms, and the second Chapter, he refers Tumors unto organical Diseases; for
there he writes, that Phlegmones or Inflammations, Scirrhos or hard Swellings
in the Skin, Abscessus, i. e. Impostumes or Ulcers, and other affects of this
nature are to be accounted Diseases of the parts instrumental. But in his Book
of the difference of Diseases, Chap. 13. and of the Causes of Diseases, Chap.
6. he reckons up Tumors among the distempers arising from the first qualities,
and the diseases of the similary parts. The Physicians likewise that have
written since his time differ in their Opinions. Fallopius adheres to Galen's
Opinion in his 13. Book, Chap. 1. of the Method of Physic, before mentioned,
and refers Tumors unto those Diseases we call instrumental, to wit, when there
is a preternatural magnitude or augmentation. Hieronymus Capivaccius (in the
Chapter where he writes concerning a Frenzy) tells us, that every tumor must
needs be a disease in the intemperies, or distemper proceeding from the first
qualities; and that there is no necessity why it should be accounted an Affect
arising from an ill constitution: which Opinion of Capivaccius is assented unto
by Hieronymus Fabricius ab aquapendente. But others there are, among whom
Eustachius Rudius is one, who assert that a Tumor is an evil compounded of
magnitude augmented, and a distemper always accompanying it as its
concomitant; and that the augmentation of magnitude with this intemperies, or
distemper proceeding (as before said) from the first qualities, is the formal
cause of every tumor; and Rudius determines that those tumors only which are
caused in the parts by reason of a preternatural afflux of matter, are Tumors
properly so called; but that the Tumors happening in disjoyntings or
dislocations, in the falling down of the Intestines into the Cods, and in the
Tumor Aneurisma, are not properly so to be accounted.

But if we exactly weigh this Controversy, and withal accurately sift out the
signification of the word Tumor, and Onchus; and likewise if we will heedfully
inquire into the essence of a Swelling, as it may be considered in it self, we
must then with Galen rightly define a Tumor under the notion of a swelling; The
definition of a Tumor
that it is an affect or disease in the which the parts of our body recede from
their natural state by an augmentation of their magnitude. For the word Onchus
with the Grecians sounds as much as the distance of the parts, to wit, by
reason of their being extended in magnitude, breadth, and profundity; as is
observed by Galen in the first Chapter of his Book of Humors: so that it may
justly be reputed a grand absurdity in the definition of a Tumor, to assert
that it is this or that, and in the mean time to omit the augmentation of
magnitude; this being all one as to affirm that a Tumor may be without a Tumor,
that is to say, a Swelling. For although it be a truth (which erewhile we
hinted, and that which Galen likewise observes in his Book of the differences
of Diseases, the twelfth Chapter) that a Tumor if it be not such, and so great
that thereby any hurt and detriment shall accrue to the Member affected in any
one of its operations, is not properly a disease, but a symptom; and that that
preternatural Affect ought to be defined rather by the intemperies or distemper
that accompanies it, and very much annoyes the actions, then by the swelling,
which in no wise impedes or offends them: Yet notwithstanding it will not
therefore follow, that a Tumor also which is a disease, and which does indeed
so greatly hurt and hinder the operations, is to be defined rather by the
dyscrasie and intemperies, than by the augmentation of magnitude. And the truth
is, that very frequently Tumors when they have their original either from a
fleshy, or from a boney and hard substance, or lastly from a flatulent Spirit,
which is not internally either hot or cold, are altogether free from an
intemperies, or, as we commonly term it, distemper. In the mean time
notwithstanding we deny not but that other diseases that are no way essential
to a Tumor may yet be joined with and accompany this augmented magnitude which
does altogether constitute and make up the essence thereof. For if the matter
causing the Tumors exceed in heat, cold, dryness, or moisture, it forthwith
derives this distemper unto the part affected; insomuch that hence it comes to
pass that the disease also then concurs, and is concomitant with the
intemperies or distemper. Moreover, if the same matter shall either by corroding
or distending any part disunite what before was close and compact, then there
immediately happens that which we call the solution of Unity. Sometimes also it
comes to pass that the figure and shape of some part is altogether marred, or
at least very much vitiated; and sometimes likewise the Cavities, Pipes, and
Passages are either compressed, or at leastwise very much obstructed through
the abundant afflux of matter: the which accidents very frequently (if not for
the most part) concurring with a Tumor, hence it is also that in the difference
and cure of Tumors, we handle not only the augmented quantity, but likewise
even al those other concomitant Diseases. Mean while it stands good for an
undeniable truth, That a Tumor as such, that is, a Swelling, is an affect or
disease in the magnitude augmented beyond Natures intention, and has its
production from somewhat that is preternatural, and comes to be adjoined to some
one or other part. Nor is it of any validity what Rudius here objects, That in
Tumors which have their original from the humors, and those likewise which have
for their causes the strutting forth and falling down of parts, and such like,
that there the difference is to be taken from the efficient, next, and
containing cause, and that from this cause we may gain excellent, artificial,
and profitable Indications; but not so from the consideration of magnitude
augmented. For albeit they differ in the containing special cause, that this is
now and then an humor, sometimes above, and sometimes also an Intestine or Gut
fallen down; yet in the general cause they agree, which is some one thing or
other preternatural added unto the part, and swelling it up into a Tumor. And
in every Tumor (as it is likewise in all other diseases depending upon the cause
containing) no profitable Indicacion can be gained, or may be expected from
this cause, no not in those Tumors which have their dependence upon the influx
of humors. For the general Indication (though it be altogether useless) is
this, that the humor which lifts up the part into a tumor is to be removed;
but how and by what means this may be effected, is wholly left unto the skill of
the knowing Artist. In the mean time I will not deny but that those tumors which
have their original from the humors may fitly enough be ranked among the
diseases that are compounded of augmented magnitude, distemper arising from the
afflux of matter, and a vitiated figure; yet however this is not to be granted
in all Tumors. And hence it is (without doubt) that Galen has placed the Tumors
one while amidst the Affects of the similary parts, as in the twelfth Chapter
of the difference of Diseases; and as soon again among those Diseases we call
organical, and this he does in the thirteenth of his Method, and first Chapter.

Neither is it to be denied, That now and then Authors whilst they make mention
of preternatural Tumors do not intend al Tumors in general, such as are also
those that are produced by the falling down of the bowels, or by some boney
substance sticking out; but those in special which are caused by the afflux of
humors; and these are evermore diseases that may properly be said to be
compounded of magnitude augmented, intemperies, an unmeet figure, and most
usually also the solution of Unity.

The Cause
The containing Cause of a Tumor, as we take it in the general, is something
beyond Natures intent added unto a part, which elevates, distends, and swells it
up to a more than ordinary greatness.

The Difference
Now the matter which we say is added being threefold, to wit, a Humor, a Wind,
and a solid Substance; the primary Difference then of Tumors ought to be taken
from that which we commonly term the Containing Cause. Tumors then are sometimes
thus differenced, that some are great, others not so; some external, some
internal; some new, others that are of longer standing. But these differences
are merely accidental, denoting a certain mutation or change, and an alteration
of the condition, but the species o^ kinds they vary not in the least. But the
differences specifical, and which constitute the several kinds, are taken from
the matter and the containing Cause, which is threefold, as has been said.
First of al therefore Tumors derive their very being from the humors; but these
as yet have not obtained any peculiar appellations to be called by, but at
leastwise are al of them comprehended under the general name of a Swelling;
yea, as some say, they are only called Tumors. Secondly, Winds it shut up in
any part distend the same, and lift it up into a Swelling or Tumor; and this
sort of Tumors the Grecians call Emphysemata, the Latins Inflationes, by reason
of their windy original. In the third place, now and then somewhat resembling
flesh, or skin, or that is hard and solid as a bone, and other such like matter
is super-added unto some one part, and there causes a Tumor or Swelling: But
in regard that these very substances have their original from the humors, we
will thereupon adjoyn this sort of Tumors unto the first kind. And lastly, even
the very solid parts of the body themselves cause Tumors whenas they change
their place, together with their situation, and slip down upon some other
part, which they both distend and elevate: neither have these any peculiar
names to be known by. There are yet some other differences behind. From the
quality of the concomitant matter, some are said to be hot, others cold; some
moist, others dry; some soft and loose, others hard. From their magnitude, the
greater of them are by a general name simply called Tumors, the less Tubercula.
From their situation, that some are internal, others external; and these again
either more deep and profound, or else superficial. From their figure, some of
them are said to be broad, others again sharp-pointed. But now to comprehend al
those differences of Tumors under names, and to give you the number of them, is
not very easy to do. Galen in the close of his Book of Tumors writes, That
there was not any one kind of these preternatural Tumors which there he had
omitted, but that he had spoken of them all, and had not left any one
unmentioned. And out of that Book Johannes Philippus Ingrassias (in his Book of
tumors, first Tract, first Chapter, and second Commentary, page 77) has
collected Sixty one Tumors, which he reckons up in this order: 1. Corpulentia.
2. Phlegmone. Tumors, their number and names according to Galen
3. Abscessus calidus. 4. Sinus. 5. Fistula. 6. Abscessus ex solidis humidisve
corporibus, that is to say, an impostumated matter issuing from solid and moist
bodies. 7. Atheroma. 8. Steatoma. 9. Meliceris. 10. Anthrax. 11. Cancer. 12.
Gangraena. 13. Sphacelus. 14 Erysipelas. 15. Herpes similiter. 16. Herpes
Esthiamenos. 17. Herpes miliaris. 18. Scirrhus. 19 Ecchymosis. 20. Aneurisma.
21. Oedema. 22. Phagedaena. 23. Vlcus Chironium, seu Telepium. 24. Scabies. 25.
Lepra. 26. Elephantiasis. 27. Exostosis. 28. Satyriasmus seu Priapismus. 29.
Achor. 30. Cerion. 31. Myrmecia. 32. Acrochordon. 33. Psydracion. 34.
Epinyctis. 35. Dothien. 36. Phyma. 37. Bubon. 38. Phygethlon. 39. Struma. 40
Sarcocele. 41. Hydrocele. 42. Epiplocele. 43. Enterocle. 44. Entero epiplocele.
45. Cirsocele. 46. Varices. 47 Bubonocele. 48. Exomphalos. 49. Ascites. 50
Tympanites. 51. Anasarca. 52. Epulis. 53. Parulis. 54. Thymus. 55. Vva. 56.
Paristmia. 57. Antiades. 58 Polypus. 59. Encanthis. 60. Vnguis. 61. Staphyloma.
But Ingrassias himself not content with this number, Tumors, their number and
names according to Ingrassias. Tumors of the Head are twenty seven.
adds unto these one hundred sixty five more; to wit, of such properly
belonging unto the head, twenty seven, the which in page 301. he enumerates
after this manner: 1. Eczesma. 2. Elcydrion, sive Papilla. 3. Sycon, that is, a
Fig, or pushes in the head resembling it. 4. Exanthema. that is, an Ulcerous
blowing out like a flower. 5. Ganglion. 6. Hydrocephalus. 7. Syriasis. 8.
Phrenitis. 9. Lethargus. 10. Typhomania, seu agrypnon coma. 11. Catochus Pauli.
12. Catalepsis, seu Catoche. 13. Carus. 14. Apoplexia. 15. Rhia alsabian. 16.
Sibare. 17 Fatera. 18. Sekakilos. 19. Testudo. 20. Talpa. 21. Topinaria. 22.
Lactumen. 23. Cornu. 24. Alopecia. 25. Ophiasis. 26. Pityriasis. 27.
Phthiriasis. Those properly belonging to the Eyes and the parts thereof, Tumors
of the Eyes, and their parts, 63.
sixty three, which in page 351. he reckons up in this order following. 28.
Proptosis Galeni, sive ecpiesmos Pauli. 29. Taraxis. 30. Ophthalmia. 31.
Epiphora introductorii. 32. Chemosis. 33. Xerophthalmia. 34. Sclerophthalmia.
35. Scirrhophthalmia. 36. Phlyctaena. 37. Bothrion. 38. Coeloma. 39. Argemon.
40. Epicauma. 41. Encauma. 42. Myocephalos. 43. Melon. 44. Clavus Pauli et
Aetii. 45. Clavus introductorii and Celsi. 46. Hypopyon. 47. Onyx. that is,
Vnguis, a Nail. 48. Hyposphagma. 49. Achlys Aetii. 50. Nephielion Aetii. 51.
Vla, or Nephelion. 52. Leucoma. 53. Sebel. 54. Bothor Avicennae. 55. Hymene
panastasis. 56. Nyctalopia. 57. Anthrac^sis. 58. Carcinoma. 59. Synchysis 60.
Mydriasis. 61. Proptosis Pauli. 62. Ptylosis. 63. Madarosis, or Milphosis. 64.
Pladarotes. 65. Emphyspma. 66 Symphysis, or Ancylosis. 67. Eutropion. 68. La^
ophthalmos. 69. Trachoma. 70. Sycosis. 71. Tylosis. 72. Dasyma. 73. Pachytes
74. Barytes. 75. Hydatis. 76 Psocophtha^mia. 77 Truhe. 78. Thalazion. 79.
Porosis. 80. Lit^iasis. 81. Alan^isac. 82. Sude Avicennae. 83. ^arcosis. 84.
Lupia. 85. Mydesis. 86. Pustula Abenzoa^is 87. Scleriasis. 88. Anchilops. 89.
Aegylops. 90. Epinyctis Plinii. And (...) these he mentions many more in other
parts, Tumors in all other parts of the Body, 97.
to the number of ninety seven; and in this following order he sets them down.
91. Auritus. 92. Parotis. 93. Pherea. 94. Ozaena. 95. Sarcoma. 96. Thelu^ Albuc
97. Alharbian Avicennae 98. Chaisum Arabum. 99. Haemorrhoides Arabum. 100
Batrachos. 101. Glossomegethos. 102. Ancyloglosson. 103. Aphtha. 104. Cynanche.
105. Paracynanche. 106. Synanche. 107 Parasynanche. 108. Gongrona. 109 Folium.
110 Bronchocele. 111 Alhadal. 112 Dionysisci. 113. Hypopion 114 Jonthi, or
Vari. 115 Montagra. 116 Ephelis. 117 Ignis sylvaticus. 118 Noli me tangere. 119
Buttizaga. 120 Gutta rosacea. 121 Sparganesis. 122. Chondriosis. 123
Trichiasis. 124 Gynaecomaston. 125 Pleuritis 126 Peripneumonia. 127 Phtoe. 128
Althahalop. 129 Napta. 130 Cyphosis, or Cyrtosis and hybosis. 131 Lordosis. 132
Scoliasis. 133 Coeliacus. 134 Aurys Rasis. 135 Colica. 136 H^os. 137
Condylomata. 138 Haemorrhoides. 139 Marisca. 140 Hepaticus. 141 Cachexia. 142
Altherel, Bellunensis. 143 Thelegi. 144 Altherbel Bellunensis. 145 Splenicus,
Aureliani. 146 Nephritis. 147 Lithiasis. 148 Satyriasmus Pauli. 149 Cercosis.
150 Mola. 151 Nymphomegethos. 152 Kion Hippocratis. 153 Seliroma Pauli. 154
Arthritis. 155 Podagra. 156 Cheiragra. 157 Ischias. 158 Lupia, Guidonis. 159
Tophi. 160 Cornua Avicen. 161 Ancylosis, or Ancyla. 162 Pa^onychia. 163
Pterigion, Celsi. 164 Condya 165 Perniones. 166 Gemursa, Plinii. 167 Dentes
muris, Bellunensis. 168 Alliathan. 169 Lupus. 170 Dactilia, Haliab. 171 Malum
moriuum. 172 Terminthos. 173 Emphysema. 174. Phlyctaena. 175 Turmusios Avicen.
176 Impe^go. 177 Essere. 178 Palmos. 179 Clavus. 180 Calli. 181 Aegritudo
bovina, Abenz. and Albuc. 181 Dracontium. 183 Syrenes, or Pedicelli, Gu^don and
Argelatae. 184 Variolae. 185 Morbilli. 186 Rubeola. 187 Crystalli. 188
Exanthemata. 189 Ecthymata, Fernel. 190 Hidroa, or Sudamina. 191 Epinyctis,
Romanorum. 192 Bothon lenes. 193 Ganglia. 194 Seps Hippocr. 195 Spina ventosa.
196 Bubasticon Vlcus. 197 Hypersarcon. 198 Cacoethes. 199 Sepedon. 200 Nome.
201 Therioma. 202 Herpes Esthiamenos Celsi. 203 Herpes ecthiomenos, Avicen. 204
Thymion, Celsi. 205 Ignis sacer, Celsi. 206 Cerion, Pauli. 207 Paratrimmata.
208 Aposirmata. 209 Zerma. 210 Rancula. 211. Spina. 212 Morsus Diaboli. 213
Patursa, that is, Morbus Gallicus. 214 Scopuli. 215 Tincosati. 216 Pinitae. 217
Spili. 218 Tusius, Avice^^. 219 Eparma, Hippoc. 220 Rosboth. 221 Cunus, Rasis.
222 Albothir, Albucasis. 223 Nakir, Albuc. 224 Alchalan. Abenz. 225. Arcella,
Abenz. 226 Rosulae sataritiae. So that the number of all the Tumors recited by
Johannes Philippus Ingrassias amounts unto two hundred twenty six.

But that Entities should be multiplied in this manner without any cause is
altogether unfitting. For, as all the affects which are here reckoned up under
the name of Tumors are not properly to be accounted Tumors; besides that one
and the same Tumor is sometimes repeated under different names: So again,
Ingrassias having not at this time completed the remaining Sections of his
Works concerning Tumors, it is not sufficiently apparent what Tumors he would
have us to understand under some of these names. Now for the truth of this,
that I may give you an instance or two of what has been said; he reckons up
among Tumors, Sinus and Fistula, Vlcus Chironium, and diverse other Ulcers. But
before or since Ingrassias, who has there ever been that has taken the
liberty, or made so bold to enumerate among the Tumors that are properly so
called, such as are these following, viz. Lethargus, Typhomania, Catochus,
Catalepsis, Carus, Apoplexia, Lordosis, Coeliaca affectio, Colica, Affectus
hepaticus, Splenicus, and other such like Affects, which relate either to
Symptoms, or the kinds of other Diseases, rather than unto Tumors. And in very
truth many of the Tumors wherewith this Catalogue is stuffed, are not peculiar
kinds of Tumors, but only differences of their species according to the parts
affected.

Tumors, their Differences.
Now therefore we conceive that there are two main Differences especially to be
heeded in Tumors; one whereof arises from the variety of Causes, and the other
is by reason of the parts affected. We have said before, that the containing
cause of a tumor is threefold, a Humor, a Wind, and a solid Substance. Again,
the humors are various and much different, to wit, Blood, Phlegm, Melancholy, a
black humor, a waterish and wheyish humor, and diverse other thin excrements; as
also mixed humors, and matter into which other humors degenerate, and likewise
malignant humors.

From the Blood there is caused an extraordinary Corpulency (which the Greeks
call Polysarcia) and an Inflammation. Their Cause containing:
There are likewise that refer a Gangrene and a Sphacelus unto an Inflammation,
in regard that an Inflammation sometimes degenerates into them. But because that
a Gangrene and Sphacelus do very often proceed from other causes without an
Inflammation, and have not always a Tumor to accompany them, and are of nearer
alliance unto Ulcers, very usually degenerating into them; we will therefore
treat further of them anon when we come to speak of Ulcers. But with more right
it is that unto an Inflammation we refer an Erysipelas, or Rosa (as it is
commonly termed) Bubo, Furunculus, Phyma, Phygethlon, Parotis, Carbunculus,
Paronychia, Perni^nes, Ecchymosis; as afterward from the special Explication of
these Affects will further appear.

From Choler is produced Herpes, and its differences.

From the Pituitous or Phlegmy humor proceeds Oedema.

From the Melancholy humor, Scirrhus.

From black Choler, Cancer.

From the watery humor, Hydrocephalus, Hernia aquosa.

But of the wheyie humor, and the thin excrementitious matter called Ichores,
from which various less swellings by the Latins called Tubercula do arise,
there is a very vast difference: and oftentimes these ferous and wheyie humors,
as likewise the salt and choleric humors are mingled with other, and from
hence originally proceed diverse Wheals or Pushes in the ^kin, as to instance,
Psydrasia, Vari, Sudamina, Spinyctides, and Terminthi, Essere Arabum, Elcydria,
Scabies, Lepra Graecorum, Vitiligo, Impetigo, and Lichen, Crusta Lactea,
Achores, Favi, Tinea, with many other of the like Nature.

Moreover from the humors there is derived also a certain peculiar kind of
tumors, yet nevertheless differing from those we have hitherto made mention, of
in a twofold respect. The former difference lies in this, that it proceeds not
from one single humor, but from more, to wit, Phlegm, I mean such as has other
humors, Melancholy or Choler mixed therewith; yet notwithstanding so, that the
cause conjunct may not any longer be said to be an humor, but some other matter
generated from out of those humors. The later difference consists in this, that
the aforesaid matter is included in some one peculiar Membrane. Tumors of this
sort are, Strumae, and Scrofulae, Bronchocele, Ganglia, Nodi, Melicerides,
Atheromata, Steatomata, Testudo, Talpa, and Natta.

Out of the humors likewise (where you are to understand such humors that
degenerate into another matter) take their rise and original those tumors which
the intelligent Artist calls, Polypus, Pamela sub lingua, bernia carnosa,
Verrucae, Fungi, and others the like. There are moreover tumors that have their
very being from malignant humors; and these are Variolae, Morbili, Lepra, as
the Arabians, or Elephantiasis, as the Greeks name it, Tumors Venereal of
different kinds, Bubones, and pestilential Carbuncles.

From flatulency or windiness are derived Emphysemata as the Grecian Authors,
or Inflationes, as the Latins call them, and all other flatulent tumors
whatsoever.

From the solid parts lying out of their proper places arise Hernia in the Cods
and Navel, when the Intestines fall down thither; Epiplocele. And hitherto also
is to be reduced Aneurisma, a tumor that has its original from an Artery
dilated, as in like manner Varix, being a tumor from a dilated Vein.

From the Bones proceeds that which we term Exostosis; and from the Vertebrae
or turning Joints of the Back, when they stick out, is caused Gibbositas; like
as in other parts also tumors arise, when disjoynted or broken Bones slipping
out of their own place happen to fall down thither.

But now those tumors receive various appellations by reason of the part
affected, of which enough has been written already in its due place.

And moreover, as concerning diverse of these Tumors this is to be taken notice
of; that very many and that in most Countries, have indeed been not a little
infested by them; and that they have been likewise as ordinarily cured of them:
but yet notwithstanding, what the German, Italian, French, Spanish and other
names of several Nations are; and unto what names of the Grecians, Latins, and
Arabians they may fitly answer, is not always manifest: which very thing has
exceedingly perplexed and puzzled the studious Physician in his perusual of
Authors. And of this also Johannes Philippus Ingrassias who took a worl^ of
pains in comparing together and explaining the Greek, Latin, and Arabian
names, extremely complains, as will appear by what he writes in his Book of
tumors, Tract. 1. Chap. 1. page 220 after this manner. I cannot but exceedingly
admire, and withal greatly lament the so great unhappiness of our Age, in the
which we are evermore infested with diverse and almost innumerable kinds of
Diseases, and day after day are sadly afflicted especially more with this kind
of Tumor (he here speaks of Dothien or Furu^^^lus) by reason of an unwholesome
and corrupt kin^ of Diet; insomuch that questionless the Affect ^s most
perfectly known; but as for name it h^th none, other than what is as obscure
(and as ambiguous unto most men) as that of Epinyctis, and Psyd^acion; so that
hence we find it a business of the highest difficulty to discover the proper
head of the Disease, and the Method of curing it, either in the Latins, or the
Greeks, and Arabians themselves writing in the Latin Tongue.

Of the signs Diagnostick, Prognostic, and of the indications and Cure of
Tumors in general, some there be that are wont to assert many things. But in
truth there is but very little that can be said as concerning Tumors in this
manner, that is, generally considered, but what for the most part is agreeable
to certain species of them; of all which we will now speak in order, and
particularly, in the Chapters following.

Chap. 2. Of Tumors arising from Humors in general.
THat kind of Tumors which is caused by the Humors is found to be most frequent
and usual; and therefore we will treat of it in the first place. The primary and
nighest cause hereof is a humor elevating and raising up a part beyond Natures
intention unto a greatness more than is ordinary. Which said humor having for
the most part a certain excess of qualities adjoined wi^h it (and thereupon
becomes either hot, or cold, or moist, or dry) derives that quality unto the
part affected; the which quality since it differs from the temper of the
grieved Member, must therefore necessarily excite in the same an unequal
temper; and hence it is that an intemperies or distemper is concomitant with a
Tumor.

The Causes.
Now of the humors that cause these Tumors there is great diversity. For both
the Natural and preternatural humors, whose differences we have already spoken
to in their proper place, excite Tumors; and hereunto belongs the matter that
is wheyey and waterish, filth and corrupt matter, and all things else into
which the humors degenerate, and which are to be found in Tumors, and yet are
not in the number of the parts of the Body; of which there is great variety.
Galen in his second Book to Glauco, The variety of such things as are often
found in Apostems.
and seventh Chapter, writes, that in Apostems there have been found to be
substances contained like unto Stones, Sand, Shells, Wood, Mud or Slime, the
filth of Baths, the dregs and lees of Oil, together with many other such like
resemblances. And in his fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, and twelfth
Chapter, he further informs us that in Tumors have been discovered substances
resembling Nails, Hairs, Bones, Shells, and Stones. And that Worms also may be
found in Tumors frequent experience testifies; Fallopius with others have seen
such Tumors; and I my self have more than once beheld the like. Nicolaus
Remigius in his third Book of the worship of Devils, and first Chapter writes,
that with his own Eyes he beheld while they took out of an Impostume full of
filth, and opened in the Calf of a Mands Leg, a certain round substance or
Globe, such as is to be seen in Weavers Shops. And Wierus in his Book of the
Devils impostures Chap. 13. relates that in the incision of an Impostume on the
left side of a certain G^^, above the Spleen, there was taken forth an Iron
Knife, and after it there issued out abundance of filth and corruption. The
like whereunto Langius also has observed, in his first Book, and thirty eighth
Epistle. Now if any such strange thing chance to happen, the Vulgar People are
wont to ascribe it presently unto the Sorceries, Spells, and Charms of their
Devilish Neighbors. But there is no necessity, why for all things that are
evacuated out of Impostumes besides purulent matter, we should by and by have
recourse to such Causes as these, or rank them among the supernatural Causes of
humors, seeing that many of these contingents may be generated out of the
humors erewhile rehearsed. For whenas Experience makes it manifest, that in
most parts of man's Body small Stones, Sand and Gravel, Hairs, or such like, and
also diverse kinds of Worms may be produced out of the excrementitious humors;
and that likewise (not only in the Body of man) strange and wonderful kinds of
Worms and other little Animals; may be bred out of the Corruption of others, it
should not seem any great wonder, that the matter in Tumors (especially if it
be naught, and has been long there shut up and detained) does admit of those
various and strange mutations, happening by means of its rottenness and
putrefaction. But yet notwithstanding, if such things be found in Impostumes
that are come to a suppuration, and likewise in Tumors, which cannot be
generated in man's Body by nature, or at leastwise by Natures strength alone
without the concurrence of Art, (such as are all things formed of Metals,
Bodkins, Knives, Iron Nayls, and the like) then indeed they cannot be referred
unto natural causes; but may upon more than probable Grounds be imputed unto
the Impostures, subtilty, and power of the Devil. But as for the manner how
such things may be either generated in the Body, or covertly conveyed into it,
is not my purpose here to determine. I therefore proceed to dispatch what I
have further to deliver touching the rest of the causes of Tumors that take
their rise and original from the humors.

So then, Tumors, how caused by congestion or the heaping together of humors.
as for what concerns the causes remote; be they what they will for their kind,
they may easily be known, if we do but enquire into the manner how Tumors come
to have their first being; and withal take notice from whence, and after what
sort, or by what means that humor which has rightly gained to be styled the
containing Cause, comes into the part affected. Now therefore that humor which
is the nighest and containing Cause of a Tumor is either insensibly and by
degrees heaped up in the part, or else altogether as in a heap (which the
Grecians express by the word Athroos) flow into it. The matter is gradually,
and by little and little gathered together in the part affected, primarily and
most especially, by reason of somewhat amiss in the member, to wit, when either
the concoctive power is grown weak, and therefore cannot as it should digest
the nutriment, but generates more excrements than it ought to do; or else when
the expulsive faculty does not cast out all the excrements as it ought to do;
and this may come to pass either through its own weakness, or otherwise because
the way by which those excrements should be ejected is not sufficiently open.
And again, a humor is likewise then heaped together in the parts, whenas the
food it self is naught and unwholsom; for hence it happens that either so great
abundance of excrements are caused that the expulsive faculty cannot cast them
al forth, or else that they are so thick that Nature cannot easily expel them.
But upon what causes these causes do depend has been already declared in its
proper place; nor is it requisite that we should at large repeat what has been
spoken. Only in a few words take this; That the weakness of the faculties
wholly depends upon the intemperies or distemper of the parts, and the decay of
their native heat. The passages are obstructed by overmuch and thick matter,
which happens to be condensed by the vehemence of cold. Meats of an ill juice
produce store of excrements: Now what these meats are, Galen gives us to
understand, in his Book touching meats of a good and evil juice.

A Humor then flows to some part (this being in truth the more usual cause of
Tumors) when either it is drawn by that same part, tumors, how caused by an
afflux. How by attraction.
or transmitted unto it from some other place. Attraction primarily proceeds
from heat caused either by overmuch motion, or from the heat of the Sun and
Sunbeams, from the fire; or lastly from any sharp Medicine taken in. For the
parts so soon as they are heated by these causes draw unto themselves humors
from the rest of the body, although there be not therein any excessive store of
humors; and yet I deny not but that the more the body abounds with humors, the
greater is the store of them that is attracted.

Moreover, Pain likewise frequently enough excites Tumors, by attracting the
humors unto the part aggrieved. Yet we say not that pain of it self draws the
humors, but that this is done by some other means; and commonly it is said to
draw, for these three causes. First, because Nature while she attempts to
relieve the suffering part sends in an extraordinary supply of blood and
spirits to the part in pain, and this she does with an endeavor more than
usual; so that by this means she over fills, and hurts the parts she intended
to succor. Secondly, the grieved part by this time grows hot from that
abundance of blood and spirits transmitted thither by Nature; and hereupon falls
to drawing more than before, by reason of this adventitious heat. And lastly,
pain weakens the Members. Now the Members once weakened, if they attract not,
yet they readily receive, and in the least resist not the matter flowing in
upon them from several parts.

Secondly, A Tumor is caused by a defluxion, when as the humors are transmitted
unto some part, although they be not drawn by that part. For whereas there is
in every part a faculty not only of attracting al things familiar and agreeable
unto it, but also of expelling and casting out whatever is superfluous and
burdensome; hence it is that being stirred up and provoked by the excess or
offensive quality of the excrements and humors it expels and thrusts forth unto
some other part whatever is useless, or at least burdensome unto it. Where if it
be not digested or evacuated by transpiration, it is thence again forced unto
some other parts until at length it come unto the weakest, which is not able to
expel these transmitted humors; so that being here left they cause a Tumor. For
it cannot be that a Tumor should be caused by the matter transmitted and sent
from diverse places, unless we grant (as needs we must) that there is a part
which sends them, a part receiving them, and the passages by which the humors
flow. The parts do then transmit when the vigorous faculty by the quality or
store of matter is incited to expulsion. For unless the faculty were provoked,
it would never attemp this expulsion; and unless it were strong and vigorous,
it could never effect it. And this is likewise much furthered by the external
causes exciting the fluxion, to wit, Heat, which attenuates and dissolves the
humors; and cold, that by constriction presses the parts together, and thereby
causes the greater afflux of the said humors.

Notwithstanding, unto these two may be added also a third cause of the
defluxion, and that is a certain ((...), or) violent issuing forth of the humor
it self, as usually it does appear in persons that have the Dropsy, where we
find a water through its own weightiness descending into the Feet and Cods;
which motion notwithstanding is wont to cease in the night time; but this would
not be if the humor were expelled by Nature; and not rather (as in truth it is)
forced down by its own gravity.

Now as for the humors flowing together from elsewhere, the parts receiving
they are received by such parts as are feeble, and through their weakness
altogether disposed for the reception of a fluxion. For evermore the more
vigorous Members send away that which is superfluous unto the weaker. The
weaker Members we account such as either have contracted a certain debility in
their very first formation, or being afterward hurt do contract unto themselves
a kind of preternatural constitution; or else they are such as Nature her self
makes and intends for weak, and so framed and constituted that they may the
more easily receive the excrements of other parts: such are the skin, and the
parts loose and porous. For Nature (that she might the better preserve the
principal and more noble parts from Diseases) has purposely ordained in man's
body some certain parts weak and feeble, that so the principal parts oppressed
and burdened with Humors might into them empty whatever is superfluous and
burdensome; and these (as we have said) are the skin and glandulous or kernelly
parts. And hence it is that the Heart transmits the peccant humors unto the
Armpits, the Brain sends them behind the Ears, and the Liver thrusts them
forth to the Groyns. The parts ready to receive are al those that have any
connection with the part that transmits the humors, and which have the passages
through which the humors are conveyed always patent and open; but as for ways
whereby to expel and drive them forth, they are either none at al, or otherwise
such as are exceeding narrow and over straight; or else lastly, these passages
are so situated that they lie directly under the parts transmitting, so that
the conveyance of Humors unto them from the abovesaid parts is rendered the
more facile and easy.

As for the ways and passages through which the humors run, the passages by
which the tumors flow.
they are either such as lie hid, or else such as are open and very manifest.
For whereas the whole body is confluxile, that is to say, apt and ready to flow
together; hence it is that the humors have their fluxion out of one part into
another by these occult or hidden passages. So the Whey (as we may term it)
being gotten in great abundance into the Abdomen, or Cavity of the Belly
(commonly called the Paunch) by these privy Passages descends into the Cods and
the Thighs, and lifts up the said parts even unto a Tumor or swelling; the same
which likewise very often happens in other parts. Sometimes the humors assembled
together betwixt the Skul and skin of the Head descend thence along under the
skin into the inferior parts; but very seldom and rare it is that from hence
any tumors are produced. But most an end those humors which excite and raise
tumors flow through passages that are patent enough, the Veins and Arteries.

But that we may briefly come to speak of the differences of Tumors arising
from Humors, the differences of tumors whence they are taken.
although very many of these differences are accidental, yet notwithstanding
those by which the tumors proceeding from humors are truly and properly
distinguished among themselves, are taken from the variety of the containing
Cause, or the Humor as an efficient cause producing the Tumor. Now the Humors
are diverse, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, black Choler, Choler adust, and
Whey. From which likewise various sorts of Tumors are excited and caused. And
then again, one while the humor exciting the tumor is (as we use to say) simple
and sincere, from whence also the tumor proceeding therefrom is said to be a
pure tumor; or as soon again diverse humors concur to the making up of one Tumor;
and from hence the Tumors which we term spurious, (that is, such as are
improperly so called) take their Original.

The Signs Diagnostick.
It is easily known whether the Tumor proceed from the falling down of any
part: and if this be not the Cause, we may then safely conclude that the rise
of it is from the afflux of humors unto the part affected.

But now whether or no the Tumor takes its beginning from congestion, or rather
from fluxion, may by this be discerned; to wit, that those Tumors which are
caused by congestion or the storeing up of humors, are a longer while and by
degrees arriving at their perfection; neither take they up so much room in the
part; nor (lastly) was there any the least preceding cause or sign of a
defluxion. But now if the tumor be generated from a fluxion, it will be
discerned by the presence of the contrary signs. And certainly if so be there
were not in the grieved part any foregoing pain or heat, it manifestly shows
that the said fluxion is caused by a transmission, and not by means of an
attraction: like as on the other hand, a preceding pain or heat of the affected
part argues the Tumor to proceed from the attraction of humors.

For the Signs whereby to discern and understand the times, take this
advertisement; viz. That the beginning of it is then when the part first of al
is perceived to be distended and stretched forth. The increment or growth, when
as the part appears now to be elevated into an indifferent big swelling, and
when the Symptoms that accompany al sorts of Tumors are evidently augmented.
The state or height of it is, when the swelling and (with it together) all the
symptoms are at their highest pitch. The declination is then, when both the
bulk of the swelling, and all the symptoms are sensibly diminished.

The Signs Prognostic.
1. As for the Prognostics of Tumors in general, take this for an observation;
That in reference to the place aggrieved, inward Tumors are always accounted
to be more dangerous than those which are external; and as considered of
themselves, they have in them more or less danger of death according to the
excellency and use of the part affected.

2. By how much the greater the Tumor, as likewise by how much the greater the
intemperies or the distemper accompanying it, is; and by how much also the
humor exciting the Tumor is more malignant and vicious; with so much the
greater danger and difficulty is the Cure thereof to be expected. And on the
other side, look by how much the humor generating the Tumor is more mild and
benign, so much the less of danger is there in it, and likewise so much the
less of difficulty in the curing thereof. But of all the sorts of Tumors, those
arising from a windiness are with the greatest facility remedied, as being in a
manner discussed and dissipated of its own accord.

3. Al Tumors deriving their Pedigree from the humors, Tumors arising from the
humors how many ways terminated:
unless they make a retreat, and then vanish, either of their own accord, or
forced thereunto by Medicaments taken in for Natures assistance, are usually
terminated these four ways (as Galen in his B. of an unequal temper inform
us) to wit, either by dispersion, which you may likewise call discussion,
wrought by insensible transpiration; or else secondly, By suppuration, when as
the humor which causes the swelling is converted into a purulent matter; or
else thirdly, By corruption, when as the constitution and the radical heat of
the part affected is destroyed and wholly corrupted by the pravity and
malignancy of the matter; or else lastly, By induration, when the matter that
gives being to the Tumor has acquired an accidental and adventitious hardness.

Of Resolution an infallible sign is, a lightness in the Member (contrary to
its former weight and heaviness) and a cessation of the troublesome heating
with which it was formerly disquieted. The signs of a tumors resolution.


The Signs of a near approaching suppuration are these, The signs of the
suppuration of a tumor.
viz. a pain and palpitation in the part, together with a Fever, either now
invading it, or at least the increase of a Fever already and formerly present;
according to that of Hippocrates in his second Book, and forty seventh
Aphorism, While the peccant and crude matter is under concoction, and until it
arrive at a ripeness, and maturation (as we usually term it) Fevers are
always present. But so soon as the concoction of the crude or raw matter is
completed, so that the filth and impostumated matter appear, then the part
becomes in a manner lighter than it was, the heat abated, diminished, the pain
assuaged, and a part of the Tumor is eminently elevated, and begins to grow
sharp or sword-pointed; and this sharp point forthwith becomes of a white
color; and the part if touched with the Finger seems softer; and the purulent
matter sensibly appears to fluctuate and yield unto the touch of the Hand. Yet
notwithstanding it oftentimes chances, that the filth and corruption lies
altogether hid and obscured, so that it may not easily be discerned, either by
reason of the depth of the place, or the thickness of the part; as Hippocrates
in his sixth Book, Aphorism 41. does rightly advertise us.

Signs of maturation (which is nothing else but a ripening of crude or raw
matter) now nigh at hand, Signs of corruption and induration.
are, a blackness, or a Leaden color of the part affected. A sign of
Induration is, a diminution of the Tumor, but an augmentation of its hardness.
A sign of the Tumors retreating and decreasing, is a sudden and unexpected
lessening of the swelling; which said diminution if it proceed from an
internal cause, is evermore evil; unless the matter retiring be evacuated by
a fit and convenient way. Upon the going back of the matter immediately there
follows a Fever, if there were none before; or if there were any before, it is
now much augmented; and other evil symptoms arise from the retention of the
matter in the Body.

Now the best way of freeing the part of any Tumor that grieves and afflicts
it, is that which is performed by resolution; and next unto this, that which is
wrought by suppuration; but it is very il, that Tumors or swellings should be
hardened; and it is far worse, nay worst of all, that the part it self should
be corrupted.

The Cure.
The nature of a Tumor or, swelling in it self simply considered ( i. e. as it
is magnitude augmented) affords no useful indication at all; but it is taken
from the Cause containing; for upon the removal of this, forthwith the swelling
vanishes. If there be a distemper accompanying it, then for the better
effecting the Cure, it is expedient in Tumors that are hot, that we use means
to cool them; if they be cold, that we heat them; if moist, that by the help of
Art we exsiccate and dry them; and lastly, if they be dry, it is requisite that
we should moisten them. But then, in this alteration of the parts, their
Nature, Temper, Action, Use, Figure, Situation, and Sense (al which prescribe
the measure of alteration) are carefully to be considered; of which I have
already treated at large elsewhere, in my Institutions, the fifth Book, second
part, second Section, and first Chapter.

In the removal of the Cause, we must heedfully look whether the Tumor be
already completed, the Causes of a tumor how to be taken away
and not like to receive any further increase or addition; or otherwise whether
it may not be further augmented. For if the Tumor be already arrived at its
perfection, then there is no more required but that we look back unto the
containing Cause, and then that we take the best course to remove it. But if
the Tumor be not already at the height, but only in a tendency thereunto; we
must then also look back a little further unto the Antecedent Cause, as
likewise the C^uses more remote, and those al of them we ought speedily to
remove. And this is especially to be done whenas the Tumor is generated from an
afflux of humors. For in this kind of Tumor the fluxion it self is to be
opposed, and if possible, all its C^uses to be taken away. Now the Fluxion may
be totally removed, if the flowing humor be either evacuated by drawing of
Blood, or by Purgation; or if the course of the flowing humor be turned another
way; which is effected either by drawing it back unto the contrary parts, or by
intercepting the motion of the humors in their passages or by repulsing of them
from the part affected; or lastly, by deriving of them unto the parts adjacent.
Now the Causes of a Fluxion are taken away, A Fluxion, how it may be taken away.
if we take away all such things as conduce unto either the transmission, or
the attraction of humors; for in one of these two ways a Fluxion is both begun
and carried on. The aforesaid transmission is caused, or at least much
furthered, when either the whole, or some part stirred up and provoked either
by the over great abundance, or by the quality of the humors, or by both
together, drives forth what is burdensome unto it unto some other part that is
weaker, and thereupon the more proclive and apt to rece^ve. And therefore
whatsoever is oppressive either of the whole, or of any particular part, it
behooves us to discharge and remove it, by opening a Vein, or by purging, or
both ways; and then to corroborate both the part which breeds, and the part
likewise that collects and receives these vicious humors; that so we may hereby
free them of all their Obstructions. Attraction is caused by reason of Pain, or
Heat; and therefore it is mainly requisite that the pain be removed, and the
heat qualified by refrigerating Medicaments. But if the matter of the Tumor or
swelling be gradually and by little and little heaped up, then the Cause of
this congestion (whether it be a distemper, or any other fault in the part) is
to be removed. All which shall hereafter in the peculiar Tract of Tumors be made
more manifest.

As for so much of the Tumor as is already caused, A Humor how to be taken away
out of a tumor.
it is to be annihilated by freeing the part affected from that very humor
which excites the Tumor. Now the humor is taken away out of the affected part,
either by translating of it unto some other part, or by the evacuating of it
out of the Body. It is transferred into some other part, either by astringents
and Medicines that drive back, A Humor, how to be driven back
or else by Medicaments constringent, that is, such as by compression bring the
part close together; or otherwise by drawing of it unto other parts, which is
effected by the sense of pain, by heat, and by reason of a vacuity or
emptiness. Such things as repel and drive back (is elsewhere has been said)
take place only where the matter is not as yet impacted and stuffed into the
substance of the part, but only flows to and again in the greater or less
Vessels of the same, or else wi hout these Vessels in the vacant spaces of the
part; and which is neither so thick, nor yet so thin, that it can resist the
repelling Medicines. But if the matter be already farc'd into the part, that it
is now neither possible not safe to repel and drive it back from thence (of
which we have spoken in the fifth Book of our Institutions, Part 1. Section 1.
Chap. 8.) then in this case, repulsion has no place, neither is it to be
attempted. The peccant matter is evacuated out of the Body, either sensibly, to
wit, when it is even sensibly poured forth of the parts, or else insensibly,
when the matter is dissipated by the Pores.

Discussion of Humors:
If there be no great store of matter, and the part situated above it be less
compact, and the matter it self not so extraodinarily thick, then it is to be
expelled by insensible discussion. But then notwithstanding if the matter to be
scattered be any thing hard, it is fi st of all to be softened, that so it may
the more easily be discussed by the pores of the Skin. But then again on the
other side, if the matter contained in the Tumor be in greater abundance, and
withal thick; and if the part lying above it be close and compact, the matter
is then rather to be sensibly evacuated by opening the Tumor.

But since that all these things are most conspicuous in inflammations,
therefore whatever may here seem fit and requisite to be spoken in general
touching the original of Tumors proceeding from the afflux of humors, we will
hereafter treat of in the Cure of an Inflammation: and at present we will here
(as in the fittest place) speak something in general of Impostumes.

Chap. 3. Of Impostumes.
FOr oft-times it comes to pass, that the matter which is cause of the Tumor
cannot be insensibly dispersed, but that it will rather admit of a change into
some other kind of matter, and so be heaped up in a peculiar place. The which
although it most an end happen in Inflammations, yet notwithstanding other
Tumors also (and those not a few) in process of time are turned into Apostems,
or Impostumes as we term them. For albeit corrupt matter proceed only from
Blood, as we shall further show in the fifth Chapter, when we come to speak of
an Inflammation; yet notwithstanding, if in like manner also (in other Tumors)
the matter which causes the Inflammation may not insensibly be dissipated,
Nature that is never idle (especially when assisted by the warmth of
Medicaments, and most of al if any portion of Blood be therewith mingled) in
process of time converts it (and that very variously according to the nature of
the humor) into something like unto matter; which when it is altogether severed
from the parts containing, and gotten together into the Cavity of the part
affected, is propery called an Apostem; as has already been said in the
beginning of the first Chapter. And in truth the name of an Apostem and
Impostume is commonly made use of for every kind of Tumor; but unfitly as is
abovesaid, An Apostem: An Impostume:
Chapter first. For an Apostem and Abscessus or impostumation has its
denomination from parting asunder, in regard that the containing parts which
before touched one the other are now mutually departed asunder, and form a
certain Cavity, into which the corruption betakes it self; and likewise an
Abscessus or Impostume is the collection of the filth and purulent matter in
the hollowness of any part whatsoever. An Impostume what it is:
Pliny gives to Apostems the term of suppurations, Suppuration:
in his twentieth Book, and third Chapter; Avicen calls them Dubellet or
Aldubellet. Dubellet:


Impostumes their Differences:
Tumors some of them more speedily, others again more slowly attain unto their
maturation or ripeness. Those that proceed from good Blood, and especially in a
fleshy part, are easily and soon maturated: but those Tumors which are bred out
of other humors, and have their residence near unto the Joints, and in the
sinewy parts, those especially that are weak and have in them but very little
native heat, are with far more difficulty brought unto a maturation. Now of the
matter which is gathered together in an Apostem, there is great variety
according to that of the humors. Out of good Blood is generated a filth that is
less offensive; but out of the other humors is bred something that resembles
matter, Green, Yellow, or some other color, Pricking, and Stinking. For as for
this preternatural matter, if it may not be driven forth, Nature then separates
it from the parts containing; and thus being severed from the other parts,
Nature collects it into one place, and there digests it so far forth as the
nature of the subject matter does admit.

And indeed of the matter that is discovered in Impostumes there is evermore
great variety. For there is not only that which we call Pus, i. e. a stinking
Corrupt matter found therein, but likewise now and then a substance resembling
Gruell, Honey, Suet, the Lees of Wine, the Dregs of Oil; and sometimes also
never a whit unlike unto Honey and Snivel blended together; and that oft-times
of so ill a favor, that no one is able to abide the Stench: and as soon again
also we may therein discern substances like unto Hairs, Nails, Bones, Stones,
Worms, Wood, Coals, Cockle-shels, as before also (in the beginning of the
second Chapter) we have acquainted you. Yea moreover also in Impostumes not
unusually there are found Worms alive, and other such like little Creatures
that have life: and Philoxenus writes (as Aetius reports, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 3.
Chapter 7.) that on a time he discovered in a Tumor opened living Creatures
like unto Gnats, or small Flies. And it is a wel-known truth, that the humors in
the Body may be wholly changed and converted into Worms, and such like
substances in great variety. But then if Coals, Woods, Shells, or any thing else
of a like nature (into which the humors cannot possibly be conceived to pass)
and more especially when they resemble any thing that is feasible by Art) shall
chance to be found in Tumors, then without doubt we ought to ascribe it unto
Sorcery and Witchcraft. And this likewise (as touching the difference of
Impostumes) is to be taken notice of (the same that Galen tells us in his
fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, and twelfth Chapter) viz. that the
matter into which the humor causing the Tumor is converted, one while flows to
and again in the Cavity of the Tumor, and is gotten together into the nook
thereof; and as soon again it is shut up in its own peculiar Membrane, as it
shall further be made to appear when we come to treat of the Tumors we call
Meliceries, Atheroma, and Steatoma. Albeit there have not been wanting some (as
we may read in Paulus Aegineta in his sixth Book, and Chap. 36.) who were of
Opinion, that those Tumors alone were to be properly termed Impostumes, that
did participate of an Inflammation and Pain, and had within them a sharp and
corroding humor; and were not at all contained in their own peculiar little
Skin or Tunicle.

The Signs Diagnostick.
Now then in an Inflammation it may easily be discerned when the humor that
causes the Tumor is turned into a purulent matter. In other Tumors
notwithstanding there are Signs given which may demonstrate whether or no they
be changed into an Impostume. As to instance, Until that the Tumor be turned
into an Impostume, Signs of suppuration.
it is never a whit lessened, but there is perceived a more intense beating in
the part, the Heat, Pain, and the other symptoms are heightened; hence it is
that Hippocrates in the second of his Aphorisms, Aphor 47. writes, that til the
time of maturation the Pains and Fevers are intense. And besides some one part
or other of the Tumor begins to be sharp-pointed, the matter then seeking its
passage forth and thereby lifting up the part into a Tumor.

But so soon as the humor is converted into Snot or that kind of matter which
much resembles it, then, and not til then, there is an abatement of the Fever
and pain, and then the swelling round about is something diminished, the
extension and hardness a little remitted, and the Patient is sensible of ease
and a kind of lightsomness; for then in Tumors that are hot the heat is abated
and becomes remiss whenas the matter is al gotten together into some one part:
and hereupon the tumor it self in that part where the matter is thus collected
is raised up into a sharp point. And at length, if the place be pressed down
with the finger, there is a softness and a certain kind of floting of the
matter underneath sensibly perceived in the part. Yet notwithstanding that we
be not mistaken in this point, a C^ution is very requisite. For now and then
there is no fluctuation at all to be perceived, to wit, when either the matter
is over thick, or otherwise when it is situated in a part very deep.
Concerning which Hippocrates thus instructs us, in the sixth Book of his
Aphorisius, Aphor. 41. when he says, That for those which have a suppuration
in the body really existent and in being, which yet notwithstanding appears not
unto them, the reason why it lies undiscovered unto them is in regard of the
thickness either of the matter, or of the place where it has its residence.
But sometimes there is perceived to be somewhat like unto this fluctuation or
floting, albeit there be no filth or corrupt matter underneath; which happens
about the Knees, and other joints, where there is no flesh underneath the skin.

The Indications and Cure.
Whilst that the purulent matter (by the late Latin Authors termed Pus, from
the resemblance it has unto Snot, or Snivel) is in the way of maturation, and
until it has perfectly attained thereunto, the heat of the part that concocts
the aforesaid Pus or purulent matter must be augmented by Medicaments that
cherish and increase the heat of the part; or else by such Physical Remedies as
are proper, to wit, those that tend unto suppuration; and by this means the
production of purulency is to be helped forward and hastened, and the present
intense pain appeased. But so soon as this Pus or somewhat like thereunto is
perfectly generated in the part, in regard that it is in its whole kind
universally preternatural, and so cannot possibly be assimilated by the part,
it must thereupon be cast out of the body; which may most aptly be accomplished
by opening the Impostume, whether it break of its own accord, or otherwise it
be opened by art. But seldom or never is the matter contained in the Impostume
to be discussed and dissipated; and then it ought to be only when the matter is
very thin and fluid.

Those Remedies that not only mitigate, Matter vulgarly termed Pus, how to be
furthered.
but wholly also take away from the part al sense of pain, are such as we call
Anodyna, and Chalastica, viz. Milk, Butter, Oil, Swines Fat, Capons Grease, the
Unguent Dialthea, and the Emplaster Diachylon simplex.

What the Nature of those Medicaments which both cause and hasten maturation,
or the ripening of this Pus, is, we have declared in the fifth Book of our
Institutions, Part 1. Sect. 1. Chap. 9. Such as are these, Oil mingled with
Water, Oil temperate, without mixture, Wheaten flower, and Bread of the same,
the Fat of a Calf, Swines Fat, Hens Grease, the Fat of a Goose, Pi^ch, Rozin,
Wax kneaded and mingled with Oil, the Unguent named Tetrapharmacum, that is,
made up of four Remedies, viz. Wax, R^zin, Pitch, and Fat. In Bodies that are
soft and loose, the fat of Swine; but in bodies more compact Bulls fat is most
approved for use. For this is carefully to be needed in Ma^uratives, i. e.
Ripening Medicaments, that they ought to have in them the nearest resemblance
that possibly may be unto the nature of that body whereunto they are applied.
And therefore in Children, Women, and generally in all bodies that are softer
than ordinary, the moister kind of Remedies take place; and on the other hand,
in bodies more hard and close, Remedies of the moister sort are required. And
this in like manner is to be understood touching the Nature of a tumor or
swelling. As to instance, in Inflammations such Remedies as moderately heat and
moisten (provided always, as I said, that they be temperate) are used with the
best success. And yet notwithstanding, because that in some other Tumors
naturally more cold there is a maturation, though more slow; and the matter of
them being thicker than ordinary, if it be not converted into a laudable Pus or
Quitrier, yet it is turned into a matter near of kin thereunto; and the heat of
the part although it be greatly furthered and carried on by temperate
Maturatives, yet can it not ripen the cold matter; upon these abovesaid
considerations, Medicaments that are experienced to be something hotter are to
be added unto the former. The same is likewise to be observed in parts
naturally cold, as also in old age. And hence it is that of such Remedies which
ripen the crude matter in Tumors, we constitute two kinds. The Diffeferences of
Maturatives.
Of the former sort are all those that are moderately hot and clammy, which are
of use in hot Tumors; and these are properly such as are said to further and
hasten Maturation; of which sort are those before recited, Hydrelaeum* sweet
Oil, Wheaten Meal and Flour, Milk, the Pith of white Bread, the Fat of Swine,
fresh Butter, Wax mingled with a double quantity of Oil, Mallows, and
Marshmallows decocted with Oil, the Mucilage of Linseed, of Fenugreek, of
Mallows, and of Marshmallows. If any desire a Composition, let him make such
an one as this that follows:

Take of the powder of the Root of Marshmallows, the Leaves of Mallows, of
each one ounce; of Wheat flour an ounce and half; of the seed of Fenugreek, and
Linseed, of each half an ounce; of Saffron half a dram; boil them in the
Decoction of dried Figs, or in Milk; add hereunto of the Fat of Swine, and the
Unguent Dialthea, of each one ounce; and make herewith a Cataplasm.

Of the second sort are such as are somewhat hotter; which are to be used in
cold Tumors, and in colder Natures, because there the parts likewise are
colder; and such are, Turpentine, the Gum of the Fir Tree, the Larix-Tree, and
the Pine Tree, dried Figs, Raisons, Fenugreek seed, Lineseed, Onions roasted
under embers, Leaven, Oil of Chamomil, and Oil of white Lillies, the Fat of an
old Hen, old Butter, Bdellium, Galbanum, and Ammoniacum.

Out of which such a like Cataplasm as this may be made:

Take of the powder of the Roots of Marshmallows, Wheat flour, Linseed,
Fenugreek seed, dry figs pounded to a Mash, of each two ounces; of Leaven half
an ounce; of the powder of Chamomile flowers two drams; let them boil in a
sufficient quantity of Water; then add thereunto of the Fat of an old Hen, and
Oil of Camomile, of each an ounce and half, and so make up a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Leaves of Marshmallows, the roots of white Lillies, Holy-hock Roots,
of each an ounce and an half; Onions one ounce; boil them to a softness, then
mash them and pass them through a hair sieve. Ad hereto of Wheaten flour,
Linseed, Leaven, of each one ounce; Turpentine half an ounce; of Saffron half a
dram; Oil of Camomile, and Hens fat, of each a sufficient quantity; and so make
a Cataplasm.

The most usual are, the Emplaster of Melilot; and Diachylon magnum, with Gums.

When as the corrupt stinking matter is arrived at its full ripeness, The
Evacuation of stinking and corrupt matter.
or the matter of the Tumor is changed into an humor resembling this Pus so
often mentioned, it is then to be evacuated, and cast out of the Body; the
which since it may be effected in a twofold manner, either sensibly, or by an
insensible digestion; the best course were (more especially in the face, lest
that a Cicatrix or scar should ensue and remain upon the opening of the Tumor
impostumated) to discuss and scatter abroad the matter by an insensible
transpiration; for which very purpose certain Medicaments are described by
Galen in his sixth Book of the composition of Medicines of the second rank, the
14, 15, and 16. chapters; and there you may see them. But it is not often that
this happens; and when it does, there is cause to fear, lest that if there be
great store of corrupt matter, some part thereof should be left remaining and
hardened; or that if the filth aforesaid be acrimonious and corroding, that
then it may be rendered more sharp by delay, and the application of Remedies
that are hot; and so by this means the part affected, as also the parts nee^
adjoining should be greatly hurt and injured; and therefore for the most part
the safest way is to open the Apostem, if it chance not in a convenient time to
be opened of its own accord.

The opening of Apostems.
Now then an Impostume is to be opened in the highest and most eminent place,
where the skin usually is at the thinnest; but then notwithstanding the
incision must be in that place of the part affected which is most sloping, that
so the passage forth of the corruption may be rendered the more facile and
easy. Now the opening thereof is effected either by some Caustic Medicament,
or else by the help of an I^on incision knife. But most an end the safest way
is to open the impostume with an Iron Instrument rather than by a Caustic
Medicament. For Medicines most commonly protract and delay the Cure, excite and
cause both heat and pain in the part; whereupon it happens that the temper
and constitution of the part, which was before much weakened by the Disease,
becomes now wholly subverted; and from hence dangerous symptoms do frequently
show themselves. Now and then notwithstanding, as for instance, in the watery
Tumor of the Testicles, when with the Iron we cannot easily penetrate unto the
bottom of the place wherein the vicious matter is contained, we ought to use a
potential Cautery. For the way being once opened by a potential Cautery may
afterward be dilated as much as we see cause for; that so the Instrument may
the better pierce the part, and reach even unto the deepest place, and bottom
thereof.

The said operation with an Iron is effected whenas the opening is made by an
Iron Instrument made red hot, How many ways a tumor may he opened.
or else with an Iron Incision knife that has not been heated in the fire. We
very seldom make use of the hot Iron, and then never but in cold tumors; and
that also only whilst the impostume is in those parts that have in them either
many, or else large Veins and Arteries; that so the flux of Blood (which we call
the Hemorrhage) may the better be pre-cautioned and prevented. But as for the
Incision Iron that has not been heated, we use it most frequently, and that
with very good success. But if it shall so happen, that upon the opening of the
Impostume, sometimes pain, and sometimes an efflux of blood shall ensue; and
likewise that by reason of the abundant evacuation of the matter; or else that
by pain and fear, a sinking away or swooning should follow; in this case we
must endeavor that the Section may be performed with the greatest speed, and
the least pain that possibly may be. If an Hemorrhage be feared, we must have
in a readiness those Medicaments that stop the flux of Blood, as Frankincense,
Aloes, the white of an Egg, Bole Armenick, Pomegranate flowers, Dragons blood,
and the like. To prevent fainting and swooning, especially in Children, Women,
and other fearful persons, we ought to have at hand such Medicaments as are in
use against this faintness of mind. As also that there may be a right and
orderly proceeding in the Section or opening, The opening of a Tumor in what
manner to be performed.
the condition of the part, the situation of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves,
as likewise the Nature of the Muscles, all these ought to be exactly known and
learned by the Surgeon from what is written by Anatomists; lest otherwise
Veins and Arteries should be cut, and an Hemorrhage thereby caused; or that
pain should arise from this hurting and cutting of the Nerves; or that hereby
the Member should be altogether deprived of sense; or lastly, that by the
hurting of the Muscles the part should be wholly deprived of its motion.
Moreover also, a special regard must be had unto the fibers in the Muscles, so
that the Section ought to be performed according to the conduct of these
fibers, that is to say, not oblickly or overthwartly; for this kind of Section
will greatly annoy the action of the part. We must again heedfully weigh and
consider, in what measure, and how great the Section ought to be. For if it be
over little, the Pus or corrupt matter, especially if it be thick and cloddy,
will have no passage forth without compression of the part, which will both
assuredly excite pain, and beget a kind of brawny hardness in the part, which
may be the cause of a Fistula. And on the other side, if the section be made
overgreat and wide, there will then be left remaining a great and unsightly
scar; and which is worse, the ambient Air getting in will alter the part: and
therefore the Section ought to be made in such a manner and measure, as shall be
most requisite for the evacuation of the Corruption and filth. And although the
section be somewhat with the least, it may notwithstanding very easily be
dilated by thrusting a tent into the hole thereof. To make the Incision we
admit of either the Razor, or the Knife of Myrtle wood edged on both sides,
with which the Italians and French open Veins; or else that Knife which we call
Phlebotomus, which the Germans use; or lastly, that which we call Syringotomos,
an Instrument crooked, and of use only in the incision of an internal, or a
concavous body.

The incision being made, if there be but little filth, The evacuation of the
Pus, or corrupt matter
the part is with the finger to be pressed down, to the end that it may the
more readily flow forth: but if there be great store of this filth and matter,
it is then to be drawn forth leisurely, and by little at a time, lest happily (if
it should be evacuated al together, suddenly, and on an heap as it were) much
of the spirits should therewithal exhale, and thereupon a fainting and swooning
should ensue.

After Incision, and the emptying forth of the corruption, it will be
convenient the first day to strew thereon the dust of Frankincense; on the
second day to lay thereon some kind of Digestive or other, that so if any thing
yet remain undigested, the complete digestion thereof may hereby be
accomplished. And if there be present any filth, or any kind of uncleanness
which may hinver the growth of flesh shall chance to occur, they are forthwith
to be wiped and cleansed away. As for example:

Take Turpentine one ounce; Honey of Roses half an ounce; and of Barley Meal as
much as is requisite, and so make a mixture, and use it for the purpose
aforesaid.

If the Ulcer require yet a more forcible cleansing by reason of its
extraordinary nastiness, then we ought to use the stronger Abstersives, as
Vnguentum Apostolorum, etc. And at length Sarcoticks, that is, such Medicaments
as cause flesh to breed and grow, are wisely to be applied; and the orisice of
the Ulcer to be shut up with a scar.

Here we are to take notice, That sometimes Impostumes may for a long space he
hid not only underneath the external Muscles, Of Impostumes lying hid, two
histories.
but likewise under the more profound, yea, and the more internal Muscles also.
Concerning the Impostumes of the Muscles of the lower belly or Paunch, we have
already spoken in the third Book, Part 10. Chap. 7. As touching the Impostumes
in the great Muscle Psoa, Gulielmus Fabricius in his first Century, and sixty
third Observation, relates two Histories: And first he tells us, that a certain
Matron took her bed, complaining of acute and extreme pains about her Loins,
which was accompanied with a Fever, swooning fits, and difficulty of making
water. And when it was sufficiently understood by the kind of the pain, and
other signs and tokens, to be an inward Impostume (for outwardly there appeared
not any thing, neither could there any thing be discerned by the touch) and
that this Apostem could be no where but under the Psoa Muscle; and when that
the sick party was foretold the extreme danger and hazard of her life, unless
the Impostume were opened, and the humor caused to flow forth; both her self
and her friends gave their consent, that on one side of the Spina dorsi, or
backbone, the skin and the exterior Muscles even unto the Psoa Muscle should
be opened by an Incision with a Razor: which was done accordingly, and out
there flows a purulent and stinking humor, and so, after that some certain
cleansing and abstersive Medicaments had been for some few months applied, she
became perfectly recovered. The other History which he relates, is this: In the
Year One thousand five hundred eighty five, a certain young man, aged twenty
seven years, or thereabouts, as he was descending from the highest pitch of the
Mountain Cinecius unto the lowest part thereof, not well minding his footsteps
in a very steep path, he or ever he was aware fell or rather tumbled down
backwards; and that which added unto the mischief of the fall, was this, the
hilt of his Sword lighting under the short Ribs and the left Kidney exceedingly
crushed and bruised his Loins. After this his fall, for a few days at the
first, the pains he felt were not many; not long ^^^er he grew sensible of
pains in the left part of his Loins, but they were as yet very ge^^^^ and
remiss: now from hence forward these never left him, until at length by an
insensible and gradual growth they arrived at the height of their increment,
insomuch that at length they became extremely sharp and intolerable. Upon this
immediately follows the loss of sleep and appetite; whenas notwithstanding at
that very instant the sick party was not afflicted with any great thirst, or
very violent Fever. Neither was the part affected ever a whit discolored, or
as we say, black and blue: nor did there at al any outward swelling appear, nor
was there the least imaginable external blemish any where to be seen; but all the parts seemed to be, and indeed were what they seemed, plain and even, and
in no point at al altered from their natural situation or color. But as
afterward the event it self plainly evidenced, abundance of humors from all
parts of the body had met together in the Muscle Psoa. In the first place he
was by a certain Physician tampered withal as a Nephritick Person, that is, one
troubled with the pains of his Reins; but the Doctor was much mistaken. For at
length whenas no one sign of the aforesaid Nephritical effect appeared; and the
sick party had not received the least benefit by what had been prescribed; he
was in the next place sent unto Johannes Griffonius; who instantly discovered
the whole grief, and the mischief that it threatened; all which he very well
knew; and likewise the danger impending from the shutting up of the noysom
purulent matter in the inwards, he foretold the young man; and that his Opinion
was, it ought to be evacuated. Unto whose will the young man giving his consent,
commits himself unto the Cure. What does this expert Griffonius hereupon? In
the first place he takes care, that the matter which had now seized upon, and
did possess the whole Region of the Loins, should all of it be drawn together
into someone place thereof (by the applications of those Medicaments which had
a virtue in them powerfully to attract from on high) to wit, such a place,
where the principal Vessels were but few, and where the Instruments of motion
might least be harmed amidst their operation. Which his design when (ever and
anon attempting the part with a Silver Probe) he well perceived by the sense of
pain attending it, that he had successfully accomplished, without any more ado
he lanceth on the left side the flesh nigh unto the fourth Vertebra of the
Loins, with a fire-hot Razor, making a Wound as deep and long as is the fore
finger from the end thereof unto the hollow of the hand; as afterward it was
easy for him to conjecture by that long sharp tent which he put thereinto. And
moreover, when he had conveyed down two of his fingers into that same Wound (to
the end he might widen the passage forth) out there issues great store of
matter and stinking stuff. And then having prescribed the manner of evacuation
according to the rules of Art, the Surgeon ordains for the Patient a sharp
tent made of Silver, the which being first dipped in cleansing and abstersive
Unguents, he enjoined him to use for some months. So that by this means the
lips of the Wound came close together of their own accord; and the young man
recovered his former perfect health.

And this is likewise as a thing remarkable to be taken notice of, The humor
that flows out of an Impostume sometimes translated into other parts.
That Impostumes lying concealed in some places, if they be not opened, then
they sometimes seek out another passage, and thereby flow forth unto some other
place. And so the before mentitioned Gulielmus Fabricius, in his first Century,
and 81. Observat. relates of a child three months old, that was sorely
afflicted with an Impostume near unto his right shoulder. But the Parents would
by no persuasions be wrought upon to admit of an Incision; so that by degrees
the Tumor seemed much lessened and abated. But at length it being opened, some
small and inconsiderable quantity of matter issued forth, and the Tumor by
little and little became in a short space wholly extinct, and sunk away; the
humor now and then a little at a time gliding downwards into the lower belly,
and the genitals; by which the radical Native heat being destroyed, a Gangrene
follows thereupon, and after a few days a Sphacelus, and in a very short time
death demands his due.

And this may suffice to have been spoken concerning Tumors in general arising
from the humors. Now we will take a view of them particularly and in their
several species or kinds. Now in the first place, those Tumors that take their
rise and original from the Blood present themselves unto our consideration; and
among them, we shall first speak to that kind of Tumor which we call Corpulentia
nimia, or extreme corpulency.

Chap. 4. Of extreme Corpulency, or overmuch fleshiness.
TRuth it is, that Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 1. affirms, that Fat and
Corpulent men are said to be such as have a Bulk and vastness, not such as is
altogether preternatural, that is, beside, above, or beyond Natures intention
(much less contrary unto it) but such as may be said to be not Natural, and
above that which is according to Nature. Yet notwithstanding in the very same
place he immediately adds, that the excesses of dispositions which are not by
Nature are therefore besides Nature; and that (in very truth) the hurting of
the actions does terminate the excesses of such as are corpulent. And
therefore, since that the Bulk of the Body does now and then attain unto so
extraordinary a vastness, that Natures operations are thereby much impeded and
hurt, he does upon very good grounds (in his Book of the differences of
Diseases, the ninth Chapter) reduce extreme corpulency, or overmuch Fleshiness,
unto the Diseases of magnitude augmented. For the same Galen in the place
alleged, viz. Chap. 9. of his Book of the differences of Diseases, reports of
a certain man, one Nicomachus of Smyrna; that his Body grew to so huge and
extraordinary a bulk, that he could not stir from one place unto another. And
within our remembrance also, by the Pictures brought hither and here exposed
unto public view, a certain Rope-makers Wife of Strasburg (a City of Alsatia)
became very well known; who in the year 1613. and of her own age the 36th
weighed four hundred and eighty pounds. And I my self of late days saw here a
man who weighed more than four hundred pound; yet notwithstanding this man
appeared in public: and to tell you the whole truth, in this Person Nature began
to assay some certain kind of evacuation of the serous or wheyie humor by the
Navel. And the very same has been found to happen unto others also, in whom
the Body has attained unto so immense a bigness, that they could neither move,
nor yet so much as breathe freely. But now in such like Persons as these, there
is not an equal augmentation of all the parts of the Body (as it is in them who
grow, and are naturally enlarged) but only of their Flesh, and of their Fat
there is an excessive and overgreat increase.

The Causes.
The conjunct Cause therefore of this Tumor of the whole Body is the Flesh and
the Fat. And here truly one while the Flesh, and otherwhile the Fat is
augmented: and sometimes they are both alike increased. But the Antecedent
Cause is the overgreat abundance of Fat and good Blood. And for this cause it
is, that this Tumor is referred unto Tumors proceeding from the Blood. And yet
notwithstanding the Reason of these is far differing from that of other Tumors
arising from the Blood. For the containing Cause of bloody Tumors is the Blood,
but the containing Cause of this Tumor is the Fat, and Flesh; and the
antecedent Cause is the Blood. The rest of the bloody Tumors that are properly
so called spring from the Blood issuing out of the Veins or Vessels into some
other places; which never hapeneth in this extreme and extraordinary
corpulency, in the which Blood is never known to fall or issue forth into other
places, but it is evermore put unto the Body.

But now what the Causes may be that much Flesh and Fat should be generated,
will easily and soon be discovered, if we well consider the Causes of breeding
Flesh and Fat. Now then Flesh is abundantly bred in those whom we call
Eusarcoi, that is, Persons of a pure, untainted, and sound Flesh; yet always
provided, that the material cause of Flesh, to wit, nourishing Food, be not
wanting; and likewise that the native virtue generating Flesh be as it ought to
be, vigorous and active. That which administers matter toward the breeding of
flesh is great abundance of good blood; the which to produce and generate,
meats of a good and plentiful juice, and also a due and right temper of the
Liver, to wit, hot and moist, are evermore requisite. But now again that much
Flesh may be bred from much Blood, it is required that there be a sound and
healthful habit of Body, and a good temperament of the musculous parts in the
Body; which said temperament is likewise hot and moist. Hereunto also (as we
are to understand) very much conduces an easy or idle kind of life, in the
which there is not much Blood was^ed; as also the suppression of their
accustomed bleedings, and evacuations of Blood, especially in Women. As
touching the original and increment of Fat, many and various are the Opinions
and controversies among the Physicians at this very day; the which for me in
this place to examine were altogether impertinent. And therefore in a word we
say, that Fat is generated from the Oily and fattish part of the Blood, falling
from out of the Veins and Arteries into the membranous parts, and there
digested by the innate virtue and temperate heat of the Membranes. That great
store of Fat should be bred, in the first place, the Liver is a principal cause
thereof. For if by reason of its excellent and perfect temperament it does not
generate either much earthy and cold, nor much choleric and hot juice, but
produce a sweet fat, and oily Blood, and fill the Veins and Arteries therewith;
and if this Blood be not consumed or wasted in the habit of the Body, but that
it still continue to be more cool and moist, then this Blood is there converted
into Fat. Ease likewise, and the intermission of Exercise, the retention of
accustomed evacuations, aliment temperately hot and moist; and generally all
things which either outwardly or inwardly any ways conduce to the making up of
a plentiful and temperate mass of Blood; or that have in them an efficacy in
qualifying and allaying the over-intense heat of the Blood of the Entrails, and
of the habit of the Body. Hence it is that Galen has left it upon record; that
all Bodies tending toward a cold and moist temperament become Fat. And with
this of Galen agrees what Prosper Alpinus in his Book of the Egyptian
Physicians, Chap. 9. has written; his words are these, The Bodies of the
Egyptians (says he) are hot and dry, in regard that they live under the
hottest (and withal dry) position of the Heavens: but because they moderate
and lessen this heat and dryness by their daily drinking of water, by their
continual use of meats that have in them a cooling virtue, and likewise by
their frequent use of Baths which they make for themselves with sweet Water;
their bodies hereupon become extraordinarily fat, to fat, that he never beheld
in any part of the world in so great a number and generally such extreme fat
and gross Persons as he saw at Grand Cayre in Egypt. For he reports that very
many of them are so exceeding gross and corpulent, and generally so fat in
their Breasts, that they have Paps of a far larger size, and thicker than the
greatest that ever he had observed in any Woman. Other things there are which
demonstrate unto us the truth of this assertion, to wit, that a hot temperament
of the Liver makes very much for the breeding and augmenting of fat. For I my
self knew a Person of Honor, who after he had been sick, and was recovered of a
malignant Fever, grew to be so extremely fat and gross, that he could very
hardly move, or stir himself in any place where he fat; and as for the bulk of
his body, he came never a whit behind him whom we have formerly mentioned.

Signs Diagnostick.
As concerning Corpulency therefore, it is sufficiently obvious to every man's
Eye. But then, whether or no it only produce some kind of deformity and be no
more then a Symptom; or else whether it be not to be accounted a Disease or
preternatural affect, the hurt and offended actions will evidence unto us; of
which we will now speak.

Prognostics.
1. What the inconveniences and discommodities are that this overgreat
fleshiness or (as we term it) extreme Corpulency carries along with it, I shall
give you an account thereof in the words of Avicen that expert Arabian
Physician. For thus he, in his fourth Book, Part 7. Tract. 4. Chap. 5.
Superfluous fat (says he) is that which hinders the body from and in its
motion, walking and operation; and streightning the Veins with an undue and
dangerous constriction: whereupon it oppilates and stops up the passages of the
Spirit, so that hereby it is many times extinguished; and for the same reason
likewise it is that such Persons have no refreshment from the breathings in the
ambient Air, which finding the passages obstructed, proceeds not so far as the
Praecordia (or Entrails) to moderate and qualify their excessive heat: and
they are in continual fear, lest that their Blood should again be driven forth
unto the straightened place. Whereupon happily they will give way that a Vein be
suddenly opened, which may prove very pernicious unto them. And truly in this
kind of disposition there happens unto them an extreme and dangerous
constriction or streightning of their breathing, and a beating of the Heart.
Hereupon they are evermore exposed to a sudden death; and especially those of
them that are fatned in their younger days; for these have always their Veins
very small, and much straightened. And they are likewise exposed unto the
Apoplexy, and Palsy, and throbbing of the Heart, and the Flux Diarrhaea, by
reason of their humidity; they are also subject to fainting and swooning fits,
and the worst sorts of Fevers; neither can they away with fatsting or thirst,
by reason of the constriction of the passages of breath, the vehemence of the
cold of their complexion, their small store of Blood, and the abundance of their
Phlegm. And to this moreover may be added, that they are (whether they be Men
or Women) issueless and barren; the Male being not able to Generate, nor the
Female to produce the Embryo in the Womb. As also their Seed is little or none
at all (to wit) because it is concocted, through the imbecility of the heat;
although there may be store of Seed in regard of their humidity or moisture;
yet notwithstanding such as is waterish, and (in Galens judgment) thin, and
unmeet for Generation; or if it be generative, it is of Females only. And the
like may be said of Women, that those of them which are fat, do not conceive,
or if they do now and then conceive, they forthwith miscarry; and lastly, their
appetite (to wit that which is natural) is exceeding weak. Thus far Avicen.

2. The truth is, that the Cure of this affect may be hoped for; but it is wont
to proceed but very slowly; neither is it to be completed in a short time, and
it is mainly requisite hereunto that the Patient be, as we say, morigerous, and
in all points ready and willing to submit.

The Cure.
The Cure of this Tumor consists in the removal of the Cause which is an
overgreat store of Flesh and Fat. Now this abundant flesh and fat is taken
away, by wasting and annihilating what is already generated, and then by taking
a course that it may not again be multiplied: and this may be done, if we take
care that too great an abundance of Blood be not bred; or that which is already
in the Body, that it be by degrees wasted and lessened. Both these intentions
are accomplished by those things that heat, and exsiccate, or dry much. For
whereas the Liver, if it has a gentle, remiss, and temperate heat, generates
great plenty of sweet and Oily blood, and so continually foments matter for the
breeding of much fat and store of flesh; if now this temperate constitution of
the Liver shall be altered, and the Liver rendered more hot and dry than
formerly; then instead of good and laudable, I mean, fat and oily blood, it
generates that which is hot and choleric, or that which is serous, wheyish,
and waterish. And thus it is that Medicaments hot and dry do both retard the
propagation of an abundant and oleaginous blood, and also they waste, and by
degrees consume the fat that is there already bred throughout the body. But
then for the wasting or lessening of the flesh already bred, those Medicaments
are the most prevalent in which siccity (or dryness) is predominant, and the
heat in a mediocrity. By what has been said you cannot but understand, how
that in curing this affect we ought heedfully to observe, whether it be the
flesh, or whether or no it be the fat that offends in the excess; and so
accordingly fit and proper Medicaments are to be made choice of: and as for
such as are undoubtedly exceeding full of flesh (and such generally are al those
that have the constitutions and habits of Wrastlers) we are not to prescribe
unto them such Medicaments as either cause or increase heat, but only such as
merely dry and attenuate; and such are, Venesection, i. e. Blood-letting,
Purgation, abstinence from food, and frictions, or rubbings. In fat persons we
may notwithstanding properly enough make use of Remedies that are of a heating
Nature; but yet so as that in the administering of them we be very circumspect,
lest that by the overmuch heating we procure some other Disease.

And therefore when as the blood administers matter for the raising of an
abundant store of flesh and fat, it is to be forthwith evacuated and
diminished. And for such as are full of flesh we may safely enough exact a more
liberal and copious evacuation of the blood, yet always provided, that the
evacuation be not proscecu^ed unto the extreme, as Hippocrates cautions us, in
the first Book of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 3. But in those that abound with fat,
this letting out of the blood ought to be more sparing, since that fat persons
are more propense unto cold distempers. Cupping-glasses also either with or
without scarification are very useful and proper for both the one and the
other. Frequent, rough, and hard frictions of the whole body are likewise
chiefly convenient. Pliny in B. 11. Chap. 37. writes, That the Son of L.
Apronius (who had been Consul) was contented to have his fatness drawn away
from him, Fat drawn out of the body of one extremely fat.
thereby to alleviate and lighten his body (til then immovable) of some part of
his burden. But no man will easily admit of so desperate and barbarous a Remedy;
and therefore I forbear to speak any thing more concerning it. Exsiccating or
drying Baths, whether taken by drinking, or made use of for the bathing of the
body, are in this case of singular benefit. Frequent purgations with Aloes
(unto which may be added Mirrh and Nitre) are here likewise very convenient;
and consequently the Pills de Tribus must needs be a proper Remedy. Such are
also al bitter and hot Medicaments administered, as namely, Wormwood, Myrrh,
Frankincense, Rue, Oxymel simplex, and Oxymel compositum, Oxymel of Squils, the
Syrup de duabus and de quinque radicibus; and generally al things that provoke
and expel Urine. Wherefore the roots of Asparagus and Fennel, and of Parsley,
and such like, ought very frequently to be used. This Powder likewise is much
approved of, and commended; viz.

Take Salt of Nitre one dram; Alum two scruples; Myrrh, Frankincense, the Rind
of the Wood Guajacum, the Root of Sarsaparilla, of each of these two drams; and
so make a Powder: Of the which let half a dram be administered in the morning
for two months together. Also the Salt of Vipers is very effectual for the
purpose aforesaid.

The Diet.
As concerning the Diet in this case, take this for a brief Directory. Let all
the Meats and Drinks be such as render the lower belly loose and slippery, or
as we use to express it in one only word, Soluble; and in the next place, let
them be such as are easily concocted, but withal such as afford but little
nourishment. Let their Wine be thin, and well diluted, i. e. made small with
Water. Much fasting, and a more than ordinary frequent abstinence from food;
and in a word, a continual spare diet exceedingly furthereth the diminution of
Corpulency. Let them likewise accustom themselves to much and often exercise of
the body, by all means carefully avoiding a sedentary life. And Galen tells us,
in his 14. Book of the Method of Curing, and Chap. 15. (where he professedly
treats of the Cure of extreme fatness and Corpulency) that he on a time
perfectly cured a man aged about forty years, who was exceeding fat and gross,
even to the admiration of all that beheld him; and this he did, partly by an
Antidote compounded and prepared of Sal-theriack, against the affects and
diseases of the Joints* and partly likewise by the administering of the right
Theriaca or Treacle made of Vipers; as also by an extenuating Diet after it;
and for his exercise, swift running was enjoined him. He says moreover that he
fitted and prepared this person for this exercise of running, by a gentle and
easy chafing and rubbing of him with hard and rough rubbing-cloaths made of
new linen cloth, until the skin became red; and then immediately upon the
rubbing he anointed him with an Oil that had in it some digestive Medicament;
and this Oil the party was also to use (as abovesaid) after his running, and
more than usual exercise.

Chap. 5. Of an Inflammation:
BUt now that we may come to treat of Tumors properly so called (arising from
the blood) those Tumors are indeed wondrous frequent, and they appear very
commonly, in regard that they proceed not only of and from themselves, but they
likewise happen and follow upon diverse other affects, as Wounds, Fractures,
disjoyntings, and the like. And this Tumor from the Blood is by the Grecians
named Phlegmone, by the Latins an Inflammation. But now the word Phlegmone
has been very variously and in a far differing sense made use of by the
ancient Physicians, and those of later standing. For with Hippocrates, and
generally all the Physicians before Erasistratus, the word Phlegmone was used to
signify al sorts of Phlogosies, that is, every kind of extraordinary heat
exceeding the bounds and transcending the limits of Nature, although it be
without any afflux of matter, or any kind of swelling whatsoever. But after
Erasistratus his days, the word Phlegmone was accustomarily used to denote
those Tumors alone in which there was not only a vehement and fiery inflamed
heat, but likewise also therewithal a certain kind of renitency or resistance,
and a beating in the part, with a more than ordinary redness of color; all
which last mentioned Species of Tumors Hippocrates was wont to call Oedemata
sclera and epodyna, that is to say, hard, callous, and painful swellings; as
Galen has observed in his second Book of the difference of Respiration or
breathing, Chap. 7. and in his Book 3. Chap. 5. upon the fifth Book of
Hippocrates his Aphorisms, Aphor. 65. and in his fourth Book of the Course of
Diet in acute Diseases, Tome 21. Comment. 3. upon Hippocrates his Book of
Fractures, text 5. and elsewhere.

The subject of an Inflammation.
But now that we may make it apparent and manifest what an Inflammation is, and
how to be defined, we will in the first place exactly weigh and consider the
subject and cause thereof; for as for the form thereof, it is of it self
sufficiently evident and perspicuous. Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 2.
expresses the subject by these terms, Moria sarcode, parts carnosas, that is
to say, fleshy parts. For he there tells us that the word Phlegmone ought to be
used concerning those parts which are affected with a greater swelling than
ordinary, and which are full of flesh, stretched forth, resisting, grieved with
a beating pain, and therewithal somewhat reddish.

Whether the flesh alone may be inflamed.
Which Assertion of his notwithstanding seems to have in it something that is
very doubtful, and that may well be questioned. For a Phlegmone happens
likewise unto the Membranous parts; as to instance, in a Pleurisy, the
Membrane that girts about and encompasseth the Ribs is inflamed; in the
Frenzy, the Membranes of the Brain; and so in like manner, the small Vessels
and Membranes of the eyes suffer an Inflammation in the affect which we call
Ophthalmia, or an Inflammation in the uppermost skin of the eye. Neither are
(besides the flesh) only the Membranous parts subject unto Inflammation; but
also the glandulous or kernelly parts are often inflamed and swollen up by
reason of the blood flowing into them. And last of al, not only the musclely
flesh, but likewise also the substances of all the other bowels (which have
their flesh much differing from that of the Muscles) are oftentimes afflicted
with Inflammations; as it is most apparently manifest in the Inflammations of
the Liver, Spleen, Brain, and all the rest of the Entrails. And this very Truth
Galen himself waves not, neither does he pass it over in silence, whenas (near
about the close of the Chapter alleged) he thus writes; But likewise also in
process of time, the skin it self (says he) takes unto it self something of a
fluid and fluxile Nature, as also do the Tunicles of the greater Vessels, and
so likewise even the Membranes themselves in the part inflamed: and moreover
also, even the Nerves and Tendons themselves in process of time are made to
partake of this very same Inflammation: Thus much Galen himself acknowledges.

But now that we may the better acquit our selves in this present Controversy,
we must know that by the abovesaid Moria sarcode or fleshy parts, we are not
only to understand the flesh of the Muscles, which indeed is flesh in the most
proper acceptance of the word; but we are likewise thereby to understand the
several fleshes of the bowels, which we evermore term Parenchymata. Moreover
also under the notion of a fleshy part are comprehended all the parts that are
glandulous or kernelly; yea likewise even the parts that are Membranous. For
these also may be said to have a flesh peculiar and proper to themselves: as
Galen writes upon this very subject, in the 10. Book of his Method of Physic,
Chap. 11. In each one of the Primary and simple parts there is, says he, one
part or portion of the substance thereof which is as it were fibrous, another
that is Membranous, and a third that is fleshy. As for example, whenas a Vein
has but one only Tunicle, and that likewise very thin, we may even then and
there discover many of the fibers in this one thin Tunicle, which are
interserted, as I may so say, by their certain Spider-like interweavings; and
unto the which the very proper substance of the Vein does adhere, as growing
thereunto. But in other parts of the Body this flesh is of a far differing
nature, neither has it as yet gotten any common name. But that you may the
better understand us now that we are treating of this subject, I know nothing
to the contrary, but that you may term it a fleshy substance; or truly at
leastwise we may call it a certain flesh peculiar and proper unto this little
part; and of a differing Nature from that of the stomach, from that of the
Liver, and likewise from that of the Arteries and Muscles; in all which the
flesh is not one and the same, but (as I said) much differing. Thus far Galen.
Wherefore that we may determine what the subject of an Inflammation is, we
affirm it to be any kind of fleshy substance which has Veins and Arteries
which contain within them, and convey blood, the Cause of an Inflammation; and
are therefore even upon this account opposite to the bones, which neither have,
nor are so much as capable of receiving Veins. For in good truth, flesh is the
chief and principal subject of Inflammation: yet notwithstanding the blood, if
it both diffuse it self into the adjacent parts, and likewise draw those parts
into a consent and agreement with it self, they may then al of them (both it
and they) be truly said to be together inflamed: of which Galen treats at
large, in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 2. where he thus writes: That all that flesh
whose affection is now mainly, and in the highest degree become an
Inflammation, should seem to be replenished with a flowing of the blood, both
the color and the Tumor it self demonstrate; whereupon it appears all over
humid and extremely moistened, like as is wool and a sponge. That filth and
putrid matter which flows forth whenas the Inflammation has gotten a little
door or gate (as we may so tetm it) to cast it out by, gives a sufficient
testimony unto the truth of what has been said; and I am rightly of Opinion,
that the skin it self is elevated, and extended round about, at once and
together with the Tumors and swellings of those things that lie underneath it.
And in tract of time even the skin it self participates somewhat of the
aforementioned flux; insomuch that the Tunicles of the greater Vessels, and
also the very Membranes themselves may suffer together with the part inflamed:
and moreover also even the very Nerves and Tendons in process of time come to
partake of this same Inflammation. Notwithstanding now and then it chances
that the parts abovesaid (all or some of them) if they happen to be wounded, or
any other way disaffected, then the hurtful distemper, I mean the Inflammation,
has its original from out of those very parts. But universally and generally
there is not any thing that according to the bent of Nature perseveres to carry
it self in all things exactly conformable unto the inflamed part, if there be
but any the least stop put thereunto; but al things together with the flesh
participate of the said flux; so that oftentimes it reaches even the very
bones, like as many times also i^ is by them (when they first of al are
affected) much promoted and furthered. And in his six^h Book of the Method of
Physic, Chap. 5. he thus writes: Neither do I greatly wonder (says he) if
something resembling a Phlegmone shall in a small proportion chance to accrue even
to the bones themselves when broken. The which likewise Avicen has taught us
in the 2. of his first Book, Doct. 1. Chap. 5. where he acquaints us that
Tumors happen unto the Members that are soft; and yet notwithstanding that
there is a time also when something happens unto the bones themselves, which is
assimilated into the matter of a Tumor or Swelling, by the which said matter
the Tumors magnitude is exceedingly heightened, and its humidity greatly
augmented. And he adds the reason. Neither is it (says he) at al to be
wondered at, or ever a whit ex^raordinary, that that which receives an increase
or addition with nutriment should likewise receive it, that is to say, an
addition with superfluity, when either it penetrates into it, or shall otherwise
befall it, as generated therein. And in the species of Teeth, Galen in his 5.
Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the parts affected, Chap.
8. informs us, That in the Teeth those things that are redundant and
superfluous may excite and stir up in them a like resembling affection, or
rather passion, such as is the Inflammation that appears in and near about the
fleshy parts. Yea, possible it is, not only that the bones should get a
thickness from the superfluous nourishment, but likewise that another bone
should be super-added unto them, and grow up together with them. Concerning the
which, Abenzoar in his 2. Theisir. Tract. 6. Chap. 1. has these words: And now
and then (says he) the bones are engrossed and greatly augmented in their
superficies, either by the depraved corroding humors that are infused into the
very bones, or otherwise by the thick quittor and mattery filth which passes
over upon them; from whence it is that they are hollowed, corroded, and
augmented. And again afterward he wri^es more at large upon this subject in
these words: The bones (says he) are sometimes greatned or (to use his own
word) engrossed beyond Natures intention, by reason of an overplentiful and
gross course of Diet, it being likewise inordinate, suddenly and rashly fallen
upon, and not (as rather it should have been) successively, and by degrees,
advisedly entered into. And long it is not since I heard my Father say, that he
on a time saw a certain man that had a bone super-added and bred in his back
like unto the Hearts Horn; and that it was not altogether so hard as the natural
bones: and my Father himself (says he) purged this man, and emptied forth the
gross humors that were in him; and after he had so done, he then puts upon the
bone certain exsiccating or extreme drying Medicaments; insomuch that the said
bone fell forth of the body, like as the Heart casts his Horns, and as other
Beasts shed theirs in the Spring time. And I my self also have had a Bone
growing upon my Back, which bred me extraordinary great pain: and I thereupon
by Purging freed my self of gross humors, and laid upon the Bone Resolutives,
or Remedies of a dissolving faculty.

The Causes.
As for the Cause of this preternatural affect, Galen writes that as it is
altogether unknown unto the ignorant multitude of men, so it is not very well
understood by all that profess themselves Physicians. For although, as I
conceive, it is agreed upon by all Physicians, that Blood is the Cause of an
Inflammation, yet notwithstanding lest that (as the same Galen writes in the
place before alleged) we should seem only to declare our own single Opinion,
without any further enquiry thereinto; we will therefore make the more accurate
search after (thereby to find out) the Cause of an Inflammation, in this manner
following. There would be no Tumor at any time generated in any part of the
Body, were it not that either its substance as it were boiling over with heat
is poured out, or that from without some new substance makes its approach. For
there are but two only causes to be assigned of the augmentation of the bulk
and quantity in any thing whatsoever. For either the radical moisture through
an internal or external heat is resolved into an aerie substance, which (as it
is well known) requires a far greater space and room for dilatation then
formerly it had; or else, as we said before, some new substance is
extrinsecally from some other place superadded thereunto. Now therefore of
necessity it is that one of these two causes must be present, when as in that
hot and burning Tumor which we commonly call a Phlegmone, the part is lifted up
into a greater bulk than is ordinary, or agreeable to the intention of Nature.
But now, that the fervency and boiling up of the natural moisture, or the
effusion thereof, is not the Cause, appears by this, because that every thing
that is poured forth and converted, as it were, into spirits, when it is cooled
it assumes again its pristine quantity, and (as we may so express it) puts off
and lays aside the Tumor; as by common experience it is most apparent. But as
for the parts inflamed, let them be never so vehemently cooled, yet will they
never return into the former state and condition, nor ever cast off the Tumor
or Swelling. Furthermore, if by reason of the effusion of the part, and its
conversion into spirits, a Tumor should be caused in the part inflamed, then
necessarily upon the incision of the part the spirit should appear; which yet
(as we see) is nothing so: but that rather there follows an effusion of Blood;
and the whole place by its color and the looks thereof seems altogether full
of Blood. It remains therefore, that the accession of some new substance is the
cause of a Phlegmone. But now that this new substance is the Blood, appears
from hence, to wit, that the Phlegmone is exceeding red both within and
without. Now this red color is only proper unto, and inseparable from the
Blood; Blood the nighest cause of an Inflammation.
for there is nothing that waxes red in the Body, beside the Blood and the
Flesh; which later, notwithstanding, viz. the Flesh, cannot by any means be the
cause of a Phlegmone. For if the increment of the flesh were the cause of an
Inflammation, there would be indeed a Tumor or Swelling in the part; yet so as
notwithstanding the internal heat should remain sound, and in an healthful
plight, without the least distemper; and that also it should not in the least
vary its pristine nature, when as in no one thing that is augmented according
to its substance the heat may properly be said to be heightened and increased,
so far forth that the increment of the substance and quantity should any way
differ from the change or alteration of the qualities. But now the case is
otherwise in a Phlegmone, wherein the color is changed, and the heat grown to
be more intense, the said color evidently demonstrating not only the quantity,
but likewise the quality of the substance. Moreover, that the Blood is cause of
a Phlegmone, may be manifestly evidenced by this, that the place (in the
greatest Inflammations especially, which now and then happen in Ulcers) appears
and seems all bloody round about; which certainly would never be, if blood were
not the cause of the Inflammation. Furthermore, that Blood is Cause of the
Inflammation that generating of the Inflammation which happens in Wounds does
evidently demonstrate. For in new and fresh Wounds, the Blood (its true) at the
first flows forth; but then afterward being compressed and kept in either by
the hand, or else with Ligatures, or Medicaments that stop the issuing forth of
blood, or else lastly being suppressed and staid of its own accord, it is then
retained either in the Orifice or Cavities of the dissected Vessels, and there
it is compacted, and so wrought that it grows together (like as clotted blood
uses to do) and there by a continued heaping up of the blood abundantly
flowing thereunto it lifts up the part into a Tumor or Swelling, and causes an
Inflammation.

An Inflammation what it is.
Since therefore the Conjunct Cause of an Inflammation is proved to be the Blood
preternaturally flowing thereunto, it is no hard matter thence to collect, that
an Inflammation is a preternatural Tumor of the fleshy parts (as Galen in the
place alleged takes and understands the name of Flesh) arising from the
preternatural afflux of the blood; and that thereupon it must necessarily be
hot, red, extended; and accompanied with a kind of renitency, or resisting
property, pain, and pulsation or beating.

The manner how an Inflammation is bred.
But now, that there may not be left to remain any the least obscurity about the
nature of an Inflammation; we will here add the manner also how a Phlegmone is
generated; and this we will do out of Galen, who in his Book touching the
unequal Intemperies, Chap. 3. has in these words described it: it is (says
he) a hot fluxion or flowing, the which when it has seized upon and seated it
self in some muscelly part, at first the greater Veins and Arteries are filled
up and distended; and next after them the lesser, and so it is carried on
until that at length it arrives even at the least of them. In these when the
matter of the fluxion is forcibly impacted, and cannot therein be any longer
contained, it is then transmitted unto the outward parts, partly through their
own Orifices, and partly by a percolation, as it were, and straining or
sweating out of it through the Tunicles: and then the void spaces which are
betwixt the most principal parts are filled full with the fluxion. And so all
those parts or places are on all sides very much heated and overspread. Those
parts or Bodies are the Nerves, Ligaments, Membranes, the Flesh it self, and
before al these the Veins and Arteries. For whereas the Veins and Arteries run
along unto each particular part (by the which is received both nourishment and
vital Spirit) so long as the blood flows in a due measure, and just proportion,
and is contained within those its receptacles, the part is not wont to suffer
any Inflammation at all; but then only, when at the length the blood is
overcopiously and all on a huddle emptied and poured forth into the substance
of the part by the Veins and Arteries. By which very thing also a Phlegmone is
distinguished from other fluxions, in which the matter is diffused without the
Veins into the whole substance of the part, and there does distend and dilate
it. For in a Phlegmone, although all the parts are (as I may so say) embrued
with blood, yet notwithstanding there is a certain order observed, to wit, that
some of the parts should sooner receive the fluxion, and others of them not til
afterward; until that at length all of them come to be replenished and
distended by the humor. Now this kind of order wholly depends upon the natural
distribution of the greater Vessels containing the blood. For whereas the Veins
and Arteries when they first of all make their entrance into the aforesaid
Vessels are evermore the larger, and by how much the deeper they are
distributed thereinto, so much the less they are; all this while there arises
no Inflammation, unless it so chance that the blood be emptied forth into those
smallest Veins, and again happen to fall out of them. And this that has been
said manifestly appears unto those that by an exact and accurate inspection
take a right view of those very little and almost imperceptible Veins that are
branched forth and extended unto that Tunicle of the Eye which Oculists usually
call Adnate or Conjunctive. For these indeed do evermore convey blood unto the
Eye for its nourishment, and yet notwithstanding whilst that the Eye is free
from distemper they are so exceeding small, that they can hardly be discerned by
the sharpest sighted Eye. But then so soon as the Eye is inflamed, and those
slender Veins are preternaturally replenished with blood, then they show
themselves, and become very conspicuous. And it is most agreeable to truth that
thus it should be also in all other Inflammations, whatsoever they be. But as
yet there is no Inflammation present, albeit the lesser Veins are even filled
up with blood, until that at length by and through them the blood be derived
into the remaining substance of the parts; which may be done two ways. For in
the first place, the blood is emptied forth by those very small and most
inconsiderable orifices of the Veins, by which the Veins do (as it were) gape
and open themselves into the surrounding substance of the part, that so thereby
the blood may through them the more easily drop forth, for nutrition or
nourishment. Moreover likewise it strains and sweats through by the Tunicles of
the Veins: for even the Tunicles of the Veins are in like manner so framed by
nature, that they are not without their pores; through which, if not the blood
it self, yet certainly the ferosity or wheyiness thereof, and its thinner part
is ex^udated or sweated forth by a kind of percolation.

From what has been hitherunto spoken, the distinction of the conjunct cause
from the cause merely antecedent in an Inflammation is sufficiently apparent.
For the blood (which we have asserted to be the cause of a Phlegmone) does in a
double respect take upon it self the virtue and Nature of a cause. For either
it is the next containing and conjunct cause, of which we have hitherto
discoursed; to wit, as it has already flown into the part, and is irremovably
impacted therein, so far forth that it actually elevates that same part into a
Tumor: or else it is the antecedent foregoing cause, to wit, The antecedent
cause of an Inflammation.
as by reason of its abounding in the body it has a power of slowing into, and
by its influx of lifting up the part into a Tumor or Swelling. The which
antecedent Cause in an Inflammation, like as also in other Tumors, falls again
under a twofold consideration: to wit, either in regard of the Affect simply
considered as it is to follow upon this cause which it has a power to excite,
although as yet it has no being in the body. And so a Plethory (which is an
extreme and overgreat fullness of good and laudable blood) is very frequently
present in the body, albeit an Inflammation does not instantly ensue thereupon.
Or else secondly, it is considerable, as preceding and foregoing the affect
that already has a being, and is already actually existent in the Body; to
wit, when as the Blood now flows to the exciting and augmenting of the Tumor.
Which (to speak truth) is more rightly styled the antecedent cause, then was
the former; since that this latter has respect unto an effect already present;
but the former relates only unto an affect which happens in the future time.
But this antecedent cause, that it may flow together unto the place affected,
it is thereunto moved and stirred up by other means; whilst that it is either
transmitted from some where else; or else attracted by the part it self, for
those very causes we have hitherto been treating of and explaining.

But now for those Causes which we commonly term Procatartick, The remote
Causes.
more remote, and primitive, they are such as either conduce to the breeding of
a copious and a plentiful blood (as do al meats of good and much juice) an
easy and idle kind of life, and other such like requisites: Or else they are
such as render the blood more acrimonious and sharp, as do all things that
cause heat, al acid and tart aliments, wrath, watchings, stirrings, and
exercises in the extreme, or else such as excite and stir up the blood to move
unto the part affected, as does the overgreat heat of the part, pain proceeding
from a wound, from a fall, from contusion or beating, from a fracture, from
disjoyntures, and the like causes; or else the weakness and imbecility of the
part affected receiving, compared and considered in reference to the vigor and
strength of those other parts which transmit the abundant store of hot blood
unto the aggrieved part. Notwithstanding, an Inflammation never happens to be
generated by a leisurely and gradual storing up of blood; but it is evermore
bred by a sudden and thronging affluence and influx of the said blood. For
although it may so chance, that some kind of Humor may sensibly and by degrees
be collected in some one part, which being heaped up, as aforesaid, may
afterward begin to excite a certain kind of pain in the part; yet
notwithstanding all this, an Inflammation is never produced until such time as
the pain gives cause sufficient that a more plenteous store of blood should
forthwith and very easily make its approach.

Notwithstanding we are to take notice, That although the Blood be the
containing and antecedent Cause of an Inflammation, yet notwithstanding we say,
that a Cacochymy, or a depraved ill digestion, and more especially sharp and
choleric humors, are the prime and principal cause that the blood be moved
unto the part affected, in those Inflammations which are excited without any
apparent cause, as Wounds, Contusions, and such like. For so it is, That when
Nature is twinged and pulled by such like Humors, and yet notwithstanding is
unable altogether to expel them out of the body, to the end that she may free
the principal parts from the danger impending by reason of them, she assays to
thrust them forth unto the external and less principal parts: the which when it
is not able to accomplish, unless it make use of the blood for a vehicle or (as
we say) a Conduit-pipe of conveyance; and that the acrimonious humor it self
excites a pain in that part into which it is thrust and shut up; hereupon it is
that there follows a conflux of blood unto that part, and from it proceeds an
Inflammation. And much after this manner, the Pleurisy, the Peripneumonia or
the Inflammation and Impostume of the Lungs, the Quinsie, the Frenzy, the
Inflammation of the Ears and Gums, the hot Tumors or Swellings in the groins
called Bubones, Carbuncles, and such like are generated and excited.

The Differences.
The principal Differences of an Inflammation are taken from the variety of the
containing cause, and from the great difference of the blood that stirs up and
begets the Inflammation. For a Phlegmone is said to be (for distinctions sake)
either that which is a true and legitimate one, or otherwise that that is not a
true Phlegmone, but rather a bastard and spurious one. The true and legitimate
Phlegmone is that which proceeds from good blood, and such as is in a due
natural temper, or at leastwise such as whereof there is more than ordinary
store: and this is absolutely and simply termed a Phlegmone. But the spurious
and counterfeit Phlegmone is that which has its rise and original from corrupt
and vitiated blood, and such as swerves from its natural temperament; and this
may be occasioned two manner of ways: for if the blood does neither lose its
nature, nor change its substance; but only has mingled together with it some
other Humors, then there are three bastard spurious sorts of an Inflammation
that thence arise. To wit, if Choler be mingled with the blood producing an
Inflammation, it is then called Phlegmone erysipelatodes; if Phlegm, Phlegmone
o^dematodes; if Melancholy, Phlegmone scirrhodes. But if the blood change its
substance, it then excites not any kind of blood-Tumor: for the blood (as Galen
writes upon this very subject, in his 2d Book of the Differences of Fevers,
Chap. 9.) if it be overmuch heated, and (as it may be so expressed) boiled to
an extreme intense height, then its more subtle and fat part is converted
into yellow Choler; but the more thick part into black Choler, or, as we
usually call it, the Melancholy humor.

The Signs Diagnostick.
The Signs of Inflammation (as may be gathered out of its definition) are,
heat, pain, a swelling and stretching out of the part, a renitency or
Resistance, a redness of color, and a pulsation or beating.

1. And in the first place, in this kind of Tumor there is present so intense a
heat, that from it the Tumor has its very name and denomination; and many
indeed are the causes wherefore this heat is necessarily raised and stirred up.
For first of all, the blood that through its overgreat abundance excites the
Phlegmone, is hot, which heat it also communicates to the part affected.
Moreover, whenas by the plenty of blood, and oftentimes likewise by a certain
kind of thickness all the pores are so filled up and obstructed that the hot
exhalations cannot sufficiently be sent forth and evaporated, neither the heat
eventilated or cooled as is ought to be, the heat by retention of these
exhalations and fuliginous vapors is much increased. Unto which also a third
cause may be added, to wit, putrefaction: for the blood contained in the
inflamed part assumes at length a putredinous quality, by which (as is to be
seen likewise in other things) the heat is excited, and communicated unto the
part inflamed. And this heat is sometimes greater, sometimes less, according to
the greatness and growth of those causes.

The second sign is Pain: for whereas there are two remarkable causes of pain,
an Intemperies or distemper, and the solution of continuity, they both of them
take place in Inflammations. For in truth this extraordinary heat by its
distemper first of all excites pain: and then the abundance of blood by filling
full and distending the part dissolveth continuity, and thus doing is the cause
of this pain. Again, the pain that is thus caused is various and much
different, viz. distending or stretching out, pulling or twinging, pressing and
burdening, according to the variety of the parts affected: but more especially
there is present a beating pain, which likewise for this very reason is
peculiarly reckoned up amongst the proper signs of a Phlegmone, and of which
more hereafter.

In the third place, a Distension. For when the plentiful store of blood does
not only fill the Veins and Arteries, but even the whole substance of the part,
all things are now distended and stretched out, but chiefly the skin; the which
as it lies round about all the other parts, and has a Membranous substance,
must necessarily partake of the distension, and the extensive pain.

4. Fourthly, Renitency or resistance, or (as the Grecians call it) Antitupia,
in like manner follows upon this repletion and distension. For albeit the
inflamed part be not hard in its own nature, yet it is so stuffed out, and
distended with store of blood, that now it will no longer answer the touch,
neither yield thereunto, but resist and withstand it; and withal it appears
hard unto the touch.

5. Fifthly, the parts inflamed wax red, the blood imparting this color unto
them. For there is nothing in man's body that assumes this redness of color,
besides the blood and flesh.

6. And lastly, In the sixth place, there is perceived in the inflamed parts a
Pulse and beating pain, to wit, when with grief and extreme irksomness there is
perceived a bearing of the Artery in the inflamed part, which while the part
was ^ound was not to be perceived. From whence we are instructed (as Galen
writes in his sixth Book of the parts affected, Chap. 7.) that this beating pain
does not happen unto all the parts, but only to such of them as have in them
certain notable and remarkable Arteries, The heating pain how it is caused.
and that have a part endued with an exquisite sense; and when the Inflammation
is raised up unto a magnitude worthy of observation. Now this Pulsatory or
beating pain chances from hence, that when they are lifted up and distended,
the parts inflamed by reason of their store of blood do not allow nor afford a
due, free, and sufficient room unto the Artery now distending it self, but that
themselves are rather stretched out by the Artery lifting it self up; which
said distension excites the pain. And this pulsatory pain is then most of al
perceived, whenas the Inflammation tends toward a suppuration. For then the
blood boyls as it were, and grows exceeding hot; from whence it also comes to
pass, that it assumes and makes use of a larger space of room, and so much the
more distends the part; by the which part the Artery is henceforth much pressed
and kept down in its motion, which we call Diastole; and then afterward hereupon
the Artery likewise compresseth and bears down the adjacent and near
neighboring parts that lie round about it.

The Prognostics.
In an Inflammation there are two things that it mainly and principally behooves
us to presage, to wit, The termination of an Inflammation.

Which is threefold.


its event or termination, and then the exact and punctual time of the said
termination. Now the Event is said to be good, when Nature overcomes the
matter that breeds the Inflammation, which happens when either the Tumor is
resolved, and the matter insensibly exhaled (which is the best kind of solution
of an Inflammation) or else when the matter is suppurated and turned into that
which we term Pus, being a thick and purulent matter. Or otherwise, secondly,
The event may be said to be evil, or if ye will, worst of all, when Nature does
not overcome and master he peccant matter; which happens when the Inflammation
(if it be external) suddenly vanishes and retires back to the internal parts;
or when the natural heat being overcome and extinguished, the Member thereupon
becomes putrified and seized upon by a Gangrene, insomuch that if it be not
forthwith cut off, ruin and death it self threaten the whole body. Or else in
the third place, there follows a Neutral Event (as some call it) which is
absolutely evil; when the Tumor is hardened, and when upon the resolution and
discussion of the thinner parts (the more thick and gross parts remaining
behind) the Inflammation degenerates into a Scirrhus. But now, which of these
events is to be hoped for or expected, may probably be guessed at by comparing
together the vigor and strength of Nature with the matter that causes the
Disease. For if the matter be not overmuch, not thick, not over deeply
situated, not shut up under a hard and thick skin; if the body be not greatly
impure, and Nature be strong, then a resolution, and an evacuation by an
insensible transpiration may be hoped for. But if the matter more abound, be
more than ordinary thick, be contained in a deeper place than usually, and be
pent up under a thicker skin, then a suppuration is to be expected. That the
matter is retreated unto the inward parts may be conjectured by this token, to
wit, When we perceive the Tumor to be diminished, albeit there were no
repulsive remedies administered and applied, to drive back the matter. That the
extinction and overthrow of the heat is near approaching may be presaged by
this, whenas the heat, redness of color, pain, and the pulse or beating is
lessened, the Tumor notwithstanding still remaining; touching which more
hereafter, when we shall come to treat of a Gangrene. But then lastly, an
Inflammation for the most part then degenerates into a Scirrhus, when the
matter is over viscous and clammy, and hard therewithal; and when the Natural
heat being strong and vigorous, forthwith even in the very beginning of the
distemper remedies that discuss and dissipate over forcibly are thereunto
applied; which said remedies disperse and scatter the thinner parts thereof,
and leave the thicker still remaining.

That the time of the Event may be known, The times of an Inflammation.
it is requisite that the times of the Inflammation be first of all known; and
they are likewise heedfully to be observed by us (upon our knowledge of them) in
relation unto the Cure. For unless the times of an Inflammation be well known
and considered, we may soon run our selves into an Error, whilst we administer
and apply Remedies that are any ways improper or incongruous unto any one
particular of those several times. Now then, Inflammations (like as all other
Tumors and Diseases) have four times or periods; its beginning, increase, state
or perfection, and its decay or declination. It commenceth or begins when the
parts are replenished with blood, and when the swelling, pain, and stretching
out are increased, this we call the augmentation.

The state or perfection is then, when the Tumor, Distension, Pain, and all the
other symptoms are most vehement, and in the height of their extremity. And
lastly, the declination is then said to be, when the matter generating the
Tumor is diminished, and the pain, heat, together with the other symptoms are
become more remiss and gentle; or otherwise the matter is converted into Pus or
purulent matter.

But the truth is, these times are some while shorter, sometimes longer; and the
Inflammations are sometimes sooner, and sometimes more slowly terminated. For (as
Galen tells us in the sixth Book of the Aphorisms, Aphor. 49.) that which is of
a thinner substance is in a shorter space digested; and that which is thick or
tough requires a longer time for its digestion; but that which is thick and
viscous requires a far longer time. And that Inflammation which has seated it
self in the fleshy parts is terminated according to the period of acute
Diseases, to wit, fourteen days: for the substance of the flesh is more soft
and permeable, by reason of its thinness. But the substance of the Ligaments,
Tendons, and Nerves, being more thick and hard, and thereupon with greater
difficulty receiving the fluxion, for the same cause also does with more
difficulty discharge it self thereof; and hereupon the Inflammation in those
parts is the longer time ere it attain unto its state and perfection, and is
not so soon curable: but yet notwithstanding the Cure is in this case seldom or
never prorogued beyond the term of forty days; if both the Physician rightly
in all points discharge his part; and likewise the patient be in all things
willing to submit.

The Indications and Cure.
Whereas the containing cause of an Inflammation is the blood, which has
preternaturally ( i. e. beyond or besides Natures intention) flown in unto the
part, the Cure is effected if that blood be removed out of the diseased part;
and then great caution be had that it thenceforth flow no more unto the part
affected; that so by this means, as well the containing as the antecedent cause
may be wholly taken away. For whenas the affect cannot possibly be removed,
without a first removal of that which causes it; and the case so standing,
that the causes ought to be taken away in the very same order that they follow
one the other in; therefore we say that the Fluxion must first of all be
extirpated. The Cure of a fluxion or flowing of the blood.
Now this intention may be accomplished, if care be taken to prevent the bloods
abounding in the body, and that that which is there in great plenty flow not
unto the part affected; The benefit of blood-letting in an Inflammation.
and this with most safety and speed is to be effected by opening a Vein. For
by this Venesection or blood-letting the great store of abounding blood is
diminished, and the same is likewise drawn back from the aggrieved place: hence
it is, that there is an exceeding great benefit arising from, and following
upon this opening of a vein, in an Inflammation; so that it is seldom or never
to be omitted, if the strength of the patient will permit it to be done. And
indeed hardly can any other Remedies with safety in this case be applied,
unless opening a Vein have the precedence, and the abundance of blood be
thereby diminished. For if we administer remedies to drive back, the body still
continuing full of blood, it is greatly to be feared lest that the matter
should not be received by the other parts, and thereupon that it should
altogether attempt a flowing unto some one or other certain particular part.
And as for digestives, hot as they are, if they should be made use of in a body
that is full, there might be just cause to doubt lest that there should be more
matter attracted then discussed and dissipated.

A Purgation.
Moreover also, albeit a Cacochymy or ill digestion and bad nutriment be not the
cause of an Inflammation; yet notwithstanding, since it is a very rare thing to
find a Body that is altogether free from this said Cacochymie, it will be very
requisite to ordain a Purgation; which completed, other Medicaments also are
afterward to be administered, with an expectation of more success and greater
benefit. And as we hinted to you before, although Inflammations take their
Original principally from the blood, yet notwithstanding vicious humors very
frequently give an occasion of their being, as also does the aforesaid
Cacochymie; and indeed herein the hot humors challenge the first place. For if
by these Nature be at any time stirred up and provoked, and it be so that she
cannot of her self expel them, then she endeavors to thrust them forth by some
and some unto the other parts: but when she falls short in the effecting of this
also (unless she should withal transmit the blood thither) and that by an
acrimonious humor sent unto the part a pain is excited; hereupon a conflux of
the blood unto that same part into which Nature assaies to empty forth the
vicious humor, is caused; and so consequently an Inflammation is generated. And
from hence it is also, that from a Cacochymie there is very frequently produced
a Pleurisy, an Inflammation or Impostume of the Lungs, the Squinancy or (as we
use to term it) the Quinsie, and that kind of madness which we commonly call
the Frenzy.

Moreover also the blood is abated, and no excessive store thereof bred in the
body, if that meat be not taken in which either by its overgreat proportion, or
else by reason of its substance, afford too much nourishment, and exceedingly
conduces to the generating a more plentiful store of blood than is requisite.
Wherefore let the sick Person abstain from Wine, and let him use a sparing and
slender Diet, which both hinders the breeding of much blood; and if it be
already overmuch, does by little and little lessen it.

But that the blood may not flow to the part affected, it may be prevented, if
we deprive it of that which necessity requires that it should have to help
forward and facilitate its motion; and if we likewise correct the thinness
thereof, together with its overmuch aptness to motion; if we obstruct and
streighten the passages through which it ought to be moved; and if we recall
and draw it back from the part affected. The blood therefore, that it may be
withheld from flowing unto the part affected, is to be altered, driven back,
intercepted, and derived unto some other place.

Alteration of the blood.
The Alteration of the blood is altogether necessary, that so, if it be overhot,
thin, and fluxile or movable, it may be cooled, thickened, and rendered more
unapt and less prone to motion: and this Alteration for the most part we ought
the rather to procure in regard of the Fever, which almost ever accompanies
the Phlegmone, or heat of the Liver. For it is a rare thing, that they which
are infested with an Inflammation of any part should yet not be sensible of a
Fever. Wherefore we must use Medicaments made of Succory, Endive, Violets,
Lettice, Sorrel, Barley, the greater cold Seeds, the juice of Citron, of
Pomegranates, and such like. And if the blood be more than ordinarily hot and
thin, we ought also then to add those things that have in them an astringent
quality; and such are Roses, Purslane, Plantane, and the like. But here
notwithstanding we ought carefully to look to it, lest that the Veins being
narrow and overstreightned, or there being obstructions in the Bowels, by the
use of these or such like astringents more obstructions should be bred or
increased.

And then again, we ought not only to administer contrary Medicaments for the
altering of the blood; but likewise to remove from the Patient, and cause him
to omit and forbear the use of such things as either introduce or augment those
qualities whose absence we now require, as being better than their company. For
instance, a hot Air is to be shunned, surfeits with over-eating and drinking
must be avoided, and Wine forborne; or if any be drank, it must be that which is
weak and well diluted; all kind of violent motion is to be omitted, and rest
rather to be indulged; Wrath and venereal Embracements ought likewise here
carefully to be avoided and abstained from.

Revulsion or drawing back ought moreover to be ordained, Revulsion or drawing
back.
and the humor is to be turned away unto a contrary place, that is, we must so
order it, that a contrary motion may be procured unto the humor, and that it
may move unto that part unto which it naturally tends; so that it may not flow
unto the part affected. For, that the turning away and drawing of an humor
flowing into some part unto that which is contrary may be termed Revulsion, we
rightly take it for granted, and by Hippocrates at the first appointed and
ordained. The contrariety in Revulsion:
For (as Galen informs us in his fifth Book of the method of Physic, Chap. 3.)
this was the invention of Hippocrates, that a Revulsion should be made unto the
contrary or opposite places. Now although it be much controverted by
Physicians, what is here to be understood by this word Contrary; yet
notwithstanding we judge the Opinion of Ga^en to be very plain and perspicuous,
if we well ex^mine together what he has here and there often^imes written upon
this subject; and if we take a right view of the conditions that are requisite
in a Revulsion. But that Galen by the word [Contrary] understood nothing else
but the parts contrary, that is, far distant and remote from the part affected,
is every where manifested in his own writings: for thus he argues in his
fourth of the meth. of Physic Chap. 6. If it be a perpetual standing rule (as
we have learned from him, viz. from Hippocrates) that a fluxion if but
beginning is to be drawn to the contraries, but if already fixed in the
aggrieved particle, it is then to be evacuated, either from the particle it
self which is afflicted, or else from that which is next neighboring unto it;
we may now hence readily conclude, as to the point of this blood-letting, that
at first ( i. e. in the beginning of the distemper) it ought to be attempted
from a far off, but afterward from the affected parts themselves. Now what
kind of remoteness, and what sort of longitude he understands, is explained in
his fifth of the Method of Physic, Chap. 3. A Revulsion (says he) ought
always to be carried downward in those affects which are upward; and upward
evermore in those that are below: and moreover also the Revulsion ought to be
made from the right side unto those on the left; and again in like manner, from
those unto these: and semblably, from those places that are internal unto such
as are outwardly situate; and on the contrary, from these unto those. For when
as the main scope of Revulsion is, not to evacuate those humors which are
already contained in the part affected, but those rather that are flowing
thereunto; and seeing it respects rather the part sending the blood, than that
which receives it: from these premises it necessarily follows, that
questionless this is required in every revulsion, to wit, that it should by all
means procure a motion contrary unto that which flows, that so it may not any
longer be moved unto the part affected; and for this cause, the revulsion must
not be ordained either from the grieved part, or from that next unto it; but
rather from the opposite, yea (and so far forth as possible it may be) from the
places most remote from the affected part. And hence also it is that every
opposition does not constitute a contrariety, neither has every kind of
opposition any place in a Revulsion; but those oppositions alone which Galen
(in the before alleged third Chapter of the fifth Book of his Method of
Physic) recites; to wit, upward and downward, from the right side parts unto
the left, from the places that are within unto those that are external, and so
on the contrary. Yet if there be only but a very small inconsiderable distance,
we cannot safely nor conveniently draw back from the parts more inward to those
more externally situate, but then only when the distance is greater. But that
opposition which is from before and behind, or according to the fore parts and
hinder parts, has no place in this kind of Revulsion, which is so called
singly and absolutely. For neither if any affect shall chance to be in the
backward part of the Head, are the Forehead Veins forthwith to be opened, by
way of revulsion, since that may not be done (without manifest danger) during
the continuance of the Plethory, and flowing of the humors. But enough has
been said of Revulsion in the fifth Book of Institutions, Part 2. Sect. 1.
Chap. 18.

But that we may in few words contract whatsoever has there more at large been
spoken, Revulsion twofold:
and whatever else may be said upon this subject; it is in the first place to
be taken notice of, that Revulsion is twofold, one, which is accomplished
together with the evacuation of the humor, such as is that which is effected by
Blood-letting, and Cupping-Glasses with Scarification; the other which is
wrought without the evacuation of the humor, such as is that which is performed
by Frictions or Rubbings, Ligatures, and Cupping-Glasses without Scarification.
This latter is never to be practiced but when the Revulsion is to be made unto
the parts most remote, since that if it be instituted in the near adjacent
parts, then the humor which is only stirred, and not totally evacuated, may
without any difficulty or resistance rush upon the affected part. And it is
very rare, and scarcely ever known, that this kind of revulsion has place or
any thing to do in an Inflammation, which requires a manifest, sensible, and
sudden evacuation of the blood.

Furthermore, Revulsion by opening of a Vein:
as for what concerns Revulsion which is effected by opening a Vein, this one
thing at least is to be observed (which if it be well heeded, many intricate
controversies touching the thing now in question may be determined) to wit,
that the utmost endeavor must be used that a contrary motion may be procured
unto the blood, and that (as much as possibly may be) drawn back unto that
Fountain from whence it flows. And since that the Liver is the Fountain and
Sourse of the blood, and that the greatest store of the blood is contained in
the Vena Cava or great hollow Vein nigh about the Liver, we must do our utmost,
that the blood which flows into the inflamed part may be drawn back toward its
Springhead; yea also if it be possible, unto the opposite part, yet
notwithstanding so, that the blood which flows may be retracted and drawn back.
And therefore in every Revulsion this at least is to be wrought, that the blood
may obtain such a motion, as that by it the part affected may not be injured by
its immoderate conflux, but that it may rather be again recalled from the
diseased part. But how this may be effected in every part, here to declare unto
you would be a business too tedious; besides, we have already elsewhere spoken
to this very point, in our treating of particular affects.

Revulsion when to be ordained, and after what manner.
And by what has been said (as I conjecture) it is sufficiently apparent, how
and in what manner a revulsion is to be ordained in case of an Inflammation; so
that there will not be any great need, that we should add much as touching the
right and due administration thereof. For whereas revulsion is then only
suitable and proper unto the Humors when they flow, and unto them alone, and
not unto those which have done flowing, and have seated themselves in the part
affected; it is hence manifest, that it ought to be instituted and appointed in
the very first rise of the distemper. Notwithstanding this is not so to be
understood, as if in the first appearing of an Inflammation we were instantly
to put revulsion in practice; for if either there be no great store of blood,
or if its rushing in upon the part be not over violent and impetuous,
Medicaments that drive back and derive will be sufficient. But then only is
Revulsion to be put in practice, when there is great plenty of blood, and a
more than usual violent and forcible rushing thereof unto the part affected:
and according to the greater or less proportion of this abundant blood, and the
more or less vehemence of its motion, so answerably ought the Remedies and
Medicaments that are prescribed for Revulsories or drawers back, to be ordained
so much the more or less strong and forcible. But now that Revulsion which is
made with an effusion or emptying forth of the matter must needs be greater
than that which is made without it. But amongst all the Remedies which we term
Revulsories or drawers back, the most prevalent and efficacious, is, the
opening of a Vein; which said Venesection does more effectually, or less
strongly draw back, accordingly as the Veins that are opened be greater or
less. The greater Veins are to be opened whiles the blood flows with greater
violence, and (as we may say) with a more impetuous motion; and the lesser,
when the Fluxion of the blood is less forcible and impetuous. For it is
behoveful that the Remedies should be such as may by their celerity or
swiftness contend with the over hasty motion of the matter. And therefore we
acknowledge Fernelius to be in the right, in his second Book of the Method of
Physic, Chap. 7. where he writes, That the opening of the Shoulder Vein in the
Elbow does very conveniently draw back all the affects of the Head, as well
internal as external, arising from fullness; if they be on the right side, the
right Vein; but if on the left side, the left Shoulder Vein is in the Elbow to
be opened. But if this be to be done more deliberately and slowly, as to
instance, when the intention and main drift is only to anticipate and prevent
future Diseases, then that Vein in the Hand which runs directly unto the Thumb
and fore Finger is to be opened, unless happily it take its original from
elsewhere, and not from the Shoulder Vein. But for those distempers which are
seated betwixt the Channel bone and the Kidneys, the more inward Vein in the
Elbow being opened does more speedily and with greater force draw back from
them; but more slowly and dully that Vein in the branch of the Hand, which is
extended and stretched forth between the Ring-finger, and the little finger.

Repulsion or driving back is used to follow revulsion. Repulsion or driving
back.
For Repulsion and Revulsion as it were mutually assist each other; and hence
it is that both these Remedies are to be administered in great Inflammations;
yet notwithstanding Revulsion ought always to have the precedence. For
Repelling Remedies that drive back may not safely be administered while the body
continues full, since that the Vessels yet remaining full will hardly give way
unto the Humor that is driven back; but if Revulsion be first made use of,
where there is occasion for it, afterward those things that drive back may
with more safety be administered. For Repellers both drive back the flowing
humor unto some other part, and so permit not the passage thereof into the
distempered part; and they also likewise repress the humor which is newly flown
into it, and which sticks in the Capillary Vessels; and so by this means they
free the part affected from that overgreat abundance of blood. But albeit the
benefit arising from these Repelling Remedies be very great and evident, as
that whereby the fluxions even in their beginning (by the alone use of these
Repellers) are stopped, and the part which began to be lift up into a Tumor
again falls down from its Swelling; yet notwithstanding these ought not evermore
in all cases to be administered. For (that we may not again repeat what we said
before, to wit, that driving back benefits nothing in a full and foul body, but
that likewise it cannot then be so much as attempted without danger) When
Remedies that drive back are not to be made use of.
it is altogether improper and unfit to administer those things that drive
back, when a far greater discommodity and inconvenience may be feared from the
repulsion or driving back of the blood, than from the Inflammation it self;
which may very well be, first, if the humor be malignant, venomous, and
pestilent; the which if Nature shall thrust forth from the inward parts unto the
outward, we ought not to drive it back again unto the internal parts, lest that
it should (peradventure) make its retreat back unto those inward parts, and
thereby increase the disease, and endanger the choking of the man. Which very
Caution is likewise to be observed in every other humor (be it what it will)
that Nature (rightly acting in a critical way) rejects and casts forth into any
some one part. For Nature while it is rightly employed and busied is by no
means to be impeded in her operation. Secondly, Those things that drive back
are not safely to be administered in the parts which we term ignoble, or less
considerable, being such as Nature has ordained to receive the superfluities
of the more noble Parts; unto which she is oftentimes wont to thrust out the
Humors with which the more noble parts are burdened and even loaded; and such
are the Glandules or Kernels in the Groins, Armpits, and behind the Ears. For
if repelling Medicaments be applied unto these parts, there will be great cause
to fear, lest the matter should again retire to the more noble and principal
parts. Furthermore, thirdly, There are other places, and other parts likewise,
unto the which Repellers may not commodiously be applied; and such are al those
that in their situation too nearly neighbor upon the noble parts: For the very
same thing (as before said) is to be feared, lest that the matter being driven
back should invade some of the nobler parts, and create a greater mischief. In
the fourth and last place, Repelling Remedies are not then to be tampered with,
when the parts are situated in a place too profound, or over deep. For neither
does the virtue (as we call it) and strength of the Repelling Medicaments reach
unto such parts; neither can it well be prevented, but that those parts are
hereby rather made more full, than any ways emptied. For while by Repelling
Remedies the exterior parts are contracted, and from out of them the Humors are
driven inwards, they are (after a sort) thrust and obtruded upon the affected
part, the which by this means becomes more replenished.

The time when Remedies that drive back are to be administered.
But then again, For the time and season when these Repellers are to be
administered, it is easily discernable. To wit, seeing that the main end and
scope of driving back is this, That the flowing humor should be prohibited its
passage, and rejected, therefore they are to be prescribed in the very
beginning, and that most rightly and properly whilst the matter is yet
flowing. But this notwithstanding ought evermore carefully to be observed, as
we said before, that the body be not full. For if the body yet remain full,
drivers back are not safely administered, whenas the blood has not any free
passage for its retreat, and so by this means becomes either more impacted into
the part, or else rusheth into some more noble part, and so create a greater
danger. But when indeed (even whilst it is in its augmentation) there is yet
some of the blood in flowing, even then repelling Medicaments may be
administered, yet not alone; whereupon we judge it not amiss, that unto these we
add and mingle therewithal some kind of Digestives, to the end that by the heat
somewhat may together also be attenuated, and converted into exhalations.

How Medicaments that drive back are to be mingled with those that digest.
Now after what manner Repellers are to be mingled with Digestives, Galen
instructs us in his sixth Book of the composition of Topical Medicaments, that
is, Medicaments that are made suitable unto the part affected, Chap. 1. Like as
(says he) in the beginning those Medicaments that drive back that which flows
in are useful and commodious; so, after the beginning, even unto the very end,
those Remedies that consist of both together will be requisite, to wit, such as
have in them both a repelling faculty to drive back, and likewise a digestive
faculty to discuss and scatter: and as for the time, the astringent Remedy that
drives back ought to have the precedence, and in the end that which digests and
dissipates; and in the time intervening betwixt the beginning and the end, the
Remedies ought to consist of equal parts of both the sorts before specified.
But whereas Galen elsewhere seems to be of a somewhat differing judgment, so that
it may be doubted whether Digestives also are to be mingled in the very
beginning, or that we are only to make use of Repellers; and whether or not in
the state or perfection only digestives are to be applied, or otherwise whether
that Repellers may not likewise b^ added and mingled therewith, these things
thu^ controverted ought rightly to be understood; an^ thus indeed it may be
done. For whereas eac^ part of the times of an Inflammation may again also be
divided as it were into three times or spaces, the end of the preceding
participates the nature of the beginning that follows, and almos^ agrees
with it: hereupon even almost in the first beginning of an Inflammation, or
that part of the beginning which is yet further distant from the augmentation,
Repellers only ought to be put i^ practice. But the beginning tending toward
the augmentation, or in that very part of the beginning which having already
made a good progres^ is now nigh unto the augmentation, it will be requisite
and convenient therewith to mingle Digestives. In the augmentation, and the
beginnin^ of the state or perfection Digestives and Repeller^ are almost
equally to be mingled together. For although the blood does now no longer flow;
ye^ notwithstanding, since it is not so altogether impacted, some part thereof
may as yet be drive^ back. But then afterward in the midst of the state
Digestives ought to take place, as most prevalent; and in the end of the state
or perfection of the distemper the remedies alone are to be administered; and
the same is also to be observed an^ accordingly practiced when the Inflammation
(...) now at length in its declining condition.

The quality of Medicaments that repel or drive back.
Furthermore, that in our Discourse we may make our approach, and come closely
to speak of the subject Medicamental matter it self, all repelling Remedies are
cold; as Galen asserts in his fifth Book touching the making of simple
Medicaments, Chap. 17. For like as heat attracts and draws, so that (whatever
it be) that is cold repels or drives back from it self. But then, look as
whatever is hot is not in or of it self the principle of the local motion, or
attraction, but only as we use to say, per accidens, or accidentally; to wit,
as it resolves into vapors the matter that is moist, in the room and place
whereof (lest a vacuity should happen and follow thereupon, which Nature
evermore abhors, and will by no means admit of) those things that are near
neighboring do afterward succeed: so in like manner, that which is cold does
not of it self drive back, but accidentally, to wit, as it causes a
constriction; by which motion of constriction the thicker parts do coalesce and
seat themselves close together, but the thinner are pressed forth. But then
that coldness has adjoined with it sometimes humidity or moistness, and
sometimes its contrary, siccity or dryness. And hence it is, that of such
Remedies as drive back there are two sorts or kinds: Repellers twofold
one moist and cold, or waterish; the other cold and dry, or earthy; and as
Galen tells us in the Book next before alleged, it has conjoined with it a
thickness of the parts. Such as are of the latter sort, since that besides
their coldness they have likewise an astringent power, they therefore with a
double force, as by their coldness, so also by their astringent faculty, do the
more strongly and vigorously repel and drive back. But then those cold and
moist Repellers are more mild and gentle, which therefore have power only to
drive back the thin humors that are seated in the superficies, and then also
when there is no great store of them; and they are commodiously administered
when heat and pain afflicts the part. For they do not only oppose and resist
the influx of the humors, but they also allay the heat, and by relaxation do
something mitigate and assuage the pain. But Repellers with astriction are
proper in other cases; and chiefly if the fluxion proceed from the debility of
the parts, and that the pain be not over urgent. For they strengthen the part
receiving, that so it may not receive the humor flowing into it, and they drive
back that which has already flown in. And they profit likewise, if the Vessels
through which the blood flows be wide and large, like as when the Vessels are
small and straight the gentler sort of Repellers are sufficient. Of the former
kind are, Housleek, Wall-Penywort, Lettice, Purslane, Endive, Nightshade, the
juice of Gourds, Water Lentils, Fleawort, Water-lilly, Arrach, Violets, and al
other Medicaments that are cold, and which are endued with a Watery humor.
Notwithstanding even among these themselves there are also certain degrees; and
some of them have a greater, some a less efficacy. Wall-Pennywort and Fleawort
drive back less forcibly than Lettice, Housleek, Purslane, and Nightshade.

Repellers with astriction are, the flowers and heads of Roses, the Leaves of
the Bramble bush, Vine Leaves, Saunders, Medlers, the fruit of the Service
Tree, Wild Pears, Quinces, the Leaves and Fruit of the Myrtle Tree, Pomegranate
flowers, Frankincense, the Rinds of Pomegranates, Acacia, Bole Armenick, Earth
of Lemnos (called Terra sigillata or sealed Earth) Dragons blood, the Leaves
and Nuts of the Cypress Tree, Oak Leaves, unripe Galls, Ceruss, Litharge,
Corals.

Out of these there are compounded diverse Medicaments (which you shall anon find
expressed) according to the diversity of the disease it self, and its
circumstances. For of the Plants, either the crude raw Leaves themselves are
imposed upon the grieved part; or otherwise if by reason of their roughness
this shall not be deemed convenient then let them be boiled in water, in the
which let linen clothes be dipped, or else spunges thoroughly soaked, and so let
them be laid upon the part affected. Or else the juice is pressed forth, and
applied in the same manner. But others of them are bruised, and then mingled
with Liquors are applied in a different manner. Galen was wont to dip a sponge
and wet it well in an Oxycrate, that is, a compound of Vinegar mingled with some
other Liquor, and then to apply it unto the part. To the same end and purpose
are convenient the Oil of Roses and Myrtles, the Unguent of Roses, the cooling
Santaline Cerecloath prescribed by Galen. And this likewise that follows is
an excellent Remedy, and in frequent use with Surgeons, viz.

Take the Whites of Eggs, and Rosewater, of each alike; let these be well
shaken, and thoroughly mingled together; then let Linen Clouts be well wet and
soaked therein, and so laid upon the part.

Or, Take Barley Meal, which boil in Vinegar and the juice of Plantane, and lay
it upon the grieved part. Galen in his second Book to Glauco, Chap. 2. commends
a Cataplasm of Housleek, Pomegranate Rinds boiled with Wine, and so made up
with Sumach and Barley Meal. For this Cataplasm (as says Galen) is absolutely
the best in such like affects; and also very effectual to al those purposes we
intend it for. For it drives back that which flows in, dries up what is therein
contained, and fortifies the Members situate round about. Or it may be thus
compounded:

Take Housleek three ounces; Barley Meal two ounces; Pomegranate Rinds one
ounce; Sumach ten drams: bruise what is to be bruised, and then boil them all
together in Wine for a Cataplasm. Galen likewise made use of the Plaster
Diachalciteos, dissolved with the Oil of Roses, or Myrtle. This likewise is
profitable.

Take Plantane, Roses, Lettice, Purslane, of each alike, one good handful; boil
them in Water, unto which put a little Vinegar to mingle therewith, and then
add Barley meal. Or,

Take the juice of Housleek, Plantane, and Roses, of each one ounce and half,
Barley meal one ounce, Vinegar, half an ounce, Oil of Roses as much as will
suffice; boil them into the form of a Pultise. Or,

Take Pomegranate rinds, red Saunders, of each half an ounce, Bolearmoniack two
ounces, Barley meal one ounce, Housleek one ounce and half, Oil of Roses and
Myrtle of each as much as is sufficient; and make a Cataplasm.

Where there is need of a stronger Repulsion, and if the part will admit of it,
those Remedies that are somewhat more forcible are to be used. As,

Take Bolearmoniack, Dragonsblood, of each one dram; the Root of the greater
Comfrey half an ounce, Barley meal two ounces, make a powder; which as occasion
shall require is with Rosewater and the white of an Eg made into the form of a
Cataplasm, and so laid on.

Intercepters and Defensives:
Those things that Intercept (which are also commonly called Defensives) are the
same with Repellers, and only differ in respect of the place whereunto they are
applied. For drivers back are applied unto the very place inflamed, but
Intercepters and Defensives unto the parts and ways by which the humor flows
unto the affected part, that so it may be intercepted in its passage, and that
the way may be shut up against it, that so it reach not unto the aggrieved
part. And indeed these are most commodiously applied to those parts that have
little or no Flesh, and unto those in which the Vessels do more appear and are
conspicuous, as in the joints, and above the joints. As for instance, if the
inflammation be in the Hand, they are then applied unto the Wrist; if betwixt
the Wrist and the Elbow, they are then to be applied above the Elbow; if in the
Shoulder, to the highest part thereof; if in the Foot, above the Ankle-bone; if
in the Leg, above the Knee.

Their Quality:
Now all Intercepters are cold, dry, and of an astringent or binding faculty:
among which notwithstanding since there is no small difference, as erewhile was
said of Repellers, we ought to use the gentler sort of them in the more tender
bodies, where the fluxion is not great, the Veins smaller, and in the Winter
time. But those of them that are more forcible are to be made use of in
stronger Bodies, where the fluxion is greater, the Vessels wider, and in the
Summer time. But Medicaments that intercept are to be administered after a
different manner. For either the juyces, as of Quinces, Pomegranates, Plantane,
Housleek, the Bramule or Blackberry bush; or else the decoction of Saunders,
Pomegranate Flowers, Myrtles, Sumach, Roses, or Rosewater, Plantane, Housleek,
or Vinegar and Oxycrates are used, and linen Clothes are well moistened in them,
and then applied to the Joints and the parts betwixt; or else, lastly,
astringents being pulverized and mingled with proper liquid Remedies are to be
administered.

The Vulgar or common Defensive is made after this manner, viz.

Take Bolearmoniack, Dragons Blood, Lemnian or sealed Earth, all the Saunders,
of each one ounce; Oil of Roses and Myrtle, of each a sufficient quantity, of
Wax a small quantity, Vinegar of Roses one ounce, mingle them, and boil them
till the Vinegar be all consumed. Yet notwithstanding the Oils and Wax are
deservedly and not without cause to be suspected in these prescriptions. For by
their fat unctuous or oily substance they mollify the parts, and they likewise
overheat them if they long stick upon them. And therefore it will be more safe
to apply the aforesaid or such like powders mingled only with Rose water or
Oxycrate; and if we would have them to be somewhat more forcibly astringent,
mingled with the white of an Egg well beaten and shaken together. For by this
means they stick and cleave the more tenaciously unto the part, and cause a
constriction thereof. As,

Take Bolearmoniack, Dragons Blood, of each an ounce, Flowers of red Roses,
Pomegranate flowers, Myrtles, red Saunders, Pomegranate rindes, of each an
ounce; make a Powder hereof, which afterward mingle with the white of an Egg
and Rose water, or Vinegar, as much as will suffice.

And last of all, we may also in this place make use of derivation, Derivation.
which has respect unto the blood that has indeed already flown in, yet
notwithstanding as yet is only poured forth without the Veins into the void
spaces of the part, but as yet fluctuats or flows to and again in the Veins.
Neither indeed can the blood possibly be derived which is already impacted in
the part, or that already begins to be concocted, or to be turned into Pus, or
quittery matter; since that it is now become more thick than formerly, and
consists (as having taken up its abode) in that place out of which it cannot
easily flow back, and thereupon is rendered the unfitter for motion, and the
more earnestly and greedily retained by Nature until it be there digested and
concocted. From whence will easily appear, at what time the derivation ought to
be ordained and administered, to wit, indeed in the very beginning of the
Inflammation; and yet notwithstanding not instanly upon the very first onset of
the Disease, but toward the augmentation thereof, when its beginning is now at
hand, to wit, when by means of Revulsion and Evacuation already both prescribed
and administered the blood is rendered not over abundant, and that which is does
not as yet pertinaciously and fixedly adhere unto, or stick in the parts, but
as yet continues to be fluxile and apt to flow. Wherefore, that we may rightly
understand that which is on all hands taken from granted, to wit, that during
the consistency or continuance of the Inflammation derivation ought to be
administered, this is not to be taken as meant either of the state or (as we call
it) the perfection of the distemper, or of its declination, but rather of the
latter part of its beginning.

In derivation what to be observed.
Now in Derivation, that community and correspondence that is between the Veins
and the part affected (of which we have formerly made mention) is especially to
be observed. For if the blood that is in the Veins of the affected part ought
to be drawn thence unto the neighboring parts by derivation, then in this case
we must evermore make choice of such a Vein to effect it by as has the nearest
commerce and vicinity with the part affected; the which if it be opened, brings
along with it an apparent and admirable benefit. But now for the measure and
proportion that we ought so heedfully to take notice of and observe in letting
blood by way of Derivation, Hippocrates informs us, in Book 7. of the Course of
Diet in acute Diseases, chap. 10. The blood (says he) must be drawn away so
far forth, and so long, until it flow forth more red, and much yellower, or
that instead of a ruddy color it appear to be of a livid, or leaden-like color.
For (as Galen there tells us) whatsoever blood is contained in a Phlegmone, that
same will be changed in its color through the abundance of heat, but the rest
will all of it continue alike in all parts of the body. And for this cause,
that blood which is contained in that side that is afflicted and inflamed with
a Phlegmone must needs be much more red and ruddy than that which is dispersed
and diffused throughout the whole body; especially if the body be pituitous or
Phlegmy. Now if the blood that is diffused into the whole body appear to be al
of it of a more ruddy color than ordinary, without doubt then that which
accompanies the Phlegmone, boiled and burnt as it is, must needs be changed
into a black hiew. And from hence it is, that a change in the color denotes and
signifies a translation of the blood from out of the part affected; which said
change notwithstanding is not evermore to be expected, if strength be wanting
in the Patient.

And after such like ways as these may the Humors that flowing forth together
unto a part generate there a Phlegmone be removed from the aggrieved part.
Among the which before mentioned notwithstanding, those Medicaments that drive
back and derive very much, conduce (like as the other) for the removal of the
humor that flows amain into the part affected. For Repellers, although their
principal scope be to repress the humor that flows in and is as yet contained
within the Veins of the part; yet notwithstanding they have a power also to
drive, and thrust back again into the Veins, and to cast out of the part those
humors likewise that are newly fallen forth without those Veins, and as yet not
it removably fixed in the place whither they are fallen. For neither is it a
thing impossible that the Humors that are fallen out of the Veins should again
retire back into them; even as many sorts of Tumors in the skin evidence unto
us the truth hereof, which now and then in a cold season suddenly vanish away,
and disappear. And so likewise derivation, albeit it hardly call back those
Humors that are fallen forth without the Veins; yet notwithstanding, as for the
blood which fluctuates in the Veins of the inflamed part, it has a power
sufficient to draw it unto the neighboring parts, and by them to evacuate it.

Notwithstanding, Evacuation.
since that by the alone use of Repellers and Derivers all the whole matter is
seldom evacuated out of the part inflamed, but that after the use of them for
the most part somewhat is left remaining behind, this ought in another manner
and by other means to be evacuated. Now this evacuation is accomplished after a
twofold manner; either insensibly and by an imperciptible transpiration (which
the Grecians call adelos diapnoe) or else sensibly and manifestly: The matter is
evacuated insensibly by Diaphoreticks or Sweaters, as likewise by those that we
term Digestive, Discussive, and resolving Medicaments. The sensible evacuation
is performed by scarification, and the opening of the part, after suppuration,
or (as we commonly term it) maturation of the peccant humor. We will therefore
in the first place treat of the former manner of evacuation, and declare our
opinion touching discussive Remedies.

But now, Discussion
since that resolution or discussion is nothing else but an evacuation of the
humor by an insensible transpiration, it will from hence easily be made to
appear, that what is to be discussed ought to be thin or fluxile, and not over
clammy and thick; neither the skin it self too much shut up and condensed. For
if the matter be over thick, it cannot then be easily resolved into vapors: but
if the skin be too thick and compact; like as also if the matter stick in a
place over deep; when all or any of these happen, then the matter causing the
distemper finds not easily any way for its passage forth, neither can any
Remedies but what are very forcible penetrate unto the place affected.

Discussives, what they are for their quality
Moreover, since that al digestive Medicaments are hot in their operation (as by
and by we shall further show you) they are therefore to be administered not over
hastily in the very beginning of the Inflammation; but then we ought rather to
make use of Repellers, for the reasons before mentioned. But the Inflammation
approaching now nigh unto (or if ye will, while it is yet in its passage
toward) its augmentation, some kind of digesting Medicaments ought to be
mingled with the Repellers: and so al along the quantity of the Discussives
ought evermore to be increased, until at length in the declination they alone
come to be administered. Now the truth is, al Digestives or Diaphoreticks are
hot; for the Humor cannot be resolved, attenuated, and converted into vapors,
but only by heat. But of such things as are hot there is a very great
difference: for some of them do only rarefie, or open the orifices of the
Vessels; other of them cut the Humors; and a third sort there is that attracts
and draws them; and last of all, there are others that are of a burning
quality. Now the Diaphoretick Medicaments differ from them all; and have in
them this proper and peculiar faculty, to resolve the Humors, and to convert
them into vapors. Which said quality of theirs may not so easily be described
by their Causes; but it is rather discovered by the experience that we have of
their effects: so that what cannot be defined by reason, that same is supplied
by experience, and use. But now although al Diaphoretick Medicaments are in
their own Nature hot, and that they acquire this faculty from a certain due
proportion observed in their mixture; yet notwithstanding, among them, some are
stronger, some weaker. Those of the milder sort are, Chamomel, Melilot, the
Roots of Marshmallows, the Roots of white Lillies, and of Fenugreek, the flour
or meal of Lupines, of Orobus or bitter Vetch, and of Cicers or Chiches;
leavened Bread, Goose fat, old Oil. The stronger of them are, Dill, Organy,
Thyme, Pennyroyal, Hysop, Calamint, Horehound, Orace roots, Rue, Sage, Annis
seed, Fennel seed, Caraway seed, flowers of the Elder Tree, Ammoniack,
Bdellium, Galbanum, Bulls fat, Bears grease, Oil of Rue and Laurel. And those
most of al forcible, are, Nitre, and the froth thereof, Sulphur or Brimstone,
Lime, and the like.

We make use of the milder sort, when the matter is in a place not very deep;
when the part affected and the body it self is more soft and relaxed, and the
Inflammation but small and inconsiderable. But if the Inflammation be greater,
and the matter situate more deep than ordinary, the body it self more hard and
condensed, in this case the stronger Medicaments are to be administered.
Notwithstanding we ought to use the stronger Discussives with due caution, lest
that by them the thinner parts of the Humors being discussed and resolved, and
the thicker parts left remaining behind, the Tumor should be hardened, and the
Malady rendered incurable; which will most commodiously be prevented, if
together with such things as forcibly discuss we likewise mingle those things
that moisten and mollify. We ought in like manner to be very cautious, that
the Discussives be not over tart and biting, lest that by their biting property
they the more excite pain, and augment the fluxion.

Now out of that before recited Medicamental matter, there are diverse kinds and
forms. In the end of the beginning of the Inflammation, and likewise in the
augmentation, such like Remedies as these that follow are of singular use.

Take Barley Meal two ounces; What is to be done in the increase or
augmentation of an inflammation
Linsed one ounce; the Powder of Camomile flowers half an ounce; boil them in
Vinegar; then add of Oil of Roses and Camomile, and the fat of an Hen, of each
alike as much as will suffice, and make a Cataplasm. Or otherwise:

Take Pellitory of the wall, Mallows, Plantane, of each one good handful: boil
them in Water: with the which let there be a very small quantity of Vinegar well
mingled together, and so let them be bruised into small pieces: after they are
thus brayed, add of Barley meal two ounces, Fenugreek seed an ounce and half:
Oil of Roses and Camomile, of each as much as will suffice, and make a
Cataplasm.

A most excellent and useful Cataplasm to prevent Inflammations in Wounds, and
in other cases. Viz.

Take the powder of Camomile flowers, of red Roses, of Wormwood, and Barley
meal, a like quantity of them al: boil them in pure clear Water, and make a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take the powder of Camomile flowers, red Roses, Wormwood, Barley Meal, of each
three ounces; Decoct them in common Water; then add Oil of Roses one ounce and
half, and make a Cataplasm.

In the state or perfection, What in the state or perfection of it.
such like as these that follow may be administered.

Take Camomile Flowers, and Melilot Flowers, the Leaves of Mallows, of each
half a handful; red Roses two large handfuls, boil them in austere or sharp
Wine, and then add of Fenugreek meal one ounce; Oil of Camomile a sufficient
quantity, and make thereof a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Roots of white Lillies one ounce; the flowers of Camomile and
Melilot, of each one good handful: red Roses and the tops of Dill, of each half
a handful: boil them in simple common Water, and let them be bruised very small:
then let there be added, of the Meal of Millet seed, Fenugreek Meal, and Barley
Meal, of each an ounce; Saffron half a dram; Oil of Camomil as much as will
suffice, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Pith of wheaten Bread six ounces; boil it in common Water, and after
this let it be strewed with the Powder of Camomile flowers and Melilot flowers,
of each half an ounce, red Roses two drams, Saffron half a dram, and so make a
Cataplasm.

And what in its declination.
Lastly, In the declination, such like Remedies are to be put in practice, Viz.

Take Marsh-mallow Root one ounce: the leaves of Mallows, Organy, the flowers
of Camomil and Melilot, of each half an handful: Lin-seed, Fenugreek seed, and
Dill seed, of each alike two drams: Decoct them in a sufficient quantity of
Water, and make a fomentation to be applied warm with a Sponge. Or,

Take the Powder of Camomil Flowers, of Elder and Melilot flowers, of each of
these half an ounce; Dill seed two drams, the Meal of Lin-seed, Fenugreek, and
Beans, of each one ounce; Oil of Dill and Camomile, of each alike as much as
will suffice; and make a Cataplasm.

This (moreover) as touching Digestives is to be taken notice of; to wit, That
if the matter be grosser and thicker than ordinary, insomuch that Digestives
cannot satisfy the expectation by doing their office, we must then do our
endeavor that the matter may be rendered fit for Discussion and transpiration
by sweat; and this may conveniently and securely be done by mollifying
Remedies. And therefore in such a case (as before we likewise hinted unto you)
we ought not only to abstain from those Medicaments that over-heat and dry;
since that they discuss, wast, and consume the humidity that is in the Tumor,
and harden the matter, and so cause the Malady to become altogether incurable:
but we ought likewise to administer mollifying and loosening Remedies, such as
do moderately heat, and withal do not excessively dry, but rather moisten;
which kind of Medicaments you may before find enumerated and reckoned up among
the Digestives themselves; such as is Hens fat, Goose fat, the Roots of
Marshmallows and white Lillies, Mallows, Lin-seed, Fenugreek, Bdellium,
Ammoniacum, and such like; al which are most fitly and conveniently administered
when the matter is thicker than usual, as we shall further show you in its
proper place, when we come to speak of Emollients or Mollifiers. And in this
manner the matter contained in an Inflammation is to be removed by insensible
transpiration.

But we have acquainted you that this matter is sensibly and perspicuously
poured forth either by scarification, or by opening of the part, after that the
Pus or purulent matter is generated. As for what concerns Scarification, that
it ought to be administered, Galen gives us his judgment clearly for it, whilst
that in his ninety fifth Chapter of the Method of Physic he thus writes: But
thou shall more especially evacuate (says he) both by the useful assistance of
scarification, and by the help of Medicaments that have in them a power and
faculty to dissolve, in case thou observe any thing to be contained in the
intervening middle spaces. And in his second Chapter of a Tumor he thus writes:
It is (says he) by Physicians found to be expedient, in the case aforesaid,
not only to discuss by the means of heaters, but likewise sensibly to evacuate
at least some part or portion of the blood it self, by making scarifications in
the Skin. But here then we are to know, that great heed and circumspection
ought to be taken and had, whether or no the matter may be turned into Pus, as
we term it, being the snotty fetid matter ensuing upon maturation. For if we
may probably hope for the said suppuration, then the above mentioned
scarifications have not any the least place. But then on the other hand, if the
matter may not be changed into the said Pus or matter, and that notwithstanding
likewise there be little or no hope that possibly it may be wholly discussed or
scattered by the application of Medicaments, then in this case both
Scarifications and Cupping-glasses may, nay ought to be administered. For these
two are a very effectual and prevalent Remedy for the evacuation of the matter
(whatever it be) that sticks and is deeply situated, and which seems
forthwith to be in the ready way of conversion into a Scirrhus. And therefore
they are by no means to be administered in the beginning or first appearance of
the Inflammation, but at length after that the body is sufficiently emptied,
and that the Phlegmone is at a stay; that so there may be further cause to fear
that a new fluxion should be excited by that pain which originally proceeds
from scarification; and then only when we have a purpose to extract that which
remains over and above after the use of other convenient Remedies. Yet
notwithstanding Scarification has place only in those parts which in other
cases likewise are fit to undergo and suffer the said Scarification. For if an
Inflammation happen unto any part unto the which in any other case
scarification ought not to be administered, I conceive that there will be found
no man so rash and unadvised, as that he dare be so adventurous as after a
Phlegmone (for the evacuation of the residue of the matter) to apply
Cupping-glasses and administer scarifications unto the part affected. But very
rare it is that scarifications are admitted and allowed of for the use and
purpose aforesaid.

But the safest and most usual way of curing an Inflammation, is, that the
matter which has flown in unto the part be discussed by the Medicaments before
propounded. But if thereby it may not be effected, Suppuration
we must then have recourse unto some other means for the curing of the
Phlegmone, and that is by Suppuration.

Now all this that has been said must be understood as spoken of a pure and
simple Phlegmone. But if the Inflammation be not pure, but that it rather
decline unto the nature of an Erysipelas, or an Oedema, or a Scirrhus, then
those Medicaments that are proper and convenient for these and such like Tumors
are to be intermingled with the other; yet evermore with this Proviso, that
such of them as relate unto the Phlegmone be always predominant.

The Cure of an Inflammation degenerating into an Impostume.
The generation of an Impostume.
If therefore there be no hope that the Inflammation may be completely cured by
the helps and means hitherto propounded (which will appear from the more
intense signs of the Inflammation, to wit, grievous pain that increases day
after day, a manifest Pulsation or beating, and an evident discernable
extension or stretching out of the part) then we ought instantly to use our
utmost endeavor, that the matter that is the cause of the Inflammation may with
all possible speed be concocted and brought unto suppuration, that is,
converted into Pus. For neither can the matter yet unconcocted, and as yet not
turned into matter, be in a due manner evacuated; and then again, if any one
open the inflamed part before the said Pus be completed, he shall thence draw
forth nothing; and shall increase and add unto the Malady rather than relieve
and cure it. But if that same part shall be opened, the purulent matter being
already elaborated and thereby brought to a due perfection, then all whatever
is superfluous in the inflamed part may most commodiously be evacuated. And
therefore we conclude, that the matter is first of al to be concocted, and so
far forth as possible may be digested by the native radical heat. For although
that matter which is contained in a Phlegmone can never be so far forth
concocted and elaborated that it may be rendered any ways useful and profitable
to Nature, and in any sort fit to nourish the parts; Yet notwithstanding, since
that there are therein certain qualities which are to Nature very offensive and
burdensome, those may be taken away; and a certain kind of equality, and
moderation of the qualities may be instituted; and a separation of the corrupt
humors from those that are good and such as are meet to nourish the Body may be
wrought; which said elaboration of the humor is here termed concoction and
suppuration. And when that that is superfluous and corrupt in the part inflamed
is separated from what is useful, good, and serviceable, and that the vicious
qualities are now hereby corrected and amended; and the very proper substance
of the blood it self shall be changed into an equal whitish and smooth matter,
and gathered together into its proper and peculiar place, so that now without
any difficulty at all it may upon the opening of the part be evacuated; then
and not til then the Pus is said to be now already perfectly concocted; and
that same collection or gathering together of the snotty filth, termed Pus or
matter, into some one particular place, is by the Grecians called Apostema, and
by the Latins Abscessus; with us (in English) it is named an Apostem or
Impostume, as has been said before in the first Chapter. Now that concoction
in man's Body is Natures work alone, the which by the help and assistance of the
native heat digests the humors, takes pains with them, and as it were leads
them along until it has brought them unto that perfection which they ought to
receive: which said heat if it be strong and vigorous, then we use to say, that
the Pus or matter thereby bred is good and laudable; and it is (as we may find
in the first Prognostic, Tom. 42.) white, equal, smooth, and not very s^^nking
and noysom. But if the innate heat be weak, then it will be quite and clean
contrary unto what was in the former case. And therefore the Physicians office
is, and his main care must be to cherish or preserve, and increase the native
or natural heat in the inflamed parts, that so by means of it the generating
and breeding of the said Pus may the better succeed, and the more easily attain
unto its perfection. The innate heat is conserved and augmented, if in the
first place we take course to hinder the issuing forth of it, and then that in
the next place we use all possible caution, that whatsoever of it is more
debile or weak in the more external parts may not be dissipated by the ambient
Air: and moreover, if Medicaments agreeable and suitable unto the Native heat
be applied to the part affected; and hence it is that the Medicaments
prescribed to facilitate the said suppuration or production of Pus, ought to be
such as bear a resemblance unto the native heat in the part to which they are
applied. And thereupon since that our Nature is moist and hot, the Medicaments
ought in like manner to be answerable, to wit, hot and moist. Furthermore, let
them be such as we term Emplastick, that is, such as have in them a certain
clamminess, that so they may fill up the Pores of the Skin, and that they may
prohibit and prevent the flowing forth of that heat that is so apt to
evaporate. For all those remedies that are of a cleansing property, or else
those Medicaments that forcibly heat (such as Cataplasms of Bean meal,
Fenugreek, Chiches, Lupines, etc.) seeing that they permit the vapors to exhale
and vent themselves outwardly, they may indeed in this respect be said to dry,
but they little or nothing at all further Suppuration.

Take Marshmallow roots three ounces, the Leaves of common Mallows, and
Bears-breech, of each one large handful; and then having boiled and mash'd
them, add thereto of Swines grease as much as will suffice; mingle and use them.
Or,

Take Marshmallow roots, white Lillies, of each two ounces; Mallow Leaves, two
large handfuls; full and fat dried Figs, in number ten; boil and bruise them
small, then add of Wheaten meal two ounces, Linseed half an ounce; mingle and
pass them through a fine Hair-sieve, and after add of Swines fat, Butter, or
Oil of white Lillies as much as is sufficient, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Marshmallow roots, Onions, white Lillies, alike of each two ounces.
Wheaten meal one ounce, Linseed six drams, Turpentine half an ounce, Saffron
one scruple, Hens fat, and Oil of Camomile, of each as much as will suffice, and
so make a Cataplasm.

The Signs of Pus or ripe matter.
When the Pus, that is, the purulent matter, has once arrived at its
perfection, we must then do our endeavor that with all speed possible it may be
evacuated. But then first of all it must manifestly appear unto us, whether or
no the Pus be already made and brought to perfection. For although in general
we have already before (in Chap. 3. concerning Impostumes) spoken of this same
subject; yet notwithstanding those things which are most proper to an
Inflammation seem needful here again to be repeated. Now therefore the best
and surest sign is taken from the Touch. And first, if the part he perceived to
be soft whiles that it is pressed, and that there is therein felt (as it were)
a certain kind of fluctuation; to wit, if two fingers of both hands, or the
forefinger and middle finger of one hand be applied to the Tumor, but yet so
that they touch not one the other, but be some little distance assunder, and
that one of the fingers press down the Tumor, and the other not: for then a
certain fluctuation and motion of the matter which is driven forth from place
to place is perceived under the other finger that lies quiet. But here
notwithstanding it will not be amiss to take this caution, lest that we be
mistaken, and either (the maturation being completed) deem that there is no
Pus or matter lying underneath, or else, that we open the part, albeit there
(indeed) be no filth, which we usually call Pus or matter. For why, there
appears a Fluctuation in some certain parts, even whiles they are sound; such
as are the places about the Knees. And on the contrary, now and then the said
Pus or filthy snot-like matter, although (as to its maturation or ripening) it
be completed, yet it does not evermore of it self evidence the signs and
tokens thereof. Touching which Hippocrates likewise makes mention in his sixth
Book, Aphor. 41. where he thus writes: Unto whom purulent matter existing and
abiding in the Body does notwithstanding disappear, and not discover it self by
any kind of token or signification, there we are to understand that it does not
disclose it self ei her by reason of its own thickness, or the condensedness of
the place. To wit, the said Pus ever and anon lies hid and concealed and does
not discover it self, either by the reason of the density, that is, the
thickness, and withal the hardness of the place affected; or else because of
the profundity, or if you will, the depth of the place where it resides; as for
instance, when an Impostume has its residence, and lies hid between the
Muscles of the Belly, or of the Thigh, or of the great Joints: like as it comes
to pass also in the Heel, and the sole of the Foot, by means of the Skins
extraordinary thickness. Or else it happens, in regard that the said Pus it
self is overgoss and thick; upon which account it neither can be driven forth
unto the superficies, neither does it yield unto the compression of the
fingers, and so consequently fluctuate.

There are moreover other signs of Pus (when perfectly bred) disappearing and
lying hid. To wit, secondly, the place (in reference to its color) declineth
unto a certain kind of whiteishness, when the maturation is already terminated;
whereas before and until such time as the filthy corrupt matter was ripened, it
was of a more ruddy or reddish color. Thirdly, it is a sign, and it argues
that the Pus or the quittor is completely ripened, if that both the heat and
pain be remitted, and the extension and pulsation of the part be diminished;
touching which likewise Hippocrates thus writes, in his sixth Book, Aphor. 47.
The pains and Fevers happen and are always more intense whilst that Pus is
in breeding, and until it be perfectly bred, then after such time as it is
fully ripened, and the maturation completed. For the concoction being once
made and past, there is some certain portion of the matter and of the vapors
resolved; and the matter being converted into Pus is gathered together into one
place: from whence it likewise proceeds, that the sense and feeling of pain is
not now any longer so great and intolerable as before, and also all the other
symptoms slacken and grow remiss. The fourth sign is, that the Tumor struts
forth (as it were) into an eminent height and sharp-pointedness. For Nature
thrusts forth the elaborated and ripened Pus, and confines it unto some one
place, and according to her power expels it unto the more external parts, and
that place more especially by the which it may with least difficulty and danger
be emptied and cast forth.

If therefore by these signs we get assurance that the Pus (as we term it) is
already made, we must then (as has been said) do our utmost endeavor, that
without the least delay it may be evacuated. For if the said Pus be overlong
detained it overthrows the temper of the member, corrupts the adjoining and
near neighboring parts and so the Ulcer proves to be intrictae and full of
turnings, or else degenerates into a Fistula; which is then wont more
especially to happen, when the matter is sharp and malignant; or otherwise when
the Inflammation is seated in the joints, in the Arse-hole (as we call it) and
such like parts.

Now as for the manner of Evacuation, The evacuation of Pus or corrupt matter
out of an Impostume.
it is (as has likewise been shown before, in the third Chapter, touching an
Impostume in general) twofold; either by the opening of the part, or else by
insensible transpiration. And very commonly indeed, if not for the most part,
that kind of Impostume which we call Vomica (which is an Impostume full of
snot-like filth or matter) is forthwith opened; and that also very
conveniently, and usually with good success. Yet notwithstanding Galen in his
third Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 15. does not instantly proceed to
opening, but first of al assayes what may be done by exhalation and insensible
discussion. And this is especially practiced in that affect which we term the
Kings Evil, and generally in all Swellings in the Neck, Arm-holes, and all the
glandulous kernelly parts. For if such like parts should be opened and altered
by the ambient Air, it is possible (and indeed very frequently seen) that from
thence the Ulcers are rendered either altogether incurable, or at least more
difficultly curable, and of longer duration. But here we cannot be over
cautious. For whenas this said resolution and discussion of the purulent
corrupt matter happens but seldom, and never but after a longer tract of
time, so that thereupon there is great cause to fear, lest that it should in
the mean while corrupt the near neighboring parts, and cause windings to and
fro in the part affected; then in this case, all the circumstances ought
heedfully to be weighed, and duly considered. For if that the Pus be good and
laudable, thin, not much of it, not situate in a deep place, but rather seated
in the superficies; and if the Skin be softer and thinner, then perhaps we may
have some ground to hope and expect a discussion. But if the case stand quite
contrary, and it be so that the said Pus be not good and commendable, but that
it be thick, fixed in a deeper place than ordinary, and likewise if the Skin be
thicker than is convenient; then to attempt resolution, and to defer opening,
will be a course altogether safe, and void of danger. But where there is any
hope given of resolution, we must then make use of the stronger sort of
Digestives to accomplish this discussion. Of this kind is that Medicament which
Paulus Aegineta (in his fourth Book, Chap. 18.) has prescribed; which drives
forth those Impostumes that are already thoroughly concocted, and quite and
clean discusseth and scatters such as are not concocted.

Take of the stone Pyrita, Ammoniack, of each one ounce and half: of Bean Meal
six drams: let them be incorporated with liquid Rozin, and let the liquid
Medicament be spread upon a Skin, and not taken away until it fall off of its
own accord.

This likewise is singularly useful;

Take Ammoniack two ounces: Galbanum half an ounce: Lithargyrie three ounces:
old Oil as much as will suffice: make a Liniment.

But if (which but seldom happens) the Pus cannot insensibly be discussed, The
opening of an Impopostume.
then it is sensibly to be emptied forth and evacuated by opening the
Impostume. Now either the Impostume is broken of it self, or else it is opened
by art. The Impostume is opened of it self, whilst that we expect and wait
until the Pus corrode and fret away the skin it self; which we are allowed to
do, in case the Tumor or Swelling be not so very great; but especially if it be
in the outwardmost part of the Skin and flesh, and under the Skin that is not
over thick. But it is not evermore safe to expect a Spontaneous and voluntary
opening. For (as Galen writes upon this very subject, in his second Book to
Glauco, and sixth Chapter) when Tumors which arrive at Impostumes shall be long
neglected ere they be launced and cut (either by reason of the unskilfulness of
those that undertake the Cure, or the fearfulness of the Patient that is under
cure, who will not suffer themselves to be cut, when it is to be put in practice.
but will rather wait and expect until that in process of time the Skin be
corroded and eaten through) it then very often comes to pass that the whole Skin
is exceedingly extenuated by reason of the purulent matter heaped up together
near unto the Impostume, not unlike unto that which the Greeks call Racos, that
is, a rent Garment; from whence it is that Physicians have imposed upon it this
appellation or name, Racodes, that is to say, rent and torn. And if this
chance, the Skin in this manner and by this means extenuated will very hardly
ever after be brought to cement and unite with the part that is subjected and
lies underneath it. But now, in the first place, the said opening is not to be
delayed, and a voluntary eruption of the corrupt matter to be expected, if so
be that the flesh and skin be thicker than ordinarily; and if there be in that
part Nerves, Veins, and Tendons. For then the Impostume is to be opened as soon
as possibly it may be, lest that if the opening be deferred, the malignancy of
the purulent matter corrupt and eat asunder the Nerves and Tendons; especially
if the Impostume be ever a whit nigh unto the Joints. Yea, in some certain
places, as for instance, near about the Arse, and the Sutures, we are scarcely
allowed to expect the highest and utmost perfection of the said Pus, lest that
the more profound and deep parts putrefie, and thence a long lasting, or
Fistula-like Ulcer be generated. And therefore if the corrosion or gnawing
asunder of the Skin, and consequently that spontaneous eruption of the filth
and corruption he not to be expected, the Impostume is then forthwith to be
opened; and this ought to be performed in that place of it that is the highest
and most eminent; for there the Skin is at the thinnest: and withal it is
likewise to be opened at the same time, in some more sloping and inferior place
thereof, that so the said Pus may the more easily pass forth. It is to be
opened either with an Iron Instrument, or else by Medicaments. The Iron that
opens it must either be such as is heated in the fire, or else such an
Instrument as is prepared to cut. We most rarely make use of the Iron heated in
the fire, and never unless in case of urgent and extreme necessity; as for
instance, if it should so chance, that there be a Tumor in those parts that are
full of Veins and Arteries, and such other like cases. For there the dangerous
flowing forth of the Blood is checked and suppressed by the fire-heated Iron.
But most frequently it is opened with an Instrument that is fitted expeditely
to cut; and this knife ought to be sharpened to the utmost, that so the Section
may be performed without putting the Patient unto any extreme and intolerable
pain; and (if possibly it may be done) so that the sick party may take no
notice thereof. But in the accomplishing of this work we must evermore look well
unto it, that the Sections (or cuttings) be no larger than needs must; and yet
(on the other hand) not so small, but that they relieve the present necessity; I
mean, that by the Orifice of the incision the Pus may find an open and free
passage forth. For if the Wound be less than that the corruption may rightly
pass out thereat, then it will be requisite that the part be pressed down; by
which compression pain is evermore excited, and the Ulcer is rendered callous
and brawny; from whence a Fistula may possibly arise. But on the other side, if
the Incision be wider than it needed to have been; then both the Cicatrix or
Scar will be greater (and more unsightly) than if it had been artificially
made; and then likewise the parts subjected will be altered by the ambient air;
and now and then the part is thereby made the weaker. Celsus (in his seventh
Book, and second Chapter) gives in charge, that the Incision be made after the
resemblance of the Myrtle Leaf, that is, that a simple downright Section be
made, and that it be so long, that when the lips thereof are dilated the Wound
may bear a resemblance to the Myrtle Leaf. And sometimes one only Section does
not suffice; but (as Celsus there instructs us) greater turnings and nooks are
by incision to be made in two or more lines. And this also is carefully to be
observed, That the Section be made according to the fibers, that is, answerable
to the small strings or hairs of the Muscles. Now the Fibers proceed straight
forth, and for the most part according to the length of the body, unless it be
in some certain places, as in the forehead. Now this is therefore to be heeded,
that so we may not hurt or hinder the motion and action of the member; which
yet we need not to observe, if the Tumor be in the Superficies, and close under
the Skin; but then only, when the Pus sticks in the very substance of the
Muscle. In the first place therefore we must take due heed that we keep at a
good distance from the Nerves, as also the Veins and Arteries, and that we come
not nigh them. The Instruments we make use of for the opening of Impostumes are
very many. The first is the Razor; then next the Myrtle Knife, which they
commonly call the Lancet; thirdly, a Knife or Instrument resembling the Olive
Tree; fourthly, our Countrymen likewise open Impostumes with the Penknife, or
that with which they let blood when they open a Vein. But of necessity these
Instruments must variously be used, according to the great variety and
difference of circumstances. For if the Impostume be deeply seated, and the
Skin be thicker than usually, then it will be needful proportionably to make the
Section so much the more profound and deep. But if it be (as we use to say)
subcutaneous, that is, lying close under the Skin, there will then be no
necessity for this so deep an Incision.

But in regard there are many that will not admit of Section or Incision, we
therefore prescribe and administer unto such persons Medicaments whereby the
impostume may be opened. But those Medicaments are hot al of them of one and
the same sort, neither of a like efficacy; for some of them are weaker, and
other stronger. The stronger sort of them are not over rashly to be
administered. For they both prolong the Disease, and introduce an evil distemper
into the part; and possibly they may likewise produce diverse other ill
symptoms. And therefore the gentler sort of them are first of al to be
administered, which do rather ripen the matter and draw it to the highest part
of the Tumor, and withal do there render the Skin more subtle, and cause it to
become more tender, than truly and properly corrode, eat asunder, and break the
Skin. And such are these that follow:

Take Marsh-mallow roots, and white Lillies, of each alike one once: Garlic,
Onions roasted under embers, the flour of Fenugreek seed, dried Figs fat and
full, of each two drams: the dough of Bread well leavened one dram and an half:
Oil of white Lillies, Butter, Swines fat, of each alike as much as will suffice,
and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Onions, Garlic, Marsh-mallow roots, equal parts of them al: boil them to
a softness, and when they be well bruised add the flour of Fenugreek as much as
any one part of them: the fat of an old Hog as much as will suffice, and mingle
them well. This following is more forcible.

Take of sharp and sour Leaven half an ounce, Onions roasted under live coals
one ounce, Doves Dung one dram; black Soap, Swines Fat, of each alike as much
as is sufficient; and mingle them.

The Emplaster Diachylon mingled with Mustard Seed, Figs, and Salt, performs
the same with the former.

But such like Medicaments are more especially applied unto that part in the
which the Impostume is sharp-pointed; and round about it there is put to
somewhat that is maturative or ripening (understand it here of simple
maturatives) as Diachylon, which to this end is wont to have a hole made
through the midst. The strongest sort of them are those that we call potential
Cauteries; the which kind of Remedies we have described in our Institutions;
among which that is the most efficacious, and withal the most safe, which is
prepared and made out of Lee, out of which there is a certain soap prepared;
touching which we have likewise spoken in our Institutions. Now of such a
Cautery we are to take a certain small proportion, to the quantity of half a
Cicer or Pease, and then apply it unto the part after this manner. Take the
Cloth that is spread over with the Emplaster, and cause it to stick close to
the Skin; then in the midst thereof cut a small hole, somewhat narrower and
streighter than you intend the Cautery shall be. After this take the Cautery,
and being somewhat moistened with Spittle apply it unto the Skin that appears
and lies open to view through the aforesaid hole, and afterward lay on another
Emplaster upon the former. After two or three hours remove the Cautery with the
Plaster; upon the removal of which the part appears black, soft, and without
any sense or feeling. And that this burnt part may be wholly taken away, let it
be all over thoroughly besmeared with unsalted or fresh Butter, or with the fat
of an Hog, or with some other fit Digestive. But if the hole be not wide and
large enough, it may very easily be dilated, to wit, if either a little piece
of Sponge or Gentian root, or Rape root dry be put thereinto. For these things
aforesaid when they are filled full with humidity they are then dilated, and so
consequently widen and enlarge the hole. The Sponge is thus to be prepared: the
Sponge is to be well soaked in the white of an Egg twice or thrice thoroughly
shaken together; then afterward let it be close squeezed together on all
sides, and then let it be leisurely dried in the shade: a small portion of this
(when it is dried) is to be taken and put upon the Ulcer. But in regard that
the crustiness thereof will not fall off in a few days time, and that all this
while the Pus or filthy corruption (unless it stick immediately under the Skin)
is detained and imprisoned in the Impostume, for this very cause, if there were
no other, it is by far the safer way to open the Impostume with an Iron.

The Impostume being now opened (whatever the way of opening it has been) the
Pus or matter is to be evacuated, but yet this needs not evermore to be wholly
all at once or altogether. For if the Impostume be great, and contain much Pus
within it, near unto the Arteries and Veins, the whole matter and filth ought
by no means to be evacuated all at once, lest that together therewith much of
the Spirits be likewise evacuated and dissipated, and so by this means the sick
Person should be caused to faint and swoon, or be debilitated and weakened: but
rather the corruption is to be emptied forth by some and some, especially if
the Patient be weak, or a Woman with Child; or in case the Patient be a Child,
or lastly, if the sick party be very aged. When the Pus is evacuated, if either
pain manifest it self, or else any relics of the matter not suppurated appear
in the circumference, and it be so that the Pus it self be not well and
perfectly ripened; then the pain is to be mitigated, and more especially the
remainder of the matter is speedily to be converted into the said Pus by some
concocting Medicament, which they commonly call a Digestive. And such is that
which is made of the Oil of Roses, and the Yelks of Eggs: for it greatly
mitigates the pain, and helps forward the generating and breeding of the Pus so
often mentioned. Or,

Take Turpentine one ounce, one Yelk of an Egg, the Powder or Dust of
Frankincense one dram, Oil of Roses three drams; mingle them well together.

Likewise the Emplaster Diachylon simplex is very profitable in this case.

When this is once accomplished, even while the concoction does yet appear, we
must come to those things that thoroughly cleanse and purge it: for neither can
there flesh be bred, nor any conglutination (by drawing together the Lips of
the Impostumated part) be made, unless the part be first cleansed. Which to
effect,

Take Clear Turpentine one ounce, Honey of Roses six drams, the Yelk of one
Egg; let them boil together a little, and afterward add of Saffron one scruple,
and a little quantity of Barley meal.

If there be need of a greater cleansing, you may then add the juice of
Smallage. As,

Take of crude Honey, Barley meal, of each alike, one ounce; of the Juice of
Smallage half an ounce, Saffron half a scruple; and mingle them.

If yet there be occasion for a more forcible cleanser, there may be added of
the Vngueut Egyptiack as much as will suffice.

Centaury the less, and round Birthwort is here likewise very useful. As,

Take the juice of the lesser Centaury two ounces, Smallage one ounce, Honey
three ounces; let them boil together, and after add of Barley meal, and the
Vetch Orobus, of each six drams: when they are taken from the fire, add of
Turpentine one ounce, of the Powder of the Flower-de-luce root one dram; mingle
them.

The Impostume being thoroughly cleansed, such Medicaments as breed and cause
flesh are to be administered. Now of what sort these are, Galen in his third
Book of the Method of Physic, the second, third, and fourth Chapters teaches
us at larhe* and we have likewise declared them in our Book of Institutions. As
for example,

Take Frankincense, Mastick, of each half an ounce, Colophony two ounces, Oil
of Roses and Honey, of each as much as is sufficient; let them be mingled. Or,

Take The greater Comfrey one handful, Betony, Saint John's Wort, Hors-tail
Grass, of each half a handful; boil them in Wine, and bruise them well: out of
the mash of them squeez forth a Juice, and add of Frankincense and Mastick of
each one ounce and half; Dragons blood an ounce, Honey and Turpentine, of each
a sufficient quantity; boil them until the juice be consumed, and make an
Unguent. Or,

Take Myrrh, Aloes, Sarcocol, of each an ounce; Honey six drams, White Wine as
much as will suffice; boil them to an indifferent thickness.

When the Ulcer is filled up with Flesh, then those Medicaments which we call
Epuloticks, that is, such as bring to a Scar, are to be administered; of which
we have in like manner spoken in our Institutions; such as are, the Emplaster
Diapalma or Diachalciteos, de minio of Vigo, and others, which are every where
known.

Chap. 6. Of the Sinus in the Tumor.
BUt it oftentimes so happens, that although the said Pus or snotty filth be
emptied forth of the Impostume, yet notwithstanding it becomes again
replenished; from whence it comes to pass that the adjacent Skin does not
close, fasten and grow together with the Flesh that is underneath it; but there
is a certain cavity or hollowness left to remain; and at length there arises a
certain difficulty, if not impossibility, of cementing and conjoyning the skin
with the Bodies lying underneath; which affect the Greeks call Colpos, and the
Latins term it Sinus; to wit, when the entrance into the Impostume and Ulcer
appears narrow enough: but the deeper and more profound part thereof diffuseth
it self into a breadth.

The Causes.
Now for the most part, the Causes of this Sinus are Impostumes or Suppurated
Tumors, over-slowly opened, or not well cleansed. For the corruption if it be
longer detained in the deep place than it ought to be acquireth a certain kind
of sharp corroding quality, and there causes diverse winding passages and
turnings, such like as we find in Coney-borrows; and so unto the part in this
manner affected there flow together from the neighboring parts, yea from all
the whole body, such excrements and such humors as superabound; from whence
afterward it chances, that this kind of Sinus or windings to and fro can very
hardly be conglutinated and filled up with Flesh.

The Differences.
But now of these Sinus there is an exceeding great diversity: for they differ
not only in the dimension of quantity (that one should be less and shorter, and
another more deep or broad) or in their figure (that one should be straight,
and another full of turnings, of this or that figure) but most especially they
differ in the manner of their situation and position; because that kind of
difference does not a little vary the Cure. For that which tends upwards
affords us a better hope and surer expectation of cure, seeing that by its
orifice the Pus may the more readily flow forth and be evacuated. But that
which tends downwards does longer retein the said Pus; which being kept in
does further corrupt and corrode the parts. Wherefore such a Sinus is not to be
cured, unless you open it on the adverse or opposite part, that so the Pus may
freely come forth out of it. Now that the Physician may not be ignorant of
these Differences, but that he may know and well understand whither the Sinus
reaches, and how great it is, an exact and strict search must be made
thereinto by Tents, or otherwise with those Silver Instruments (we call them
Probes) wherewith Surgeons are wont to search unto the bottom of deep
Wounds; as likewise by Wax Candles (or the like) gently conveyed down into the
very deepest part of the Sinus. And withal we must do our utmost endeavor,
that the Sinus may be speedily cured; for unless it be spedily cured it
contracts to it self a certain callous or brawny superficies; and in process of
time it becomes exceeding hard; neither will it afterward be cured without much
difficulty and danger.

Notwithstanding, what hopes there may be, the qualities of the part it self
that is affected do evidently demonstrate, and chiefly the matter which flows
forth out of the Sinus. For if it be much, not digested; if there be pain
sensibly felt in the Sinus, or if a Tumor or Swelling appear, as yet there is
but small hopes of its Cure: but then if the Pus be but little in quantity, if
it be good, white; if there be present no pain, and all the whole place be
equal; it is a great and strong Argument that the Sinus is already filled with
Flesh.

The Cure.
As for what concerns the Cure; since that hollowness and solution of Unity are
the Causes of the Sinus, the solution of Unity points us out to the procurement
of an uniting; but the Cavity instructs us, that repletion ought to be
endeavored. But now those things that stand at a distance cannot be united,
unless first that which is hollow be filled up; whereupon the Cavity must in
the first place be replenished. But the Cavity can by no means be filled with
flesh, unless the temper of the part be right as it ought; and that the said
Sinus be free and clean from al its impurities. And therefore we must primarily
provide by a sedulous endeavor, that if there be any distemper present it may
be removed, and that the Sinus may be well and thoroughly purged. And moreover,
unless that either the Orifice of the said Sinus look downward, or that the
Member may be so placed that the matter may freely flow out of it, before any
thing else be done a way must be opened, and a passage forth made for the Pus
or filthy corruption. If the Orifice of the Impostume lie open toward the
inferior parts, the filth has then a free passage forth, and such a like Sinus
by the application of Cleansers is easily cured. But then if the Orifice be in
the superior place, there is a necessity that we forthwith assay to open a free
vent and passage forth for the corruption.

And this may be done in a twofold manner; either by dissecting the whole
Cavity, or at least by opening the Orifice in the inferior part. Now of a truth
it is the more convenient of the two that we open all the whole Sinus; since that
by so doing the Ulcer may the more easily be purged and healed. But because we
are not evermore allowed to put this in practice, to wit, when the Sinus is
great, and that the whole part may not be dissected without danger; therefore
sometimes we only ^p^n the Sinus in the bottom thereof. Which being done, and
the Sinus opened, it is carefully and thoroughly to be cleansed and dried, lest
that there be any of the Pus left remaining. For if there be any of it left
behind, from thence Fistula's and recidivations o^ Relapses are wont to take
their Original. And although the parts may seem to be conglutinated, yet
notwithstanding they do not rightly cohere or stick together, but afterward
they do again part asunder. But now, to the furthering of the evacuation of the
said Pus the use of Swathbands and Pillows does very much conduce, if with them
we straightly compress and strictly keep down the part affected from the higher
part of the Sinus toward its Orifice. Now the Medicaments fitted for this use
and purpose are, the Water of the Decoction of Barley, Melicrate (that is,
Water and Honey sodden together) which is of it self sufficiently purgative, so
that alone it is able to render that Sinus whose orifice is in the inferior
place apt and fit for glutination or cementing together; Mulsum, that is, Wine
and Honey sodden together, which both corroborate, and together withal purges;
Rozin, Turpentine, Honey of Roses, Barley meal, Bean meal, the flour of Orobus
or bitter Vetch, of Lupines, Lee, Spirit of Wine, Bath-Water, Alum Water,
Oxymel, Unguent Aegyptiack; which are the stronger sort of them, and to be
administered only (or at least chiefly) in the most impure and nasty Ulcers.

Out of those before mentioned diverse others may be made and compounded: As for
example:

Take Honey of Roses strained six drams: Barley meal a sufficient quantity, to
give it a thick Body. Or,

Take Honey of Roses strained six drams: clear Turpentine one ounce: the juice
of Smallage and Wormwood, of each half an ounce: let them boil together: and
afterward add of Bean, Barley, and Lupine Meal, of each alike, as much at will
suffice, and then mingle them thoroughly.

But when (as now and then it happens) the Sinus are manifold, or otherwise
when they are of an extraordinary depth, so that to open them is altogether
impossible; neither also can the Unguents possibly penetrate throughout their
whole Cavity; then (in this case especially) liquid abstersives are chiefly
approved of, as such which can insinuate and convey themselves into al parts of
the Sinus. And such kind of Medicaments ought to be injected by a Tunnel, or by
a pipe; and so soon as the Medicament is cast in, the Orifice ought sometimes to
be stopped up with a Linen cloth or Napkin; or else with a piece of Silk, to
prevent the immediate flowing back again of the Medicament. As,

Take of whole Barley three pugils or small bandfuls: Centaury the lesser, and
Wormwood, of each alike two pugils: boil them in Melicrate, and make an
injection. Or,

Take of the Water of decocted Barley, Melicrate, of each two ounces: Unguent
Aegyptiack half an ounce; mingle and inject them.

And thereupon, if by these kind of Medicaments the Ulcer be sufficiently
cleansed and purged, then those Medicaments that produce and breed flesh are to
be administered. For albeit Nature her self generate and breed flesh; yet
notwithstanding Art does by Medicaments so far forth assist Nature, as it
removes and carries away the excrements which much hinder her in her
operation. For it is generally well known that any part whatsoever (although it
be sound) does generate a twofold excrement, and drive it forth without the
body; one whereof is more thin, which for the most part breathes forth by
insensible transpiration, and is also not unusually evacuated by sweat; the
other more gross and thick, which outwardly adheres unto the body, and by a
general name is termed Scurf, filth, or nastiness. These excrements whenas they
are resident in the aggrieved part, being weak and infirm, and cannot by the
strength of Nature be expelled and driven forth of the Ulcer, they still persist
to stick there in the Ulcer, and the thick excrement renders the Ulcer filthy
and foul; but the thin excrement makes the Ulcer to become moist. Which said
excrements since that they are an impediment to Nature in the breeding of
flesh, they are therefore altogether to be removed and taken away; and to speak
more perspicuously and plainly, the filth and impurities thereof are to be
thoroughly cleansed and wiped away from off the Ulcer, and the moisture is to be
dried up.

Now those Medicaments which accomplish the abovesaid intentions are called
Sarcoticks, i. e. Breeders of flesh; not that they themselves can indeed really
generate flesh (which is the peculiar work of Nature alone) but because (as we
have said) they take away the impediments, and suffice Nature with so good a
blood, that from it good flesh may easily and soon be engendered. Now such like
as these are dry, yet are they not of an over dry quality, but of such a
faculty as very little (and that likewise moderately) exceeds the temperament
of the affected or grieved part. But since that there is not the same kind or
measure of dryness in all Bodies and Members, thereupon the same matter is not
useful for the engendering and breeding of flesh in all bodies and members; but
those bodies and members which are drier require and need the dryer
Medicaments; but those that are more humid and moist call for Medicaments that
are less drying. The more mild and gentle of them are, Frankincense, Barley
meal, Bean meal; the stronger are, the meal or flour of Orobus or bitter Vetch,
Flower-de-luce root, Root of Aristolochia, Myrrh, Tutia, Pompholyx, and the
like. From which we may very fitly and commodiously prepare Compositions for
the present occasion. As,

Take Turpentine two ounces: Frankincense, Mastick, Colophony, of each half an
ounce: Wax, Oil of Roses, of each sufficient; make an Unguent.

But this following is somewhat stronger and more forcible. Viz.

Take Round Aristolochia, Flowerdeluce, the greater Comfrey, of each two drams:
Mastick, Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, of each one dram: Honey and Turpentine, of
each sufficient, and thoroughly mingle them.

If the body be more than ordinary dry, and if that hard flesh be to be
generated, and that the Ulcer it self lie open, we may also then administer
Medicaments in a dry form, and make up Sarcotick Pouders, to strew thereupon.
As,

Take Frankincense, Mastick, Colophony, of each alike: make a Powder. Or,

Take Aloes, Frankincense, Sarcocol, Dragons blood, of each as much as ye will,
and make a Powder.

But if the Sinus be not open, then liquid Sarcoticks are by a Funnel to be
injected after the same manner as the cleansers were; and the orifice being
close shut up, they are for a while to be left in the Sinus. For which end and
purpose there may be injected austere or sharp Wine in which Frankincense has
been boiled; or the Decoction of Aristolochia, the great Comfty which some call
Wall-wort, Horsetail, Roses, and the like, with Wine; unto which may be added,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes.

But now whether or no by means of these Medicaments the deeper parts of the
Sinus are well cemented and exactly conjoined, that which flows forth will
evidently demonstrate: which if it be but little in quantity, and well digested;
and moreover if there be no pain perceived in the Sinus it self, it is an
argument that there is a perfect conglutination effected. But if the fourth, or
(at the utmost) the seventh day shall be past, and yet notwithstanding a crude
raw humor shall issue forth of the Ulcer, it is a sign that as yet the Sinus is
not exactly united and conjoined, and that flesh is not as yet therein bred;
whereupon those Medicaments that more forcibly dry (yet notwithstanding without
any kind of mordication or biting) are then to be administered. Whenas now the
Sinus is in a manner filled up, some one or other of the agglutinating Remedies
ought to be applied, which may gently and without any the least acrimony close
together the tender flesh that is generated and bred (of which sort are those
which by the Greeks are called Enaima;) that so they may as it were conjoyn the
divided parts, and may likewise cure the new made Wounds: of which sort Galen
(in his second Book of the composition of Medicaments according to their
several kinds, Chap. 21. and 32.) has given us a description of good store of
them.

After that the agglutinating Medicament has been applied and laid to, Galen
directs us to cast round about it a new Sponge made as soft as possibly may be
with sweet Wine, or with Mulsum, i. e. Wine and Honey sodden together; which
said Sponge others also use to thoroughly soak, and thereby sil it full with the
Decoction of Pomegranate Rinds, Roses, and the like; to wit, that it may dry
it, and receive in the filthy corruption issuing forth of the Sinus, which
might otherwise easily corrode the part, or excite and cause therein an
intolerable itching: and this said binding round about he would have to begin
from the bottom of the Sinus, and from thence that it tend toward the orifice.
And likewise about the bottom thereof let Swathbands be rolled as hard and
straightly as may be (provided still notwithstanding that it cause not pain) and
then let them be loosened by degrees, and by little and little, until you come
to the very mouth of the Sinus; in the which said mouth let the Medicament be
tied unto it after a loose manner; neither let it too closely stop up the
orifice, but leave a passage forth for the Pus or snotty matter; unto which
end, and for which purpose also let the Emplaster which is laid thereon have a
hole cut (with a pair of Shears) in that same very place.

And this was the way and method used by the Ancients for the curing of a
Sinus, and generally al sorts of hollow winding Ulcers; and to speak truth, it
was sufficiently useful and commodious. Yet notwithstanding, Franciscus Arcaeus
in his second Book of the Curing of Wounds, the seventh Chapter, tells us of
another far more easy and compendious course that he himself had found out and
discovered in curing Apostems newly opened; whereby on the third, or on the
fourth day at the furthest, all the aforesaid Cavity of Apostems might be
remedied, and perfectly cured, by drawing together what was divided; (which
operation we call commission and conglutination of the Impostume) so that
nothing should be left gaping, beside the opening or incision place, which was
made by Art to the end that thereby the Pus might flow out, and be pressed
forth; and that all this should be effected without any the least danger to the
sick party, without much (if any) pains and labor, or any other difficulty. Now
his way and method of Curing was as follows. If the Tumor or Apostem be
great, then (says he) in the first place let it be opened in the best manner
that may be; so that the little finger may be put into the orifice, and that
thereby all the Pus that is contained within the Impostume may be permitted to
flow forth; and may likewise be thence expelled by a gentle compression of the
place it self. The Pus being once expelled and evacuated, let the mouth of the
Sinus be stopped with a Tent; and then an artificial Pillow or Cushion being laid
and fastened down thereon, let it so remain (without removal) until the next
day following. The day following, the Ligature being loosened, let the Ulcer be
purified and carefully cleansed from all the Pus, if happily there be any left
remaining underneath. After this is done, let a Pipe or small Cane of Lead be
put into the orifice; the which let it be as big and large as is the Orifice it
self; and let it reach even unto the Cavity or hollow place; but let it not by
any means be forced any further. Upon this let the Basilick Emplaster spread
upon a Linen Cloth be imposed; in the which also the pipe may be contained,
that it fall not forth; yet nevertheless leave a hole at the very Orifice of the
Leaden Pipe or Cane. Afterward, on either side of the Cavity let there be put
triangular Pillows or Cushions (of which before) on either side one, so that all the hollow space may be filled up with either Pillow, etc. But let the Orifice
of the Sinus in which is the Leaden Pipe be left free and open; neither let it
be stopped up by the aforesaid Pillow, nor any ways obstructed by the Ligature
or binding; that so all the Pus that lies underneath may be thoroughly purged
out: afterward let the place covered by the Pillows be rolled about with a
Swathband, so that it may be without the least pain; and let it be so ordered,
that the Ligature may begin at or from the bottom, and tend toward the orifice;
that so by this means all the Pus or filth that is within may be forced toward
the Orifice, and through it may be pressed forth. The Sinus thus bound about is
to be left in this manner until the day following; on which, the Ligature being
loosened, we ought by making strict enquiry to find out how much of the Cavity
remains; that so we may be thoroughly certified, Whether or no the aforesaid
Pillows or Cushions did touch upon the places. For all those places which were
subjected by the Pillows etc. will al of them be found conglutinated and fast
closed together. The which when we have discovered, the Pillows are again to be
tied and fastened after the same fashion as they lay before; and so they are to
continue until the next day. But now if so be that any of the Humor, or of the
Pus seems to be left in any place, this (as before) is to be pressed forth with
the Pillows fastened by the Swathband; together with which the gaping place
does coalesce and join close together. In this manner so soon as the parts are
closed together, let the Pillows be removed; and then let there be imposed upon
the Ulcer a Linen cloth spread over with the Authors Leonine Emplaster, or such
other like Plaster, as suppose the Emplaster Diapalma; and you may not forget
to wipe and cleanse it six or eight times every day.

But yet notwithstanding, as touching this way and manner of curing the Sinus
and Cavities, it is first to be taken notice of, that this same does succeed
most happily in Apozems newly opened, and in them only: for as for an old Sinus
(where all is not well within, and which almost declines unto callous Ulcers and
Fistula's) the former way and manner of curing it is far better and safer.
Moreover, this is likewise to be observed, that we ought well to look, whether
or no there remain any relics of the indigested matter, spread thorow-out the
part; which easily comes to be known by some apparent Tumor or Swelling; as
also by its redness of color. For otherwise, and as long as any thing
preternatural sticks in the part, agglutination (as we term it) or closing up
of the Orifice is not to be expected; neither is it to be so much as hoped for.
And therefore be sure that the Pus it self be likewise cleansed and purged in
the best manner that possibly you can.

Thirdly, This also is to be heeded, to wit, whether or no the place may
conveniently enough be rolled about with Swath-bands, and likewise whether the
aforementioned Pillows or Cushions be straightly fastened, and tied down close
enough, that so they may both compress and keep down the severed and disunited
parts, and also press forth the Pus or filthy snot-like matter. For if so be
that the Swath-bands gape, and that the Pillows press not down the part as they
ought, then neither is there any Pus pressed forth, nor does the part coalesce
and meet together.

Chap. 7. Of the Tumor Erysipelas or Rosa.
THat Tumor which the Greek call Erysipelas, but we here of this Country
(commonly) Rosa (from its rosy color) is altogether to be referred unto, and
so to be accounted in the number of the Tumors that take their original from
the Blood. All the Latins ( Celsus only excepted, who retains the name
Erysipelas) term it Ignis Sacer; we in English call it St. Anthonies fire; or
this Ignis Sacer the Poet Lucretius makes mention in his sixth Book.

The Body all at once with Ulcers brand grows red,
As it is, when Ignis Sacer has the whole ore-spread.
This Tumor is most an end by Physicians ranked among the Choleric. But yet
there is ground and cause enough of doubting, from what humor it derives its
beginning and Pedigree. For Galen himself seems now and then to stagger, and
not always to stand to what he had spoken concerning it. For in his second
Book to Glauco, and first Chapter, he expressly writes, that the most thin and
hot Blood, or Choler together with Blood (to wit, when both of them are hotter
than is behooful) is the Cause of an exquisite Erysipelas; and there he
determines that meet and pure Choler is not the original efficient cause of
this said Tumor, but rather of that which we usually call Herpes. And in his
Chap. 9. concerning Tumors he asserts, that Herpes is bred or caused, when a
choleric fluxion (being indeed purely and exactly such) happens to be excited,
and to exulcerate the Skin; but that when this said choleric flux is mingled
with a waterish matter and with blood, and so is less sharp, and when it rather
swells up the part into a Tumor then exulcerates it, that then an Erysipelas is
excited. But contrariwise, in his Book of black Choler, Chap. 5. in his
fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic Chap. 1, 2, 3. and B. 17. Chap. 2. in
his Book of the Differences of Fevers, Chap. 5. and in his Book of the way of
curing by Blood-letting, Chap. 8. and in diverse other places, asserts that
Choler is the cause of this Tumor: which latter opinion of Galen most of our
Physicians follow.

But truly, if we lay aside the Authorities and Opinions of the Ancients, and
look well into the thing it self, and if we confer the name of an Erysipelas
upon that Tumor that is so well and commonly known unto our Countrymen; and
lastly, if we take good notice of those things that daily befall the sick
Persons in a Disease so well known; we shall then (without any scruple) judge
the Opinion of Galen (which he propounds unto Glauco, in his second Book and
Chap. 1. and in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 9) to be by far the more true and
probable.

For the very color it self of the part affected (being altogether rosy)
instructs us, that Blood rather than Choler is the cause of this Tumor. And
although this kind of Tumor does now and then from red or ruddy become
yellowish, yet notwithstanding this is not altogether true of every Erysipelas,
but only of some one certain species and difference thereof. Moreover, the
humor that excites and causes this Tumor is not altogether so sharp and tart
as is Choler; and for this cause does neither exulcerate, nor produce extreme
heat, or over vehement pain. Notwithstanding the Blood that excites this Tumor
is the thinnest and most intensely hot, and it is vulgarly said to be bilious
or choleric; the same that Galen also tells us in his second Book to Glauco,
Chap. 1. where he writes, that Choler alone (when it lies hid and secret, and
consists in some one member) does excite and cause the Tumor Herpes. But then
if so be that the fluxion shall be mingled, and consist of blood and yellow
choler, (being both of them hotter than is meet) or else from the blood in this
manner waxing hot, and being according to its substance most thin, we then call
it an Erysipelas. For albeit that Galen in very many other places asserts an
Erysipelas to proceed from Choler; yet not withstanding, what he means and
intends by Choler, he has sufficiently declared in the place before alleged.
And if we consult experience, and those accidents that betide the sick Parties,
we shall then find that he could not intend any thing but that Choler which
they term natural and alimentary or nourishing, that is to say, the hottest and
thinnest part of the blood, but such as is now grown extremely hot, and
therefore the nearest that may be to Choler. But now, whatsoever kind of Choler
we assign to be the cause of this Tumor, whether yellow, or pale, or like the
rust of Brass, or Leek-coloured, they will not any of them agree with those
things that happen in this Tumor. Furthermore this humor has conjoined with it
a depraved quality, and a peculiar sort of corruption; and before such time as
it breaks forth it exciteth and causes exceeding great streights, not much
unlike to those that the Plague (upon the first invasion) is wont to produce;
and therefore the same kind of Alexipharmaca or counterpoysons that we make use
of in the Pestilence are here likewise to be administered, for the expulsion
thereof.

Notwithstanding, the words of Galen, and of other Authors (that affirm the
original of this Tumor to spring from yellow Choler) may be drawn to a better
sense; I mean, that they may be more rightly interpreted, if we say, that by
Choler is to be understood the natural part of the blood, which is more thin
and hot, and which is very commonly called Choler; but it were more fitly and
properly named a bilious or choleric blood; the which so soon as it begins to
wax intensly hot, and to boil, it then excites this kind of Tumor. And very
frequently there is also herewithal mingled a certain portion of a most subtle
thin and intensly hot whey (the which if thou have a mind, and art pleased to
call it a bilious and choleric whey I will not gainsay or oppose thee) and then
there is bred an exulcerated Erysipelas, yet only superficially; like as
oftentimes it is wont to happen in the Face, when there arise and appear little
bladders full of a waterish humor; and then the Skarf-skin alone is affected,
and parts assunder. But if (together with it) the Skin it self shall be
exulcerated (which ever and anon chances in the Thighs) then we may conclude
that adust humors are therewith mingled; and this kind of Erysipelas is said to
be, not pure, or if you will impure.

But of this Tumor enough has been spoken in the second Book of Fevers, Chap.
16. which here we judge it not fit to repeat, in regard that there the Reader
may by perusal be fully acquainted with what has been written. I will only
repeat this, that the first rise of this affect is from a Fever, or move
plainly, that the affect is primarily and originally a Fever. For neither does
an Erysipelas (or Rosa) invade the part but with a Fever; which oftentimes a
day or two before it breaks forth is wont exceedingly to afflict and excruciate
the sick Person. But this Fever is critically determined (as we wont to
express it) and the Patient freed therefrom by means of this Tumor: and
thereupon it is, that oftentimes a pain or some kind of swelling is perceived
in the Glandules under the Armpits, or else in the Groyns; until that at
length Nature shall have driven forth the matter unto some extreme part of the
Body: for then the Fever is wont to cease, albeit the Tumor is wont to stick
and continue in the part affected, for a certain space after.

Touching the Cure, this likewise is to be observed (like as it has been more
at large declared in the place before alleged) that it ought to be altogether
perfected and completed; and we must use the utmost of our endeavor, that the
humor (the containing cause thereof) may be called forth and not retained
therein; since that by the deteining thereof greater evils are wont to be
introduced and made way for: which may sufficiently appear even by the example
of that Countryman (or Peasant) mentioned by Gulielmus Fabricius, in his first
Century, Observe. 82. who having an Erysipelas in his left Hand (and by the
advice of a Barber-Chirurgeon for some days anointing his Hand and Arm with
Oil of Roses) a Pain, an Inflammation, and other symptoms were from day to day
more and more augmented; insomuch that at length the whole Hand was corrupted
(and altogether rendered incurable) by a Gangrene.

Chap. 8. Of a Bubo:
A Bubo likewise appertains unto Inflammations. For a Bubo (as Galen defines
it, in his Book of the Difference of Fevers, Chap. 5. and in his second to
Glauco, Chap. 1.) is an Inflammation of the Glandules in the Groyns. For the
Glandules being by Nature ordained and appointed, that unto them the
superfluous Humors should be expelled from the principal parts; if they (and
together with them the blood) shall chance to be thrust forth altogether (and as
it were by heaps) unto the Glandulous parts, then an Inflammation is excited;
and this happens most an end, and especially in the Groins; and sometimes also
under the Armpits, and behind the Ears; which latter Inflammations behind the
Ears are commonly termed Parotides.

But now, The Humors that stir up and provoke Nature unto the aforesaid
expulsion being very various, hence it is that the differences arising from
Bubo are likewise exceeding various and different. For one while the Humors are
said to be simply vicious or vitiated, so that they have no malignity conjoined
with them; and from these originally proceed those Bubo's that are not
malignant: but then again (otherwhiles) the matter is malignant, and thence the
malignant Bubo is produced; and this again according to the variety of the
malignant matter, is either pestilent, or else that which we call venereal. But
in regard that we have already treated of the Pestilent Bubo in our Book of
Fevers, and that the other which we call Venereal belongs unto the Tract
touching the French Pox, therefore we will discourse of the Bubo at large only,
and handle it as it is in the general.

The Causes.
Now every Bubo whatsoever has its original from a preternatural effusion of
the blood into the Glandules in the Groyns, or the Arm-holes; the which
notwithstanding has evermore conjoined with it some certain vicious and
corrupt humor, of what sort soever it be, that excites and stirs up Nature into
the aforesaid excretion, or as we usually term it, expulsion. From whence also
the antecedent, yea and the external causes likewise which make for the
generation of that humor are very various. Notwithstanding the strength of the
principal parts is for the most part evermore conjoined therewith; which expel
forth whatsoever is offensive and burdensome unto themselves unto these ignoble
parts, and to the Emunctories.

Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente determines, that some kind of Bubo's have
their beginning and original only from the store of Blood, and that certain of
them by the way of expulsion are bred from the vicious blood; and that the
other Diseases follow, and are excited at the time and Instant of the Crisis.

But in very truth I cannot think that a Bubo may be excited from the abundance
of blood only, but that it has evermore conjoined vicious humors which provoke
Nature to the expulsion. This notwithstanding is most true and certain, that
one while a Bubo does follow upon another Disease, and is excited by the Crisis
whether perfect or imperfect; and as soon again, without any other Disease
preceding it. For although only those Tumors which follow upon other Diseases
may properly be said to be caused by the Crisis, yet notwithstanding even those
likewise the arise without any other Diseases are excited by Nature in her
expulsion of the depraved and bu^densome humors.

The Signs Diagnostick.
The Bubo is known by this, to wit, that in the Groyns, or under the Arm-holes
there appears a Swelling or Tumor, with a certain kind of renitency or
resistance, with a redness of color, and likewise with pain; and for the most
part also a gentle Fever accompanies it. And this is most certain and sure,
if the Bubo happen to be by the Crisis, that then a Fever or some o her
Disease went before, which upon the appearing and breaking forth of the Bubo is
lessened and abated; and then the signs of a good and hopeful Crisis preceded;
the which if so be they are absent, then the Bubo is to be accounted for
symptomatical. And then truly if there appear no signs at all of the
Pestilence, or of the French Disease, then it is a single and simple Bubo, and
not malignant and contagious. But if there be conjoined the signs of the
Plague, the Bubo is then to be accounted for malignant and contagious; and
evermore Bubo's are to be suspected, where the Pestilence invades the Patient.
In like manner, if the sick Person be infected with the French Pox (commonly
termed likewise the Neopolitane Disease) the Bubo is then also to be held for
and esteemed Venereal, Malignant and Contagious.

Prognostics.
1. Bubos that are not malignant, and those likewise that are not contagious,
are not in the least dangerous, since that they are resident in the external
parts, and are caused by Nature in her expelling forth the vicious and corrupt
blood unto the weak and ignoble parts; and especially if they be forthwith
suppurated, and then opened.

2. But if they belong delaied, and that their maturation be not speeded, there
may be great danger; in regard that they very easily pass and degenerate into
dangerous Fistula's.

3. Those Bubo's that are bred or excited under the Arm-holes are sooner
maturated, since that they arise from a hotter kind of blood; such as is that
which the greater Vessels near neighboring unto the Heart do extrude and thrust
forth; for as much as that part (by reason of the Hearts vicinity) has more
than ordinary heat, which is altogether necessary and requisite for maturation.

4. But Bubo's that have their original in the Groyns are longer ere they come
to a supputation; in regard that they are excited by a blood that is lets hot
and thick; and likewise, because they are scituat^ in a place more remote from
the heart, and which is but meanly hot.

5. The slowest of them all in their maturation are those Bubo's that are
behind the Ears; upon this account, namely that they proceed from a colder kind
of matter, and have their residence in a colder place.

6. What we are to think and judge of Pestilential and Venereal Bubo's has
been already shown in its own proper place.

The Cure.
When a Bubo that neither is Pestilent nor Venereal is excited (Nature
unburdening her self of that, whatever it be, that is offensive and troublesome
unto her and expelling it unto the external ignoble parts) Natures operation
and endeavor is by no means to be hindered, nor the matter to be driven back
again unto the internal parts. And first of al, we must duly weigh, whether or
no Nature has excited the Bubo by the Crisis (and that a perfect one) and that
thereupon the sick Person be discharged of the Disease, and that there be
present and apparent the signs of a good Crisis or judgment; for then in this
case (according to Hippocrates his Precept, Book 1. Aphorism 20.) there ought
nothing to be moved; but the whole business is to be committed to Nature; and
means must be endeavored, that either the Bubo may be discussed, or else that
it may most speedily be maturated and brought to a ripeness. But then if in
truth the Bubo be critical, and that the Crisis notwithstanding be an imperfect
one, the humor is then yet further to be attracted unto the part affected by
the application of Cupping-glasses, or by Medicaments made of Leaven, black
Soap, old Hogs grease, the Rosin of the Pine Tree, Diachylum with Gums, and
such like.

Again, If there be a Bubo generated, no other Disease preceding, neither then
(as has been said) is Natures motion in the least to be impeded. But yet
notwithstanding the great abundance of blood is to be lessened by the opening
of a Vein; which yet is so to be instituted, that Natures motion to the part
affected may be helped forward and furthered, rather than hindered. If also
(which very often chances) vicious Humors shall happen to be conjoined together
with the blood, they ought to be ev^cuated.

The remaining part of the Cure in all these Bubo's which are not malignant and
contagious is to be ordained and ordered like as in other Inflammations. Yet
notwithstanding this one thing is well to be observed in the first place;
because that such Digestives as are administered ought to be of the stronger
sort, and more forcible than in other Inflammations; in regard that the
Glandules are parts that are more cold than ordinary, and more ignoble than the
other, and have not any exquisite sense; we advise therefore, that a Cataplasm
be made of Barley meal and Lupines mingled with Honey. Or,

Take the Roots of white Lillies, Marshmallows, the wild and spirting
Cowcumber, of each one ounce: the Leaves of Pellitory of the Wall, and Parsley
Leaves, of each an ounce and half: boil them in Wine unto a softness, and then
bruise them well: being thoroughly bruised and passed through an hair sieve, add
of the meal of Lupines two ounces: Oil of Camomile and white Lillies, of each a
sufficient quantity, and so make a Cataplasm.

If the Humor be not digested it ought to be converted into Pus, and the Bubo
is to be maturated or ripened; and this for the most part is the safest course.
For unless this be done, as I have often observed, after some short interval of
time, a new Bubo is wont to arise either in the same or some other part. Now
the very same Maturatives that are wont to be propounded and prescribed in an
Inflammation are here to take place, and to be made use of.

The Pus or filthy corrupt matter being bred, the Tumor is then to be launced,
that so the Pus may most speedily be evacuated; and (the truth is) the section
or cutting ought then to be appointed and instituted (in the Groyn) in a
transverse or overthwart manner; since that the Tumor being cleansed after this
fashion, the skin may the more easily coalesce and come together; because that
whilst the Thigh is bending the Skin is united.

The Pus being evacuated and emptied forth the Ulcer is to be made clean, flesh
to be generated, and at length the Ulcer is to be shut up with a Cicatrice or
Scar as we use to call it.

Touching the Cure of a Pestilential and French Bubo we have already spoken in
its own proper place.

Chap. 9. Of the Tumor Furunculus.
THere is a certain kind of Tumor near of kin to an Inflammation, which we term
Furunculus; but by the Greeks it is named Dothion or Dothien; and by the
Germane Blutschwer; to wit (as Celsus defines it in his fifth Book, and Chap.
28.) a little acuminated o^ sharp-pointed swelling together with an
Inflammation and pain; and especially then when it is now already converted
into Pus. And it has its original from a thick and vicious blood (as Galen
instructs us in his fifth Book of the composition of Medicaments according to
the part affected) yet notwithstanding the blood not so burnt and corrupted as
in a Carbuncle; the which Nature severing from the rest, expels and drives it
forth (as offensive and useless) unto the superficies of the body. And thus the
Furunculus arises in the Skin, and in the fleshy parts that are under the
Skin. But there seldom breaks forth one alone, but for the most part many of
them break forth together.

But now of these Furunculu's there is a certain difference. For some of them
are mild and gentle, which only invade and seize upon the Skin; others of them
are malignant, which descend deeper: or otherwise (as Paulus Aegineta writes in
his fourth Book, Chap. 23,) of Furunculu's, one sort of them is benign and
harmless, another kind of them mischievous and dangerous. And then it is truly
said to be gentle and dangerless, when it resides only in the Skin; but
mischievous and destructive, and not to be cured without great difficulty,
whenas its Roots being deeply fixed it breaks out upon the Skin. These
Furunculu's are sometimes likewise said to be Sporadick (that is, such as here
and there privately seize upon, and differently afflict the sick person, when
they come not after an ordinary manner) and sometimes also they are Epidemick or
Universal.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Signs of a Furunculus are, a small and inconsiderable Inflammation in the
first beginning thereof, and a Pustule or blister by degrees and by little and
little growing forth, and still tending toward an acute and sharp point (not
exceeding the bigness of a Pigeons Egg) with a certain kind of pain and redness
of color, whenas it has arrived at its state and perfection; which happens
much about the eighth, ninth, or (at the furthest) the tenth day; and a
Furunculus differs from an Inflammation in respect of its smalness in
dimension: and then again, the matter which is in a Phlegmone or Inflammation
is good blood; whereas in a Furunculus it is thick and vicious: and from a
Carbuncle it differs, in that the matter of a Carbuncle is worse and more adust
or burnt, and thereupon attains not unto a suppuration; whereas a Furunculus
may attain unto maturation, and may be suppurated.

If the Furunculus be Epidemical and Pestilential, it is then black and green;
and there is present to accompany it a malignant Fever, together with other
evil symptoms.

The Prognostics.
1. In a Furunculus (as Celsus gives us to understand in his fifth Book, and
Chap. 28.) there is little or no danger at al, yea, even although there be no
means made use of for the cure thereof. For why it waxes ripe, and attains
unto a maturation of its own accord, and so breaks forth. But the pain
accompanying it causes us the rather to put sitting remedies and medicines in
practice, that so the Patient may the more speedily be freed therefrom.

2. Among these Tubercles or little Swellings, they of them are the more
hopeful, and least to be feared, which bunch forth externally in the outward
Skin, and are sharp-pointed, and equally maturate and wax ripe, and are not
hard, neither divided and cleft in two parts; or such as have their tendency
downwards. For so says Hippocrates in the sixth of his Epidemicks, and first
Section.

The Cure.
We must use our utmost Skill and endeavor, that so the matter that is the cause
of the Furunculus may be most speedily turned into Pus; for which end and
purpose those Medicaments that have been already described and propounded in an
Inflammation are here likewise very requisite and necessary. Now those things
that convert the matter into Pus or purulent matter, are, Wheat masticated and
imposed upon the place, Raisons of the Sun, Figs bruised and laid upon the
part, and Diachylum simple or without Gums. Or,

Take of Linseed meal, powder of Marsh-mallow roots, of each half an ounce; of
dried fat Figs in number four; Raisons of the Sun stoned an ounce: boil them
all, and then add of fresh or unsalted Butter two ounces; make therewith a
Cataplasm. Or, if the pain be more vehement and violent,

Take Roots of white Lillies one ounce; the leaves of Mallows and violets, of
each a large handful: boil them to a softness, and pass them through an hair
sieve; then add of Barley meal, Wheaten meal, and flour of Linseed, of each
half an ounce; the Yelks of two new laid Eggs, the fat of a Cock, and fresh
Butter, of each one ounce; and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Turpentine, the marrow of an Heart, the fat of a Calf, the fat of a Goose,
Wax, fresh Butter, the best Honey, Oil of Roses, of each half an ounce; and
mingle them for a Cataplasm

This Tumor when it is maturated (unless it break of its own accord) is to be
opened: And so soon as it is opened it ought to be cleansed.

Take the juice of Smallage half an ounce: Barley meal two drams: Frankincense
a dram and half: Turpentine one ounce: the Yelk of one Egg, Honey of Roses as
much as will suffice: mingle and make them into the form of a Liniment.

After it is cleansed, it is to be filled up with flesh, and shut up with a
Cicatrice or scat; like as we are wont to do in other Impostumes.

Chap. 10. Of the Tumor Phyma.
UNto an Inflammation there appertains likewise the Tumor Phyma, which (a^
Galen acquaints us in his second Book to Glauco, Chap. 1. and his third Book of
the Method of Physic, Chap. 3.) is a Tumor or Swelling of the Glandules, which
forthwith is augmented, and hasteneth unto a suppuration.

The place affected are the Glandules.

The Cause.
The Cause or Humor exciting the Phyma is blood; yet not that which is pure,
but that which is Phlegmatic; and thereupon the Inflammation is not altogether
so great and intense; and this kind of Tumor appertains unto the Inflammation
Oedematodes (as we usually term it) and appears most an end in Children,
seldom in Youths, and most rarely in those that are of full age.

Signs Diagnostick.
It is known by a round Tumor of Swelling, and which is much elevated, little
or nothing red, and almost void of pain, and in a glandulous or kernelly part.

Prognostics.
1. This kind of Tumor is altogether free from danger; it is likewise instantly
augmented; and for the most part it is suppurated and healed without the help
and assistance of Medicaments.

2. The Cure is more easily accomplished in Children; more difficultly in
Youths, and such as are of full growth, and perfect age.

The Cure.
We must endeavor that it may be suppurated with all possible speed. And to this
end, Natures attempt and operation is to be furthered all that may be by
maturative Medicaments imposed on the part; (of which we have already spoken
enough, where we treated of an Inflammation and a Furunculus:) which yet
notwithstanding in this case, by reason of the coldness both of the part and
cause, ought to be somewhat more strong and forcible: Wheat chewed and laid on
is here very useful; as likewise Raisons of the Sun stoned; and also the
Diachylum Plaster, both the simple, and that likewise with Gums. As,

Take powder of the Roots of Marshmallows, Wheaten meal, the meal of Lupines,
of each one ounce; of dried fat Figs, six in number; Leaven half an ounce: then
boil them, and add thereto one Onion roasted in the Embers; Oil of white
Lillies as much as will suffice, and so make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Turpentine, the Honey found at the entrance of the Bee-hive, of each one
ounce; Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar half an ounce; Oil of white Lillies as
much as will suffice, and make an Unguent.

For (to tell you the truth) there are some that conceive that a Phyma is not
presently to be cut and opened so soon as it is suppurated; but they rather are
of opinion that an assay should be made, that it may appear whether or no the
matter may possibly be dissipated and scattered by discussives: and therefore
Galen in his eighth Book of the faculty of simple Medicaments commends
Southernwood, Parietary (commonly known by the name of Pellitory of the Wall,
and by others likewise called Feverfew) Nettles, Marsh-mallow roots, and
Ammoniacum softened with Honey: but this happens but very seldom. And
therefore the safest course is, unless it break of its own accord, that it be
artificially opened; lest that the long detaining of the matter should cause
and produce much danger.

Chap. 11. Of the Tumor Phygethlon.
IN the self same Glandulous parts of the Body there is likewise another kind
of Tumor excited, which the Greeks name Phygethlon; but the Latins call it
Panus, or rather (as Celsus in his fifth Book, and Chap. 28.) Panis, from the
similitude and resemblance of its figure. But here the cause is more hot; and
like as Phyma has its original from pituitous or phlegmatic blood; so a
Phygethlon or Panis has its rise from choleric blood; as Galen instructs us,
in his second Book to Glauco, Chap. 1. But most an end this kind of Tumor
chances after Fevers; or else after the pains of some one or other part; and
chiefly those torturing pains which invade and afflict the belly.

The Signs Diagnostick.
The Signs of a Phygethlon are, a Tumor or Swelling, hardness, heat,
distension, and greater pain than might probably be expected in regard and
reference unto the magnitude of the dimension of the Tumor. There is likewise
sometimes a Fever to accompany it. But very frequently notwithstanding there is
not any one of all the aforesaid perceived outwardly (to wit, when and where the
matter lies deeper rooted, and is there kept concealed) but only at least some
certain prickings are inwardly perceived. This sort of Tumor is long ere it
come to a maturation; neither is it fitly and properly converted into Pus.

Prognostics.
1. That Phygethlon which becomes not more hard than ordinary al on a sudden,
and which albeit it waxes not red is yet notwithstanding (otherwise) of a
changed color, this Phygethlon (I say) is of the better sort, and there is
little of danger in it. Thus Celsus in his fifth Book, Chap. 28.

2. That Panus which arises from an Ulcer, Pain, stroke, or from any external
cause, is altogether void of danger. But that which follows upon Fevers (like
as it is especially wont to fall out in a Pestilential and contagious season)
or else proceeds from Swellings either under the Armpits, or in the Neck, is
the worst and most dangerous species of this Tumor. And so Paulus Aegineta in
his fourth Book, Chap. 22.

The Cure.
If a Phygethlon shall happen to arise from an Ulcer, pain, contusion, or
stripes, or from any other Procatarctick cause, then (like as in other
Inflammations) its increment and growth^s to be impeded by coolers and
Repellers. But if it be in Fevers; or that otherwise it be excited from some
internal provision and storing up of Humors, then in this case Repellers have
not any place allowed them; neither are they at al to be made use of; but those
Medicaments that discuss and resolve are alone to be administered; and if the
matter have any thing of hardness in it, then softeners are therewithal to be
added; such as are Marshmallows, common Mallows, Orach, Chickweed, Parietary,
dried Figs, Ammoniack.

But if the matter cannot be discussed, then we ought to use our utmost
endeavor that it may be maturated, i. e. brought to a ripeness, and turned into
Pus, by the application of those Medicaments that have hitherunto been
propounded. And at length, unless it be opened of its own accord, the Impostume
is otherwise to be broken and opened.

Chap. 12. Of the Tumor Parotis.
UNto the Inflammations of the Glandules appertains likewise Parotis, a Tumor
so called from the Greek words Para and otos, because its situation is nigh
unto the Ears. Hippocrates in the sixth of his Epidemicks, Comment. fifth.
Title first, and elsewhere, terms these Tumors Eparmata. For a Parotis is an
Inflammation of the Glandules near unto the Ears.

The Causes.
Whereas then that a Parotis is an Inflammation, it must necessarily follow
that the nearest and containing cause thereof is the blood. But this blood
notwithstanding is very seldom pure, but most an end Choler, Phlegm, or
Melancholy, yea, oftentimes also there are malignant and pestilential humors
therewith mingled; from whence it is, that there are malignant and pestilent
Parotides proceeding therefrom. And it is a most rare thing that blood that is
faulty in nothing but that there is too great store thereof should stir up and
provoke Nature so far forth that it should attempt such a kind of excretion or
separation; but it happens from the vicious and depraved Humors, by which
Nature being irritated and stirred up is wont to thrust forth unto the external
parts such like Humors together with the blood. For like as in critical
bleedings (which Physicians usually term Haemorrhages) it is not the blood
alone that is principally faulty and peccant, but likewise the vicious humors;
the which when that Nature cannot easily expel without the blood, she thereupon
assays and institutes this Excretion, or (as we commonly term it) separation of
the blood: and this she does in such a manner (to the end that she may avert
and turn away the vicious humors from the principal unto the more ignoble
parts) that she makes use of the blood, like as of a Vehicle or Conduit pipe.
Now these humors are transmitted and sent either from the whole body, or at
least from the Brain. And in good truth we have discovered that these kind of
Tumors which we call Parotides may not only happen from vicious Humors bred in
the body; but also from poisons that shall by any accident be drunk or taken
into the body; as (for instance) I remember the like done here at Wittenberg.
For a certain Servant Maid (when she was to boil fish) unwillingly drawing
water out of Vessels into which a Bat or Dormouse had accidentally fallen, and
was therein suffocated and cho^ked by the water, and boiling the fish therein;
there were (if my memory fail me not) ten Students that together with their
Hostess fell sick; and some of them died. And for those of them that recovered
(in two of them at least) even these Parotides brake forth behind the Ears.

The Differences.
The principal Differences of these Parotides are taken from the matter, and
from the manner of their Generation. From the matter, because that the blood
which exciteth the Parotis is either Choleric, or Phlegmatic, or
Melancholic, or in regard also that it has malignant and pestilent humors
mingled together with them. From the manner of their beginning or generation,
in regard that some of them have their original without Fevers, or (as Celsus
speaks in his sixth Book, and Chap. 16.) some of them in good and perfect
health, Nature thrusting forth unto those places some certain vicious humors
either from out the whole body in general, or else more particularly and
principally from the head: but then others of them appear upon Fevers; and
those again such as are either long, or acute; and lastly, such as are either
benign and inoffensive, or otherwise malignant and pestilential. And this
happens in the state or declination thereof, Nature by the Crisis driving
forth the digested humor (the cause of the Fever) unto these more ignoble
places; or else they arise symptomatically in the very beginning or
augmentation of Fevers.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Parotides are known from the place affected, from the swelling, the
pain, and for the most part from the redness that appears behind the Ears.
But then what kind of Humor it is that is mingled with the blood is known out
of the several signs of the Humors that have been elsewhere propounded. If there
be present a malignant or pestilential humor, then there is evermore conjoined
therewith a Fever of the like Nature. If it be only transmitted from the Head,
then there are not present any signs of a Cacochymy throughout the whole body;
and there went before a pain of the head, the which upon the breaking forth of
the Parotis either altogether vanishes, or at least is in great part
diminished. Now whether the eruption or breaking forth of it be critical or
symptomatical, the time of the Disease, and the signs of the Crisis (whether
they be present or absent) will sufficiently instruct us.

Prognostics.
1. These Parotides that have their being without a Fever are less malignant,
and have less of danger in them than those that have a Fever to accompany them.

2. They also are less dangerous which follow upon Fevers of a long duration,
than those that ensue upon acute Fevers; and especially if they be malignant
and pestilential.

3. Those of them likewise that break forth critically are more safe and
hopeful, more easily cured, and such as free the sick persons from danger. But
as for those of them that happen in the end of the disease, after other
evacuations, without any remission or abatement of the symptoms, and together
with a great debility of the Natural powers and strength of the body, these are
very dangerous and pernicious.

4. As for those of them that break forth and show themselves symptomatically,
and have their original from crude and extremely opposite and (as I may so say)
rebellious matter, these evermore prove to be pertinacious, i. e. resisting all
good means that shall be used; and they always make much work and business both
for Nature and the experienced Physician; and withal they cast the Patient into
an extreme hazard, and the greatest dangers that may be. For why? they are in a
place very nigh unto the Brain, from the which both humors and vapors may
easily be communicated unto the Brain, and to its Membranes; from whence an
Inflammation of those parts, and dotage or madness may be excited.

5. Those Parotides which being bred at the very instant of the Crisis shall not
be suppurated, but before ever they are suppurated shall vanish, they will
return, get growth, and so become to be judged of according to the manner, and
upon the account of their return; even as are the returns of Fevers into the
like circuit. But there may notwithstanding be some kind of hope left, that
some Impostumes may arise in ihe very Joints themselves. Thus Hippocrates in
the sixth of his Epidem. Comment. 4. text. 1.

The Cure.
In the Cure of the Parotides, we ought in the first place well to consider,
whether they be critical or symptomatical; and what kind of Humor it is that
they are bred of, and from which they proceed. If the Parotis break forth
critically, and so the disease from thenceforth be quite taken away, or at
least diminished; then the whole work is to be committed to Nature (according to
the Precept of Hippocrates in his first Book, and the twentieth Aphorism) and
nothing else is then to be done, but only that those things that mitigate pain
(as they have been already propounded in the Chapter of an Inflammation) be
laid thereupon; the which may likewise at one and the same instant together
help forward the suppuration. But then it must not be forgotten that in the
Parotides, whether they be critical or symptomatical; whether the matter be
much or little; and whether it be benign or malignant; that however it be, yet
Repellers or drivers back have no place at al (as Galen teaches us in his
third Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the place affected,
and second Chapter) lest that the matter be driven back from the more ignoble
part unto that which is more noble, and especially the Brain that lies so near
thereunto. Yea moreover, if the Tumor break not forth sufficiently, and the
humor (that by reason of the disease falls and settles it self in the affected
part) be not by the vigor of Nature in a sufficient abundance thrust forth,
then in this case the gentler sort of Attractives (such as are, the Oil of
Camomile, of Flower-de-luce, of Dill, and of Melilote) are to be made use of.
But then the stronger sort of them are not to be administered but with an
especial care and caution; lest that the pain should be increased, and the
Natural powers and strength dejected.

After this we are to take notice, whether or no Nature attempt any resolution
and discussion; for which purpose she is to be assisted and furthered by
discussive Medicaments; or else, whether (which indeed is always far more
commodious) it tends toward a suppuration; and in this case likewise Nature her
self is to be aided and helped forward by those Medicaments that promote
concoction and digestion of the crude matter. Now the Medicaments of either
sort are before propounded (in Chap. 5.) where we treated of an Inflammation,
and in the eighth Chapter where we discoursed concerning Bubo.

The suppuration being made and past, the Impostume is then to be opened, and
(as we have already in its proper place declared) so to be cured.

In the Parotides that are Symptomatical Natures endeavor (where it falls short)
is to be furthered and promoted; and the overgreat abundance of the antecedent
cause (if any such thing be present) is to be lessened and abated. For if that
there be present either an abundant store of blood, or else of vicious and
naughty humors, we are not to fear that hereby Nature may be averted from, and
hindered in her work of expulsion; but rather to expect that being eated of some
part of her burden she will afterward the more easily expel that which remains
and ought to be emptied forth.

If yet notwithstanding (an evacuation of the antecedent cause preceding) she
be not as yet able as she ought sufficiently to expel; then the expulsion is to
be forwarded and helped on by the application of Cupping-glasses, and other
attractives.

And hence it is, that either a discussion of the matter, or (which indeed we
usually practice, as most requisite) the conversion thereof into Pus or matter
is to be procured by those or such like Medicaments as are propounded in the
eighth Chapter where we treated of the Bubo Tumor. And yet notwithstanding here
in this case the condition of the matter is to be heedfully regarded; so that
if it be more than ordinarily cold and thick the Discussers that we use are to
be proportionably hotter and stronger; and if there be any cause to fear that
the matter may be hardened, Emollients are likewise to be made use of.

After the softening of the matter, as aforesaid, (albeit otherwise the matter
tend likewise thereunto) a suppuration is by all means to be promoted and
furthered, the Impostume to be opened; and as we have already often declared,
in this manner the Cure is to be effected.

Neither is it to be expected that this Tumor should be broken of its own
accord, nor are we to wait til then, forasmuch as the Pus being long retained
is oftentimes wont to produce many sad and dangerous symptoms. And Gulielmus
Fab^cius in his second Century, Observe. 39. relates that he had observed, that
in a certain young Maiden (while she was afflicted with the Parotis we are now
speaking of, and yet notwithstanding was not so far amiss and ill as to take
her bed, being all the while free from any Fever) much about the fourteenth
day of the Disease an Impostume likewise to the bigness of ones fist appeared
^orth; the which said Impostume being not timely opened, the Girl thereupon was
suddenly surprised with a Fever, Swooning fits, Vomitings, and Qualms,
together with the loss of rest and sleep, and miserably afflicted with a pain
in her Back and Reins; and albeit the Impostume was afterward of its own accord
broken, yet notwithstanding in regard that very little or no Pus at all flowed
forth, but rather sought its way and passage downward, it was not long ere it
cost her her life.

Chap. 13. Of a Carbuncle.
A Carbuncle has very near alliance with, and thereupon is by the most reckoned
up and in order placed next after an Inflammation; as a Tumor that has its
original from Blood over hot, burnt, and corrupted. But now this same Tumor
has diverse Names or Appellations. By the Grecians it is termed Anthrax; by the
Latins, Carbo and Carbunculus: Avicen calls it Pruna, and Ignis Perficus, or
the Persian fire. By which several words and names although some there be who
conceive that several and different Tumors are signified, and thereby to be
understood; and thereupon have treated of Pruna and Ignis Perficus in peculiar
and distinct Chapters; and likewise have handled the Carbuncle and Anthrax as
distinct from them, and also as differing each from the other; yet
notwithstanding the very Truth is, that by all those aforesaid appellations one
only kind of Tumor is signified; for that which with the Greeks is Anthrax with
the Latins is Carbunculus, a Carbuncle, or Fire-coal. Unless any one will make
this distinction out of Avicen, that what begins without pustules and
humidity is a Carbuncle or Pruna; but that which begins with pustules, and
bladders, and that likewise has a moisture flowing out of it, this may be
called Ignis Perficus.

Now this Swelling is called by this name, in regard that it has over it a
certain Crustiness that is black like a Coal; for which cause it is also termed
Pruna, because the Flesh is black, and as it were burnt with a Coal; and
moreover it is said to be a Fire, in regard that the parts are burnt as by a
Fire. But in truth, that which Celsus and Pliny have left written touching a
Carbuncle seems yet scarcely in all things to answer to a Carbuncle in general,
but only to some one species thereof; and happily unto a kind thereof that is
Epidemical, and so a new Disease. For Celsus in his fifth Book, Chap. 28 thus
writes: From those that befall extrinsecally we must now come unto such things
as are internally bred, some one part or other of their Bodies being corrupted.
Among which there is none worse than a Carbuncle: of this Carbuncle there are
these Notes and Marks; there is a certain redness, and upon it there stand and
hang out (but not very far) certain Pushes or Pustules, especially such as are
black, and sometimes black and bluish or Lead-color'd, or Pale. In these there
seems to be a rottenness and filth; beneath the color is black: the Body it
self is dry, and more hard than it ought to be. About the which said Carbuncle
there is as it were a Crust, and this is surrounded by an Inflammation, neither
can the Skin in that place be possibly lift up, but it is as it were fixed and
close fastened unto the Flesh underneath it. The sick Person is extreme sleepy;
and sometimes there arises a certain kind of horror, or else a Fever, or both.
And this Evil creeps along, there being drawn out as it were certain roots,
sometimes more speedily, and sometimes more slowly: and likewise above when it
first proceeds forth it looks of a whitish color, and then instantly it
becomes Lead-coloured; and about it there arise little Pushes or Pustules. And
if it happen to light upon the part near the Stomach, and the Jaws, it then
oftentimes suddenly stops the Breath: thus far Celsus. But now Pliny (in his
Book 26. Chap. 1. in which he treats of Diseases that were new and unknown in
all former ages) thus writes: It is recorded in the Annals that the Carbuncle
(the peculiar Malady of the Province of Narbone) came first into Italy, L.
Paulus and Q. Marcius being Censors: of which the same year two that had been
Consuls (Julius Rufus, and Q. L^canius Bassus) died; the former of them through
the unskilfulnes of the Physicians being cut; and the latter, he himself having
put a Needle into the Thumb of his left Hand which being drawn forth the Wound
was so small that it was scarcely to be discerned It is bred in the most occult
and hidden parts of the Body, and for the most part under the Tongue; it has a
reddish hardness (like unto the Varix or crooked Vein) but black in the head of
it, and elsewhere bluish or Lead-coloured, distending the Body, yet not
swelling up, without pain, without itching, without any other sign or token
(whereby it may be known) then an extraordinary propension to sleep; and those
that have been surprised herewith, it has taken them away in three days time;
and sometimes bringing along with it a certain horror; it has round about it
small Pustules, but very seldom is there any Fever attending it; and when it
invadeth the Stomach and the Jaws, it soon kills. Thus Pliny. Now whosoever
shall well weigh what he has written shall easily perceive that he here
describes some other Disease, or at the least a Disease that has in it some
thing peculiar and differing from the ordinary Carbuncle, and ending in a
Gangrene and Sphacelus.

Pliny Expressly refers it unto Diseases new and never known before, and
writes likewise that they arise in the most hidden parts of the Body, and for
the most part under the Tongue; that it is without pain, without itching,
without any other symptoms then sleep; with which such as are surprised are
deprived of life in three days time, no swelling at all appearing. But now
Celsus writes, that it sometimes arises also without a Fever, and that it
befalls those parts that are about the Stomach and the Jaws: whereas the
ordinary and common Carbuncles arise in the outward parts of the Body, and have
a grievous pain joined therewithal; they likewise invade the Party with a
Fever, and the place affected has likewise accompanying it a manifest
Swelling.

What a Carbuncle is.
But that we may again return unto the Carbuncle that is commonly known among
Tumors or Swellings; it is a Swelling that has its original from a most
fervent and adust blood that corrupts the part.

The Causes.
The Containing Cause of a Carbuncle (according to the assection even of Galen
himself, in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 6. and in his second to Glauco, Chap. 1.
and his 14. of the Method of Physic, Chap. 10) is a blood fervently hot, and
thick, which (in his Book of black Choler, Chap. 4, and 5.) he affirms to be
black Choler. To wit (as we may gather out of his second Book of the
Differences of Fevers, Chap. 19.) a Carbuncle arises from a fervent thick
Blood, putrefying, and degenerating into the Nature of black Choler, or having
black Choler mingled with it, and for the most part a certain malignity
conjoined therewithal. This Swelling although it may be generated in the Body
by little and little, and by degrees assume this ill and depraved Nature; yet
notwithstanding when it has gotten any degree of the said pravity and
malignity, it is then by Nature instantly and suddenly driven forth from the
interior unto the exterior parts, that is to say, from the more noble members
unto those that are less noble and worthy. Which likewise happens when the
Blood is infected and corrupted by reason of some external Corruption; from
whence it is, that a Carbuncle is never excited by the Congestion or heaping up
of blood; but is evermore generated by a defluxion that is al at once made: and
thereupon it is deservedly accounted among Inflammations, and is said to be
very near neighboring unto a Phlegmone or Inflammation. Neither is it only
generated of black Choler, like as a Cancer, but it is bred by adust and burnt
blood, degenerating into black Choler, or else having black Choler mingled
therewith.

Now the aforesaid adust blood is generated from an ill and unwholsom course of
Diet, and from meats of a depraved and vi^ious quality affording and supplying
the whole matter of all the blood. And this is likewise much more promoted and
furthered by the external Constitution of the Air, overheating, burning, and
corrupting the humors, and especially its occult and malignant Constitution
depraving the humors: and indeed there is hardly any Carbuncle to be found that
is altogether void of, and free from malignity.

The Differences.
Yet notwithstanding in regard that this Malignity is sometimes greater, and
sometimes less, and that some Carbuncles invade very many in a Pestilent
consti^ution of the Air, and others again here and there seiz upon the sick
without any such pestilent consti^ution of the Air; Carbuncles therefore are to
be distinguished into Pestilent, and no^ Pestilent. Moreover some of them arise
with a Pustule, or with such Pushes as are caused and raised by the fire, which
if they be broken, there lies underneath within a Crusty Ulcer (and this
happens if not always, yet for the most part) and such as these are in
special by Avicen called Pruna, or Ignis Perficus: Others of them arise and
appear without Pustules.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Carbuncle begins (as has been said) for the most part from a small
Pustule; but sometimes there is not only one of the greater Pustules breaking
for^h, but likewise many small one, like Millet seeds, rising and appearing very
thick in the particle; which when they are broken, the Ulcer becomes crusty,
such as is excited by a red-hot Iron. But before these Pustules break forth
there is a certain itching felt in the part, and thereby there is one or more
Pustules arising and appearing: yet notwithstanding the Carbuncle sometimes
begins without any manner of Pustule, and a crusty Ulcer is excited, the
crustiness being one while somewhat blackish, another while having in it the
resemblance of the color of Ashes; and then again in a very short space after
it grows forth, and becomes like unto Bubo's, after a round acute figure,
with an extraordinary great heat, burning and pain; al which are especially
exasperated about the Evening; and then they so vex the sick party that he can
hardly withhold his hands, but that he must be rubbing of the part; from which
rubbing there afterward arise very many of the aforesaid Pustules. The flesh
that lies round about them waxes hot, and has in it at the height an
extreme great and burning heat; it likewise obtains a color somewhat blacker
than is that in an Erysipelas and a Phlegmone, like as if there were something
of black choler mingled together with the red. There happen moreover other
Symptoms besides the former, to wit, a Fever, which (as Galen also testifies
in his fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 10) infesteth those that
are surprised with a Carbuncle, more than those that are affected with a
Phlegmone or Erysipelas; a nauseousness likewise, a vomiting, a dejection of
the Appetite, a trembling with a panting and beating of the heart, frequent
faintings and swoundings, dotage; all which said symptoms do so much the more
afflict and grieve the party, by how much the matter is the more malignant.

For there is a certain difference even of those Carbuncles themselves, not
only in regard that with the aforesaid adust blood (which is the conjunct cause
of the Carbuncle) there is sometimes this, another while that humor mingled; but
more especially, in that one Carbuncle is Pestilent, and another not Pestilent.
For albeit every Carbuncle be malignant, by reason of the hot Matter, being
adust and putrefying (which has in it a power and quality to corrupt the
flesh, and cannot well return into any more benign or better nature; neither may
it well be suppurated:) yet notwithstanding every of them is not Pestilent;
neither has every of them any adventitious Malignity, but sometimes only
besides the Native malignity of the Carbuncle there chances likewise another
kind of malignity from the common state, or the contagion of the Air. But now a
Pestilent Carbuncle is discerned from that that is not Pestilent, first of al
by the present Pestilent constitution of the Air. For it is hardly possible
that a Carbuncle should arise at such time as the said Pestilent Constitution
is predominant, which in it self should not be Pestilent. Moreover all the
symptoms and signs that appear in the Carbuncle are both more frequent, and
more grievous in a Pestilent Carbuncle, than in a Carbuncle that is not
pestilent. For even the Fever also which is adjoined unto the Carbuncle
resembles and carries along with it a Pestilent nature; and although it seem
outwardly to be more moderate and gentle than that which appears in the
Carbuncle that is not Pestilent (yea, sometimes so that it can hardly be
perceived) yet notwithstanding at that very time it the more burns the inward
parts, and is by far the more dangerous: the fresh color of the face is
changed, the tongue becomes black, and is dry; the excrements of the Belly are
liquid and choleric, the appetite is dejected; there is likewise present a
nauseousness, and a vomiting of the most offensive and the worst humors; a
difficulty of breathing, a stinking breath; and there is also much sweat, and
this is either somewhat hot, or else (as we term it) a cold sweat. The sleep is
sometimes very sound, and sometimes watchings infest the sick party; dotings also
accompany the same, as likewise faintings and swooning fits. And hereupon it is
that there is more danger threatened by one Carbuncle, than there is by another.
For although every Carbuncle be not pernicious; yet notwithstanding (as Galen
testifies in the 3. of his Epidem. Comment. 3. tit. 2.) the most pernicious of
al is the Pestilent, or that which besides its own proper and particular
malignity has also adjoined with it that which the constitution of the Air
brings along with it, and which is attended with all those pernicious
symptoms: which if they remit very much of their former intensness and vigor,
there is then left remaining some hope of safety and recovery; but if from day
to day they are heightened and become more vehement, there is then no safety or
hopes of escape to be expected.

The Prognostics.
1. By how much the blacker the Carbuncle is, by so much the worse is it, as
being such as is produced by the most corrupt blood. The next unto this is the
wan and yellowish. Those that are less malignant, and consequently the less to
be feared, are such as have in them a reddish color; to wit, such in which the
blood has not as yet altogether lost and changed its Nature, but that it has
as yet retained somewhat of its native heat and color.

2. Those Carbuncles likewise that are small are less pernicious than those that
are great; and from a very little Pustule they suddenly acquire and get an
extraordinary greatness.

3. And so are likewise those that are alone, than such as have other
Carbuncles conjoined with them.

4. Of al other those are most destructive and deadly, which after they have
once begun to wax red do immediately vanish again. For the matter being
transferred unto the more inward parts often (if not evermore) proves
destructive and deadly.

5. There are some also who conceive that this is likewise thoroughly to be
considered, to wit, Whether the Pestilent Carbuncle arise before the Fever, or
else whether or no the Pestilent Fever going before it at length break forth.
For they conceive that the Carbuncle that breaks forth before a Pastilent
Fever is more safe (provided that no Symptoms follow thereupon) in regard it
is an evidence that Nature is strong, and able to expel the Pestilent Poison
before the Fever, ere ever it can seize and surprise the heart. And (on the
other side) that to be more dangerous which at length breaks forth after a
Pestilent Fever, forasmuch as (the Heart being seized upon) it has its
original from the poison and the corrupt humors now diffusing themselves into
al parts of the body.

6. The place also manifests when the danger is more or less to be feared.
For those are evermore accounted evil and pernicious that stick fast in the
Emunctories, and near unto the Noble and Principal Members. But here most
especially the strength and natural powers are to be regarded; and we are well
to consider whether they be strong, or else but weak. For that strength that is
but weak and languishing may be soon overpowered and vanquished even by a small
Disease. Whereas (on the contrary) that that is more vigorous oftentimes
overcomes and mastereth even that disease that in it self is strong and
powerful.

The Indications.
The Indications in a Pestilent Carbuncle are different from those in a
Carbuncle not pestilent. In a Pestilent Carbo or Carbuncle the fervent heat of
the blood is wholly all the body over to be restrained; and withal, the Heart at
the same time is to be fortified against that malignity, which (as we have
said) is here very seldom absent. The rest of the Cure is to be directed unto
the Carbuncle it self. But now in a Pestilent Carbuncle there is a more
poisonous and pestilent quality appearing than in the fervent heat of the
blood; yet neither is this to be slighted or neglected.

The Cure.
And therefore (as to what belongs unto the Cure of a Carbuncle) there are
two things that we are especially to regard and have an eye unto; the
Antecedent Cause, or the fervent and corrupt blood that is in the whole body;
and the Conjunct Cause, or that same Humor that now exciteth the Carbuncle. A
convenient Diet therefore being ordained, and a moderation observed in those
things we call not natural, the extreme fervent heat of the blood is by opening
a Vein to be taken away. And yet this Venesection is not rashly to be made use
of in all manner of Carbuncles; but if it has any place at al, it is most
chiefly in that that is not pestilent; touching which likewise that assertion
of Galen (in his fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic) and of other Authors
(who conceive that the blood is to be drawn forth even until the sick person
faint and swoon) is to be understood. But in a pestilent Carbuncle nothing is
rashly to be attempted, that may weaken and deject the Natural powers, (of
which there ought to be the most special regard had in the plague, and in
pestilent Fevers) amongst the which Venesection unto fainting and swounding is
not the last (but rather the first) which together with the Spirits evacuateth
that humor that is most agreeable and friendly to Nature, and even that most
excellent and precious Treasury of the life. Nay indeed moreover, even sometimes
when the pestilent Carbuncle is just then breaking forth, we cannot safely
enough institute and ordain Phlebotomy. For whereas the Carbuncle sometimes
breaks forth, not instantly upon the very first invasion of the Plague, and
pestilential Fevers, but often afterward on the fourth days (or happily on some
other days) the Natural powers will not then bear the said Venesection, in
regard that they are now dejected by the disease, and have therefore entered
the Lists, and are now conflicting with the said disease. But now what Veins
are to be opened, sufficiently appears from that which we have spoken above,
touching the evacuation of the blood, and touching Revulsion, and Derivation,
in the Cure of an Inflammation. This only is here to be observed, that we must
beware, lest that whilst we evacuate the blood, we do not lead and draw the
same either unto any noble Member, or else through any noble Member, lest that
the said Member should be affected with its malignity.

And therefore we say that that Vein is to be opened, by means whereof the
blood may rather be drawn toward the part affected than drawn back from it.
Wherefore if the Carbuncle shall be about the Head, or the Arm-holes, or in the
Breast, the nearest Vein in the Arm of the same side is then to be opened. But
if it be below the Liver, then the Ankle Vein, or the Ham Vein of the same
side. And this Phlebotomy ought to be put in practice instantly, and in the
very beginning, before the Fever get strength, and the Natural vigor be too
much dejected.

But now in regard that by this blood-letting the naughty corrupt humors can
scarcely be evacuated, therefore some conceive that there is need of purgation,
by which the said depraved humors may be evacuated, lest otherwise the Native
heat should be suffocated and extinguished by them; and that Nature may
afterward the more rightly moderate the expulsion; and that so the part
affected may not be corrupted by the great abundance of the Humor flowing
thereto.

But then we ought to be extraordinary careful, lest that by the purging
Medicament, the Humor that Nature endeavoreth to thrust forth unto the external
parts be drawn unto the internal: and this is most of al to be feared in a
pestilent Carbuncle. We conceive indeed that it may more safely be ordained and
appointed in a Carbuncle that is not malignant. But when a Fever is therewith
joined (and that an acute one) the crudity of the matter then for the most part
forbids it; and to speak truth, there is hardly a Carbuncle to be found in
which there is not something of malignity; and therefore the malignant matter is
with more safety thrust forth unto the superficies of the body by those
Medicaments we term Alexipharmaca, then drawn to the more inward parts by
Medicaments that purge.

That fervent heat also of the adust blood is to be altered; and the malignity
to be opposed by convenient Medicaments, as the juice of Citron, of
Pomegranates, Sorrel, Borrage, Bugloss, Water Germander, Succory, and the like;
with which (in a pestilent Carbuncle) other Alexipharmaca may also be firly
mingled. As,

Take Conserve of Sorrel, Borrage, Bugloss, of each one ounce and half; the
species of Diamargarit. frigid. Confection of Hyacynth, Elect. de Gem. of each
half a dram; of candied Citron rind six drams; the candied roots of Scorzonera
(or Vipers Grass) half an ounce; with the juice of Citron make an Electuary.

Unto which (in a Pestilent Carbuncle) we may add Bole-armenick, Terra
Sigillata or sealed Earth, Hearts horn, Bezoar stone, and the like. Very many
there be that in a Carbuncle do much commend Scabious, and they conceive that
it never ought to be passed by; and they write, that either the Juice, or the
Water, or the Decoction thereof, is of singular use and benefit in a Carbuncle.

It will not likewise be amiss to fence and guard the Heart with Topics, by
Epithems that are otherwise known, applied to the Region of the Heart and the
Pulses; that so by all manner of means the Heart may be preserved safe and
sound from all the malignity.

Afterward (as for what concerns the conjunct cause, or the Tumor it self) the
way and means of curing a Carbuncle is not altogether the same as in other
Inflammations, unless happily there appear to be in it very little of an
offensive quality. Neither must we make use of Repellers (but the malignant and
poisonous matter is rather to be attracted from the more inward unto the
external parts) unless perhaps they may be administered for the mitigating of
the vehemence of the pain; touching which more hereafter. And therefore so soon
as Venesection has been administered, the part affected is forthwith to be
scarified, and that likewise with lancings that go deep enough, that so the
corrupt, malignant, and poisonous blood (which unless it be instantly emptied
forth of the part affected corrupts the parts near adjoining) may be quite
drawn forth. Immediately upon this the part affected is to be cleansed and
thoroughly washed with warm salt water, or with some other convenient liquor,
lest that the blood should clod, and so grow together in the part. Now if the
corrupt blood seem not as yet to be sufficiently evacuated, the scarifications
ought then to be repeated. We are likewse allowed (when the place is scarified)
to apply thereto Cupping-glasses or Leeches. Yet notwithstanding i^ with great
violence the humor flow unto the part, then Atrractives may not safely enough
be administered, since there is cause to fear, lest that the matter flowing
thereto in great abundance, the pain should be made the more vehement; which
may (possibly) excite and cause watchings, augment the Fever, and deject the
Natural vigor; but rather, if the matter flow thereunto over hastily, and with
too great force, we are then to make use of those Medicaments which by moderate
repressing and driving back may likewise digest. And such is the following
Cataplasm:

Take Arnogloss (we commonly term it Lambs-tongue, or Way-bread) Lentiles,
Bread that is neither wholly purged from its bran, neither yet such as is
altogether branny, of all these a like proportion; let them boil in Water or
Wine, and so make a Cataplasm: which is to be applied twice or thrice every day.

But now this said Medicament that we have mentioned, or such like, is not to
be imposed and laid upon the very Carbuncle it self, but only near about it,
some three fingers distance from it. For by this means the malignant matter it
self is not driven back, but only the extreme heat and pain is mitigated, the
flux of matter is somewhat retarded; and hereby is prevented the retreating back
again of the matter unto the more inward parts. But yet neither must this be
passed over in silence, that it is not evermore requisite to fence the
Carbuncle with such a guard: but notwithstanding, this for the most part i^
necessary, to wit, That that part which has a near relation with a noble
Member should be well guarded; forasmuch as it is no way hurtful (but indeed
profitable) that some of the matter should be derived and evaporated unto the
other ignoble parts.

Moreover, the place being scarified, there are not to be applied those
Medicaments that otherwise are wont to be laid on (in regard that they promote
and further the Pus or purtilent matter, and by this means may increase the
putrefaction and rottenness; since that a Carbuncle in putrefying evermore
creeps and spreads so that very often a Mortification chances unto such
parts; but rather those Medicaments that are drying, and such as resist
putrefaction. For which end and purpose we may administer the Pastils, or
Pomanders, of Andro, Musa, Polyidas, and Pasio; which are to be dissolved first
of al in Wine, and then also afterward in Vinegar; touching which see Galen in
his Composition of Medicaments in general, the fifth Book, Chap. 11, and 12.
They commonly likewise make use of the Aegyptiack Unguent. There may also be
made a Cataplasm of the Meal of the Pulse Orobus with Oxymel. Morsus Diaboli or
Devils-bit, is likewise very much commended; if while it is yet green and well
bruised it be laid on; or else boiled in Wine and drunk. There be many likewise
that here make use of those things that are experimentally found to be helpful
by the propriety of their substance; among which Scabious is especially
commended, as also Morsus Diaboli or Devils-bit; they take (to wit) the
Scabious whilst it is green, and bruise it well, and then they add thereto the
Yelk of an Egg, Hogs grease that is old, and a little Salt; and herewith they
make a Cataplasm; which is often to be renewed. Some likewise take the Herb
Comfry for the same use, and with it they prepare and make such a Medicament as
this that follows:

Take of the Juice of the greater Symphytum (or great Comfrey) Scabious,
Cranes-bill (or Doves-foot) of each one ounce: of Barley Meal two ounces and an
half; and mingle them for a Cataplasm.

Others there are who (if there be present an extreme heat and pain) commend
this, Viz.

Take Plantane Leaves, and Sorrel Leaves, of each two handfuls, boil them to a
softness; then let them be bruised; when they are thoroughly bruised, add to
them the Yelks of four Eggs, Treacle two drams, Barley meal a sufficient
proportion, and so make a Cataplasm.

Many likewise there are that commend those Wallnuts that are old and Oily,
being bruised; of the which some make such a Cataplasm as this that follows.

Take the Kernels of Walnuts (such as are old, and rancid or moldy) in number
three; dried Figs, and Raisins, an equal proportion; boil them in strong white
Wine to a softness, and then bruise them; adding thereto a dram of Salt, and
two Yelks of Eggs; mingle, and then make a Cataplasm of them.

But now if there be any that will not endure Scarification; or if otherwise the
Carbuncle will not yield unto these Medicaments; and it be so, that the
corruption, the blackness, and the signs seem always to be augmented; we must
in this case have recourse unto Cauteries; and that instanly and with all
possible speed, Cauteries.
for even the least delay may cast the sick Person into an extreme peril, yea
into the greatest danger even of death it self. But here Potential Cauteries
may not so safely be administered; in regard that the Crust which is drawn over
them sals off more; and so the exhalation of the corrupt and malignant humor it
hardened. The actual is therefore by most accounted the safer. For why, the
Actual Cautery, by the heat and dryness of the Fire, does especially resist
putrefaction, and preserves the sound parts, lest that they also should be
infected with putridness; and it likewise attracteth from the depth and the
very bottom all the malignant and corrupt Matter; and for this cause it is
hereby the most commended as the most effectual Remedy; who conceive that here
(in this case) this is not so grievous a Remedy, seeing that the sick Person is
hardly sensible of it, in regard that the Flesh is dead; and because that the
use of it must be so long continued, even until in all parts thereof there be a
sense of pain. Yet notwithstanding even the Actual Cautery has also in this
discommodity, that it induces and causes a Crust or Eschar, which it self so
hinders that the malignant and poisonous matter cannot exhale. If therefore
any will use this Remedy, he must be altogether careful, that the Crust drawn
over it hinder not the exhalation of the corrupt and malignant humor; and
thereupon he must use his endeavor, that the Crust may speedily (even within the
space of twenty four hours) be removed; in regard that there may be danger in
the delaying thereof. And indeed (for this purpose) they commonly use Butter,
the Suet or Fat of a Hog, the Fat of a Goose, and such like moistening and
suppurating Remedies. But the Truth is, that Horatius Augenius and Gulielmus
Fabricius do rightly inform us, that (in those affects in the which there is
otherwise so extreme a danger threatened from putridness) these Remedies may not
with any safety at all be administered; forasmuch as by their humidity, and
Emplastick virtue, they do in a wonderful manner increase the putridness, and
cause that the rottenness and corruption of the part creep so much the further;
and moreover these do but very slowly take away the Crustiness. And therefore
these conceive that we ought rather to use those Remedies that do greatly
cleanse and dry, resist putrefaction, and break assunder those small slender
fibers by which the Crust adhereth unto the part affected. Galen (in his second
Book to Glauco, Chap. 9.) for the taking away of the Crust (after burning) in
the case of a Gangrene, uses the Juice of a Leek with Salt. Gulielmus
Fabricius for the falling off of the Eschar, and for the cleansing of the Ulcer
commends this following Unguent.

Take the meal of Orobus (or bitter Vetch) the root of Aristolochy, or
Birthwort, the Flower-de-luce of Florence, and the lesser vernal Gentian, of
each half an ounce; Treacle two drams, with a sufficient quantity of Honey of
Roses; and so make Unguent.

Horatius Augentius commends this.

Take Vitriol two drams, the best Honey half an ounce, Hogs grease two drams,
and mingle them.

And that the Ancients did not always use moysteriers and those Remedies that
forward the Pus or Purulent matter, for the removal of the Crusts, is
sufficiently evident out of Galen his sixth Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to the place affected, Chap. 6. and Paulus Aegineta his
fourth Book, and Chap. 19. in the which said place there are many more such
like Medicaments to be seen.

And as for my own part, I had rather (for the taking away of the Crusts which
for the most part the Carbuncle contracteth) use such like Remedies, then
Cauteries, whether Potential or Actual. For here the Putridness is not simple,
as in a Gangrene, and other corruption of the parts (where that that is putrid
is most commonly separated from the sound part; so that we may safely enough
burn away what is corrupt and putrid. But in a Carbuncle there is present a
malignant humor, and that diffused throughout the whole part; and therefore we
are to make use of those Medicaments that extract, that so by this means what
is as yet sound may be preserved from purridness and Corruption. Aetius
writes, that wild Rue imposed in a Cataplasm with Honey and Raisius of the
Sun, does likewise instantly separate the Crusts of Carbuncles: and therefore
even those medicaments also that resist malignity (as Treacle and the like) are
for the most part very properly herewith mingled. And therefore we conceive
that the Unguent of Gulielmus Fabricius, erewhile mentioned, is exceeding
profitable in a Carbuncle, not only after the burning, but likewise at all
other times. Others compound such a like medicament, which (as they affirm) will
in two days space separate the good and sound Flesh from the corrupt.

Take Rue one handful, Leaven one ounce, dry Figs three in number, Pepper a
dram, Salt a dram and half; make a Cataplasm which may be applied mornings and
evenings.

In general, in Pestilent Carbuncles, to extract the Poison we must prevent and
hinder the creeping and further spreading of the putridness.

For the taking off the Scar this Emplaster is principally commended.

Take of the best Treacle, and Mithridate, of each half an ounce, Leaven and
Turpentine of each two ounces, Honey of Roses one ounce and half, fresh Butter
two ounces, common Salt one ounce, Chimney Soot two ounces and half, Saracen
Soap three ounces, Saffron three drams, three Yelks of Eggs, bake them
altogether, and make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Scabious, the greater Comfrey, of each two ounces, of full and fat Figs
dried three, an Onion roasted in Embers, Squils half an ounce, Raddish root cut
into small pieces two ounces, two Yelks of Eggs, Salt two ounces, Leaven and
Chimney Soot of each one ounce, Honey and Turpentine, of each as much at will
suffice; and so make a Cataplasm: and having spread it upon a Linen Cloth lay
it on hot, and let it be shifted almost every hour.

If now we perceive the Crust to become round and a circular redness appearing,
it is then a sign and token of ensuing health and recovery, and a manifest
testimony that Nature has now separated the corrupt from the sound. When the
Crust is wholly taken away the Ulcer is then to be thoroughly cleansed with
Honey of Roses, and the Juice of Smallage, and such like. After the cleansing
it is to be filled up, joined together, and at length with a Cicatrice to be
shut up. But touching the cure of a Carbuncle, see more in the fourth Book of
Fevers, and the fourth Chapter.

Chap. 14. Of the Tumor Paronychia.
UNto Inflammations there also belongs that Tumor that the Greeks call
Paronychia, because that it is generated in the Confines or sides of the
Fingers; the Latins term it Panaritium, the Germans Der Wurm, Oder Das
Vngenandte. For the Vulgar are of Opinion, that in this Tumor there lies hid a
Worm, that by gnawing exciteth and causes those so great pains; and that when
it is mentioned and spoken of it is thereby exasperated, and that therefore it
ought not to be so much at named: but these things are merely fabulous.

What a Paronychia is.
Now a Paronychia is a hot Tumor or Swelling, arising from blood adust and
atrabiliary in the extreme part of the Fingers, at the sides of the Nails; and
by reason of the neighborhood of the Nerves exciting most grievous and
intolerable pains.

The Causes.
For this Tumor has its original from adust, and (for the most part, likewise)
malignant blood; which Nature thrusts forth unto the Fingers ends; and there
it causes an Inflammation.

The Signs Diagnostick.
It is known by the Swelling, Redness, and pain, appearing in the Fingers ends
about the Nails; together with a most extreme and intense pain (by reason that
the nee^ adjoining Nervous parts are affected) which will not permit the sick
Person to sleep, or take any rest, neither night nor day; and this pain (in
regard of the Nerves consent) is oftentimes extended throughout the whole Arm;
and it has to accompany it a continual Fever, and sometimes (by reason of the
overgreat pain) a Lipothymy, which we term fainting or swounding.

Prognostics.
1. According to the benignity and inoffensiveness of the humor, the malady is
sometimes more mild and tolerable, and sometimes again more grievous and
intolerable. For if the matter be benign or moderate and favorable, the
symptoms are then the less vehement.

2. On the contrary, if the Matter be Malignant, the Malady is dangerous; for
it oftentimes so corrupts the Ligaments and the neighboring Nerves, that the
utmost Joint together with the Bone Impostumateth; and sometimes the whole
Finger is corrupted.

The Cure.
The Vulgar, as they have superstitious Opinions touching the Cause, so they
have likewise concerning the Cure of this Tumor. For they think that if any one
thus affected shall in the Spring time wash and besmear his hands with the Eggs
otherwise called the seed or Sperm of Frogs, and shall then suffer them to dry
leisurely and of their own accord; and shall afterward hold in this Hand that
Finger that is grieved with this Inflammation, he shall by this means assuage
and qualify the said Inflammation. And some there be also that every year hold
in their hand a live Mole, and then having conceived and mumbled over a certain
form of words, with squeezing hard they kill the Mole they have in their hand;
and then they brag and boast that for the year following they are able to kill
and destroy all those Worms.

But, to omit these sopperies, the right and due way of Cu^ing this Evil is
then taken, when after the general evacuation of the humors by Blood-letting
and Purgation has been premised, in the first place we impose upon the part
affected those things that moderate the pain, and mitigate the servent heat of
the humors, and such Medicaments likewise as help forward and further
suppuration.

But Repelling and Astringent Remedies are by no means to be imposed upon the
grieved part, lest that by this means the humor should be the more impacted
into the part, the pain augmented, and the Nerves and Bone corrupted. If yet
notwithstanding the Asslux be over great, then let Repellers be laid on very
nigh unto the part next above it.

And therefore in the very beginning the following Cataplasm is to be imposed:

Take Barley meal, and Bean meal, of each one ounce; Camphire one scruple; the
Mucilage of the seed of Fleabane as much as will suffice, Mingle all these with
Vinegar over the sire, and so make a Cataplams. O^,

Take the juice of Nightshade, of Plantane, of Navelwort, of each half an
ounce; the Mucilage of Fleabane seed extracted with the Water of Nightshade
three drams; Bole armenick half a dram; Camphire five grains; Oil of Roses, and
Myrtle, of each half an ounce: Mingle them, etc. Or,

Take the Mucilage of Fleabane seed extracted with the juice or water of
Plantane two ounces; Bole armenick one dram; Vinegar half an ounce: Mingle them
etc.

Or else let the white of an Egg mingled with the Oil of Violets be imposed.

There are likewise commended those little Worms that are found in the middle
of the utmost ^ind of the Teazel or Fullers Thistle, if while they are alive
they be bound about the Nails affected.

Where the matter tends to Suppuration,

Take the Meal of Fenugreek seed, and Linseed, of each half an ounce; the Yelk
of one Egg, fresh Butter one ounce; the fat of a Hen three drams: Mingle them
without sire, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take the Mucilage of the juice of Fleabane one ounce; the meal of Linseed and
Fenugreek, of each three drams; the Yelk of an Egg; Saffron one scruple; the
fat of a Hen, and Butter unsalted, of each one ounce: Mingle them, and make a
Cataplasm.

When the Pus is bred, the Impostume is forthwith to be opened, and the Pus or
Snot-like filth (being seldom good, but rotten and corrupt) is to be drawn
forth. The Pus being thus evacuated, such a like Abstersive and Incarnative is
then to be made use of.

Take Aloes Hepatick three drams; Myrrh, Frankincense, Sarcocol, of each one
dram, pure and clear Turpentine half an ounce; Honey of Roses two drams; Mingle
them, etc.

Gulielmus Fabricius (in the first Century of his Chirurgical Observations,
Observe. 97.) does not stay to wait for the Inflammation, or for any notable
swelling up, and suppuration; but in a Woman that was afflicted with a most
grievous pain in the end of her finger, together with a Fever, a fainting and
swounding, a nauseousness and vomiting, and other symptoms; he thus ordains
his Cure. He first of al a little fomenteth the finger with Cows Milk in which
Camomil flowers, Melilot flowers, the seeds of Fenugreek and Quinces were first
boiled. And then by little and little he dissected the superficies of the Skin.
The Skin being shaven away, there appeared small red spots; which being cut with
the edg of a knife, he finds under the Skin a drop or two of red Water. That
being evacuated, he applied a Linen Cloth dipped and moistened in Aqua vitae, in
which there was dissolved a little Treacle. By thus doing he soon qualified and
quite took away the pain; and by this one only Remedy the very next day the
finder was healed.

And likewise in another Matron, that for three days together by reason of the
vehement pain of the Patonychia could not sleep, not take any rest at al (the
skin being shaven off) he finds under the skin in the very tip of the finger,
a spot of this bigness O, in the which there was contained scarcely one small
drop of the Ichorous excrement. The spot being opened, and thereto applied
Cotton dipped in Aqua vitae wherein there was Treacle dissolved, and about the
whole hand and wrist a linen cloth (after it had been first well soaked in
vinegar and water) doubled and wrapped, the pain immediately ceased; insomuch
that the very next day following the finger was fully and perfectly healed. But
the same Author adds further, that this incision ought forthwith in the very
beginning to be made; because that otherwise by the concourse of the Humors
there will be excited an Inflammation and Swelling, and so the flesh lying
underneath, yea, and even the bones also will be in danger of being eaten
through. For the Skin in that place is of an extraordinary thickness; so that
the matter of the Paronychia (which in it self is malignant) when it can by no
means exhale, it then acquireth the greater acrimony and poysonfulness; and the
finger also, yea, and the whole hand (by reason of the vehemence of pain) is
swollen and blown up: and this incision very little or nothing avails, unless
that the matter be first concocted and converted into Pus.

Chap. 15. Of Perniones or Kibes.
THere is also found a peculiar kind of Inflammarion, which they term
Perniones; the Greeks call this Affect Chimethlon and Chemeithlon (from the
Greek word Cheimon) in regard of their appearing in the Winter time only. And
it is such a kind of Inflammation as in the Winter time arises in the heels,
and on the toes and fingers. I once likewise saw a Nobleman that had such a
kind of Inflammation on the very tip of his Nose.

The Causes.
Now this kind of Inflammation arises from the Winters cold, whilst that by
it not only the part is weakened and made more apt to receive, but that
likewise from the pain there is caused an attraction of blood unto the part.

Yet notwithstanding this is worth consideration, how it comes to pass that he
who has in the Winter time undergone and suffered some notable cooling of the
extreme parts should yet notwithstanding be well, and altogether insensible of
it during the Summer, and the Winter following again (and thus to continue for
some years, and until the Malady be wholly removed and taken away by cure)
should be so sensible of an extreme itching, pain, and swelling in the part
that was over cooled as aforesaid; and that although in the Summer time he felt
no ill, instantly in the very first entrance of the Winter the Malady should
again get head and return, and an itching be again felt in the part affected:
al which argues that there was some strong impression left behind in the part.
For those that are thus greatly cooled do not only suffer a bare alteration;
but that there is likewise something that is substantial communicated unto the
part affected, appears even by this. That Apples and Eggs when they are
frozen, if they be cast into cold Water, there is then an Ice taken out of
them, so that it outwardly sticks fast unto them like unto a crust, and then
these Apples and Eggs return again to their former Natural state; whereas on
the contrary, if they be put into warm Water, they become flaggy, turn black,
and are corrupted; which notwithstanding could not possibly happen if there
were only a mere and simple alteration; and therefore we may conclude, that by
the pain that afflicts the part there is blood attracted to the part
affected, that exciteth and causes the Inflammation.

Signs Diagnostick.
There went before a guarding and preservation of the extreme parts of the Body
(against the injuries of the external Air) that was but weak and slight, and
not sufficient to maintain a due warmth in them; and thereupon an undue cooling
befalls them; there is likewise an itching and a pain, that is not only once
(and after that the sick person has suffered a refrigeration from the external
Air) perceived; but, although it cease in the Summer time and Autumn, yet
notwithstanding about the beginning of Winter it again returns; the part
waxes red, and swells up; and now and then also it is exulcerated.

Prognostics.
This Tumor (to tell you the truth) has in it no danger at al: yet
notwithstanding if the Malady be not speedily ^^^ed, it will prove tedious, and
of long continuance, and this pain will for many years be grievous and
troublesome unto the Party thus affected; and sometimes likewise the part is wont
to be exulcerated.

The Preservation.
Lest that the parts should be hurt by the external cold, it is requisite that
in the Winter time they should be sufficiently fenced and provided for against
the injuries of the aforesaid external cold Air. And more particularly (lest
that the feet be hurt) it will be expedient to wear Legharnesses (as they call
them) or linen Socks well moistened in the Spirit of Wine, especially in that
part of them by which they cover the feet. But seeing that it cannot well be
that all the parts should be sufficiently kept from and defended against the
cold, yet notwithstanding, lest that any one (after he has for a while been in
the cold Air) should suffer any damage, the refrigerated parts are not first
of al to be altered with the contrary quality; but rather we ought to do our
endeavor, that the cause which has insinuated it self into any part may be
removed and taken away. And therefore (as it is commonly wont to be done in the
cold Septentrional Regions; and of which as of a thing very well known,
Gulielmus Fabricius takes notice in his Treatise of a Gangrene and Sphacelus,
Chap. 10.) the refrigerated part is not to be put close to the fire, neither
are those things that are hot to be imposed thereon; (for if this be done, the
coldness, or indeed rather the cold Atoms retained in the part being by this
means thrust down into the deeper parts of the place affected, a most
intolerable pain happens thereupon to arise, yea and sometimes also a
Gangrene is produced and excited) but the cooled part is to be well rubbed with
Snow that so by its like the coldness (or cold thing) may be extracted out of
the affected part, after the same manner as Apples or Eggs being frozen and
cast into the coldest water are restored unto their pristine Nature, the
extracted Ice sticking fast without unto the rinds of the one, and shells of the
other. And for this very reason the Inbabitants of the abovementioned Northern
Regions, when they have been traveling do not accustom themselves to enter
into Stoves or Hot-houses, or so much as to draw near unto any fire, until they
have first thoroughly rubbed their Hands, Nose, and the extreme parts (or tips)
of their Ears with Snow; or have plunged (as we may so say) their almost frozen
feet into cold Water, or Snow. And the same Fabricius (in the place alleged)
relates, That a Noble man of good esteem and reputation told him, that when he
traveled in those Regions he himself on a time lighted upon one traveling as
he was upon the Road; whom finding to be stiff with cold and almost dead he
caused to be put into a Cart; and having brought him into an June, his Host
(the man of the house) immediately plunged him over head and ears, as we say,
in cold water; which was no sooner done, but instantly there issued forth from
al parts of him a kind of frostiness, in such a manner that his whole body
seemed as if it had been al over covered with Ice, like as with an Iron shield:
and then he gave him to drink a Cup of Hydromel, putting thereinto the powder
of Cinnamom, Cloves, and Mace; upon which he fell into a swear in his Bed; and
soon after the sick person returned unto his former state, and became perfectly
well recovered.

The Cure.
When now the said congelation is assuaged and qualified, and the cold for the
most part extracted and drawn forth, or else has exhaled of its own accord,
(which is known by this, that the pricking pain is much moderated, if not quite
ceased) then the part is to be fomented and cherished with sweet Milk made
blood warm, in which there have been boiled Rosemary, Organy, Sage, the Leaves
of Rue, and Bayberries. It will be likewise very commodious (this being a remedy
that is also very well known) to thrust deep into warm Water (in which Rape
Roots, especially those that were formerly congealed and frozen with cold have
been boiled) the Hands or the Feet. Or,

Take White Wine one pint; Alum an ounce, boil the Alum with the Wine, and
let the part be well washed therewith: the Decoction also of Lupines is good and
helpful: and after it let the part be anointed over with Honey in which live
Sulphur has been boiled.

This is likewise very efficacious:

Take of the Oil of Bays two ounces; Honey one ounce; Turpentine half an
ounce: Mingle, etc. Or,

Take Turpentine, unsalted Butter, and Mace, of each alike, and what you please
for the proportion: Mingle them, etc. Or else,

Let the part be anointed with Oil of Wax.

If the part be already exulcerated, Alum poudered and mingled with a like
portion of Frankincense pondered likewise is very helpful, and well approved of,
a little Wine being thereto added: or the Oil of Roses boiled in a Rape Root
(or in the Reddish Root made hollow, and the pith taken al out) and then
squeezed and pressed forth.

Or else let an Unguent be made of River Crabs burnt, with Honey and the Oil of
Roses. Or,

Take Rue, the Marrow of a Bull, the Unguent of Roses, of each as much as you
think fit: mingle them, etc. Or,

Take Wax, the fat of a Hog, of each an ounce; Litharge of Silver or Lead ten
drams; the rind of the Pine two ounces; of Manna thur is one ounce; Oil of
Roses a sufficient quantity. Make an Unguent.

Chap. 16. Of the Tumor Ecchymoma.
THere is likewise sometimes poured forth blood (the Skin continuing still whole
and sound) into the spaces of the parts; from whence there arises an Affect,
which by the Greeks is termed Ecchymoma or Ecchymosis, and by the Latins
Effusio, Suffusio, Sugillatio. For an Ecchymosis is nothing else but Chymeon
ecchysis, that is, an Effusion or pouring forth of the Humors, to wit, the
blood, into the next adjoining spaces, by reason of the opening of the Veins;
to wit, if the Skin abiding whole the Veins pour forth that juice which they
contain, that is the blood, as Galen speaks in his second Book of Fractures,
Comment. 16. and either the orifices of the Vessels gape (which happens in an
Anastomosis) or else the blood does as it were sweat forth and strain it self
out through the Tunicles of the Vessels being rarefied; which the Greeks call
Diapedesis; or else by contusion the Vessels are loosened; which chances if
one fall from an high place, or else be oppressed and over laid by the weight of
something that is heavy lying upon him; or else be smitten and hurt with a club,
stone, stump of a Tree; or else lastly, that by some violent motion and
extension a Vessel be broken. Then (the Skin remaining who) the blood is poured
forth into the near adjoining spaces; whereupon the color of the part is
changed; and at first indeed it seems reddish; afterward it becomes Leaden
colored, then yellowish, green, blackish: whereupon it is that Galen, in his
Book of Preternatural Tumors, Chap. 10. and tenth Book of the Composition of
simple Medicaments, Chap. 9. makes two species of this Ecchymosis; one (which
by the general name he calls Ecchymoma) when the part obtains a middle
color betwixt red and black; which indeed may properly be termed Pelidna, that
is, of a livid or leaden color; and the Affect may likewise be called Livor, to
wit, paleness, or wanness: the other he terms Melasmata, that is,
blacknesses; which latter are especially familiar unto old persons, as often as
their Veins are bruised, or opened upon any other cause, and these happen upon
any small or slight occasion; like as on the contrary, Pelidna and Livores
befall Children and those that are young, and Women, and such as are of a white
color.

But now, although oftentimes, and indeed for the most part, the part is not
lift up into a Tumor or Swelling, but the Blood poured forth does so insinuate
it self into the spaces of the parts that there is no Tumor at all appearing:
yet notwithstanding sometimes the part does swell up, if there be great store of
Blood poured out; and this also is now and then wont to happen after
Venefection, to wit, if the whole Vein be smitten, or if the Wound that is in
the Skin shall be closed up, but that which is in the Vein it self left open
and unshut. For from hence by that Wound that is in the Vein the blood is
poured forth, for which when there is no issue or passage open (the Wound in
the Skin being closed up) it is oftentimes under the Skin poured out into the
whole Arm; and sometimes it exciteth also a certain swelling; but however, it
always dies the Skin of a Red and livid or leaden color.

Ecchymosis
But the Affect is various and different; and the Ecchymosis arises in a
different manner, since that the blood is not evermore poured forth without the
Veins; but oftentimes by reason of the great abundance of the Spirits and Blood
the Veins and Arteries that are terminated in the Skin are filled full of
blood, and thereupon the Body becomes colored; as appears out of
Hippocrates, Epid. 2. Sect. 4. in the end thereof, where he writes thus; That
all diligence and care must be taken, that the passion and anger of the Mind
may be provoked and stirred up, both for the repairing of the clour and the
pouring in of blood.

And to tell you the truth, in what place soever there is such an effusion of
Blood, it may in general be called Ecchymosis: yet notwithstanding, Paulus
Aegineta in his fourth Book, Chap. 30 (according to the diversity of the parts
affected) reckons up three kinds or species, all which may be called by their
several distinct and peculiar names. The first is those which we call Hypopia
(and by Hippocrates named Hypophthalmia) that is, Subocularia, to wit,
palenesses, or wannesses under the Eyes. Now it is termed Hypopion from Ops,
that is, the Eye, because it appears under the Eyes; and it is an Affect
differing from that we call Hypopyon (the difference lying in this, that the
former is written by o and i, the latter by o and u,) from Pus (which the
Greeks call Pyon) because it is a collection of Pus or purulent matter under
the Cornea Tunicle. The second Species is Hyposphagma, which some in special
term Suggillatio, to wit, an effusion of blood into the Adnata or Cornea (both
of them Tunicles) of the Eye; touching which we have already spoken in the
first Book of our Practice, Part 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 32. The third Species is
that which is caused by the Contusion or bruising of the Nails; this Species
Hippocrates calls Hyponychos, and the Latin Authors term it Subungulus, in
regard that it is an Affect under the Nails.

Contusion.
Sometimes with Ecchymosis there is likewise conjoined a Contusion; yea and
sometimes also there is so great an abundance of Blood poured forth, that it
being collected under the Skin and the Muscles, it there causes a certain
hollowness, and lifts up the part into a Tumor, or Swelling. There is also
sometimes (according to the Nature of the part) conjoined therewith a pain; from
whence it happens that more blood flows thereto, and by this means an
Inflammation, yea and sometimes likewise at the length a Gangrene is excited.
There is to b^^^ a notable History of this in Johannes Philippus Ingrassias, in
his Jatropologia. When in the year 1537. (in an Hippomachie or Tilting, as we
call it) the Marquess of Terra Nova ran with the Baron of Volaterran, it so
chanced, that the armed Knee of the Marquess (by reason of the Fury and
extraordinary fierceness of their Horses) gave so great a blow upon the bare
and unarmed Leg of the Baron, that the Contusion or bruise that followed
thereupon was so great and grievous, that the Baron died thereof four days
after. By reason of this his so sudden and unexpected death the Physicians were
questioned and called to an account, for that they had not rightly and as was
fitting managed the Cure. In whose behalf and defense Johannes Philippus
Ingrassias wrote those two Books of Apology under the name and Title of
Jatropologia. There is likewise extant in Gulielmus Fabricius (Cent. 2.
Observat. 83.) another History (which you may there see) showing how dangerous
Contusions may be.

The Signs.
Suffusions and these Suggillations are easily known. For the very color it
self, and the Swelling (if at least there be any) fall under the sense, and are
apparently to be seen. The Causes are known by those things that went before,
and such as are likewise present. For if any external Cause went before (as a
Blow, a Fall, and the like) the Physician may understand it from the relation
of the Patient. But if none of these shall happen, we are then to consider the
Blood in the Body; and well to weigh by what means it becomes thus peccant and
offensive.

Prognostics.
1. Although, in truth, these Ecchymomata are for the most part void of all
danger, and the blood that is yet thin may easily be dispersed: yet if this be
not done, and that the blood be detained any thing long in the part affected
(out of its own Vessels) it then may prove to be of dangerous Consequence, in
regard that by this means there may be excited both a Corruption of that very
part that is affected, and likewise a damage and detriment unto the whole Body.
For the Blood being clotted together unless it be forthwith insensibly
discussed, or turned into Pus, (which is necessarily done, where the Flesh is
withal greatly bruised) so that hence the part yet continues soft, it
putrefieth and corrupts, and breeds a Gangrene, and very frequently
brings Death and Destruction upon the sick Person.

2. But there is great danger threatened, and nigh at hand, when the part
affected continues not any longer green or wan, but inflamed, and becomes
very red, hard and distended. Of which we related that former notable History
out of Ingrassias.

The Cure.
As for what therefore concerns the Cure, we will first of all treat of the
Cure of that Ecchymoma that follows upon a Contusion. For even this also very
often happens; and whoever he be that knows the Cure of this, he shall have
a sufficient store of Medicaments with which he may cure the rest; since that
the discussing Medicaments that are here to be drunk have their place likewise
in the other. First of al therefore, if the contusion be great, we must use the
best of our ^kil and care to prevent and hinder the afflux of blood unto the
place, lest that thereby an Inflammation should be excited. This is to be done
by Venesection; for which cause Galen commands, That in a fall from on high, and
in beatings and bruisings, a vein be opened, and that although the blood does
not greatly abound, yet that by opening a Vein it be drawn forth, lest that an
Inflammation should be excited; from whence not only evil symptoms, but
oftentimes also even death it self has its original. And the truth is, this
Venesection is forthwith to be ordained and put in practice; and withal at the
same time Defensives and Repellers are likewise to be placed near about the
part, that may impede and prevent the influx of blood into the part affected;
such as are made up of Bole-armenick, Terra sigillata or Sealed Earth of
Lemnos, Dragons blood, Roses, Myrtles, the Nuts of the Cypress Tree, Galls,
Pomegranate flowers, Roots of the lesser Consound, and the like. As for
instance:

Take Bole armenick, Terra sigillat. of each an ounce and half; Chalk half an
ounce; let them boil in Vinegar: after they be boiled, Take Powder of red
Roses, the pure sine flour of the Root Consolida, or Consound, of each half an
ounce; and with the Oil of Myrtles make a Cataplasm.

Or only, which is likewise in common use, the white of an Egg shaken together
with Rose water; and with burds or the courser part of flax, applied unto the
place affected. Or,

Take the white of four Eggs, the Oil of Myrtle and Roses, of each one ounce;
Bole armenick, Dragons blood, of each half an ounce; Cypress Nut two drams; a
little Vinegar; Mingle them etc.

And this is also here to be taken notice of, that there be not many moist and
clammy Medicaments administered; for by reason of such humid things applied the
blood fallen forth out of the Veins is easily putrefied: whereupon diverse il
and dangerous Symptoms are afterward wont to arise.

But in very truth, when from a fall from some high place, beating and bruising
(and the like Causes) the blood is not only gotten together under the Skin and
the external parts, but oftentimes also is poured forth into the more inward
parts, after the same manner as it is in the Circumference of the Body when the
Vessels are opened or broken (which said blood is there clotted and corrupted,
and is wont to cause Inflammations, and the worst sort of Fevers, dangerous
Symptoms, and very frequently death it self) we must therefore use the best of
our endeavor that the clotting and growing together of the aforesaid blood may
be hindered, that it may be dissolved, and that it may be evacuated by stool,
urine, or sweats, and that with all due and possible speed. For when once the
blood has gotten a putridness the Malady is not so easily cured, nor indeed at
al without the most exquisite and singular extraordinary Remedies. Wherefore so
soon as there is any the least suspicion that the blood is fallen forth without
the Veins into the more inward parts, and that it cannot be dissipated by
external Remedies, we must then use these things following: to wit, Rheubarb,
Rhapontick, Terra sigillat. Sperma Ceti (in the Shops termed Patmasitty) the
Eyes of Crabs, Mummy, red Corals, Harts-born, Madder (such as the Dyers use in
coloring) with the Waters of Cherefoyl, Carduus, Marjoram, St. John's wort,
Fumitory, Alkekengy, Card. benedict. Scabious, the Syrup of Sorrel, Syrup de
Acetositat. Citri, Vinegar, and the like; which what they are will appear
further from the following Receipts, and Prescripts.

Take Rheubarb, Terra sigilat. Bole armenick, Mummy, of each one dram; make of
these a Powder: of which give one dram at once, with the Water of Cherefoyl, or
Shepherds-Pouch. Or,

Take Terra sigillat. Crabs Eyes, of each one scruple; Sperma Ceti, Goats blood
prepared, Angelica and Gentian Roots, choice Rheubarb, of each half a scruple;
seeds of Carduus Bened. seven grains; Cloves three grains: Make of these a
Ponder for two Doles, to be taken at twice, and drunk with the following Waters:

Take the Water of the Infusion of Lavender one ounce; the Waters of Cherefoyl,
St. John's wort, Strawberries, of each one ounce and half; Wine Vinegar half an
ounce, for twice. Or,

Take Terra sigillat. Madder, Mummy, great Comfrey, Rheubarb, of each a
scruple: mingle them, and make a Powder. Or,

Take Rheubarb, the Root of Madder, Mummy, Crabs Eyes, the seed of Carduus
Mariae, or Mary Thistle, the Root of round Aristolochia or Birthwort, of each
one dram: mingle and make a Powder: give hereof a dram at once, with the Syrup
of Sorrel.

Some there be likewise that commend the Water of Nuts.

They commonly administer one dram of Sperma Ceti dissolved in Vinegar, or some
fit and convenient Water.

There are likewise some that make use of Unguents, and that with good success
also; which are likewise taken into the Body, and are therefore styled Potable;
as for instance, the Potable red Unguent of the Ausburg Practitioners. Or,

Take Green Sanicle four ounces; the Leaves of Betony, Fennel seed, Juniper
Berries unripe, of each three ounces; the Root of Elecampane, of the greater
Comsrey, Rue, Ground Ivy, Rosemary, Rhapontick root, of each two ounces: all
these being shred very small, let them be stirred about and incorporated with
three pound of fresh Butter: Set them then in the Sun for eight days:
afterward put thereinto one Cyath or little Cup full (about two ounces) of
Sanide Water; then boil it til the water and juyces be quite consumed; and then
let the Butter thus incorporated and moistened with the Juyces be pressed
forth, and kept for use. The Dose is half an ounce twice a day, to be taken
with warm Beer; the place affected may likewise be outwardly anointed with the
same, yet not at the first beginning and appearance of the distemper, but some
while after. Or,

Take these Herbs, Wormwood, Southernwood, of each two handfuls: the Herb
Ladies Mantle, Motherwort or Mugwort, the lesser Comfrey, the lesser Sage,
Germander, the lesser Centaury, Crosswort, Fennel, Strawberries, Fenugreek,
Ground Ivy or Aleboof, Hyssop, Lavender, Milfoyl, Marjoram, Balm, Bugle,
Penyroyal, Pyrole or Winter green, Pimpernel, Rosemary, Sage, Sanicle, Savory,
Spicknard, Betony, Vervain, of each one handful; the roots of Marshmallows,
Clove-gilliflowers, the greater Consound, Angelica, Pimpernel, and Tormentil,
of each of these one ounce. These Herbs and Roots gathered green in the month
of May or June, boil in six pound of May Butter; adding thereto as much Wine as
you judge sufficient: let them boil together, until they be boiled enough, still
taking heed that they burn not to; and in the end adding of the Oil of Bays
fresh and new, four ounces; Sperma Ceti half a pound; Make herewith an Unguent
of a green color: the Dose is one ounce, in Vinegar or Beer; and this may
likewise be outwardly applied unto Wounds. Or,

Take the Roots of Tormentil, Dittany, Sanicle, the greater Consound, Consound
Sarracen, of each two ounces; Castoreum one ounce (that sort of it that is
offensive by reason of its unpleasing taste may be omitted) Madder three ounces;
May Butter three pound; red Wine as much as will suffice: mingle and boil them
till the Wine be consumed; herewith make an Unguent; adding thereto of Sperma
Ceti one ounce.

As for the Topics, at the first beginning some Astringents are to be mingled
with the discussive Medicaments. For when the Tunicles of the Veins (out of
which the blood is poured forth) are somewhat bruised, they ought then to be a
little strained together, bound fast, and condensed, lest that the new matter
drawn thither by pain be poured forth; since that if in the beginning only
Digestives be administered, they will not only discuss the blood poured forth of
the Veins, but attract and draw unto the part that blood that is in the bruised
small Veins. Afterward, that the little contused or bruised Veins may return
unto their Natural state, Digestives alone are to be made use of. For this end
and purpose, some there be (now this indeed is the best kind of Remedy
especially for those that are beaten) that wrap about the sick person the Skin
of a Ram new flaid off, and whilst it is yet hot, besprinkled with Salt, Myrtle
Berries, and the Powder of Watercresses; or if such a skin may not
conveniently be gotten, they anoint the Patient with the Oil of Roses, of
Myrtles, and of Earthworms, with which they mingle the Powder of red Roses, or
Myrtle Berries; and the day following such a like Liniment may be administered;

Take Unguent Dialthaea three ounces; Oil of Earthworms, Camomil, and Dill, of
each one ounce; Turpentine two ounces; the meal of Fenugreek, the powder of red
Roses, and Myrtles, of each half an ounce; Saffron one scruple: make a
Liniment, or an Unguent with a sufficient quantity of Wax.

If there be any particular Contusion, such a like Liniment may at the first be
administered;

Take Oil of Roses, of Myrtles, of Camomil, of each one ounce; the white of one
Egg; the powder of Myrtles and Roses, of each two drams: mingle, etc.

After this, on the third day, let the part affected be fomented with the
Decoction of Camomile, Wormwood, and Cummin.

The next following Liniment may likewise be administered. But now in the curing
of the Suggillation the most efficacious Remedy is the Root of the Herb
Sigillum Solomonis, or Solomon's Seal; which either new gathered, or else in the
Winter season macerated in Wine, and bruised, and then applied in the form of a
Cataplasm oftentimes in one only night wholly takes away the Suggillation, so
that the Native heat returns unto the part affected. Or,

Take the Roots of both the Consounds, of each three ounces; Camomil and
Melilot flowers, of each two small handfuls; the meal of Barley, Fenugreek, and
Beans, of each one ounce; the powder of Wormwood, half an ounce; Cummin seed
one dram; Saffron half a scruple: Mingle them, and make a Decoction for a
Cataplasm.

There is likewise commended a musty or moldy Nut bruised, Reddish Seed, with
dried Figgs; Mustard Seed with Vinegar, Rue with Honey. Or,

Take the Root of Wake-Robin or Cuckowpint while it is green, an ounce and
half; Solomon's Seal four ounces; these Roots being shred small, pour upon them
the water of Elder flowers, white Lillies, and Bean flowers, of each four
ounces, Wine Vinegar two ounces, Alom six drams, one Gall of a Bull; let them
stand and digest for the space of eight days, and every day during that time
let them be well shaken together.

In this Water let Linen Clothes be well soaked, and so applied unto the part
affected. Or,

Take Pigeons Blood, Cummin, Camomile, of each one dram; the meal of Fenugreek,
half a dram; Celtick Spikenard one scruple, Malmsey as much as is sufficient;
make a Liniment.

In special, in a Swelling (especially if there be a Leaden and wan color
after Venesection) there may be fitly applied the Oil of Rue, and the Leaves of
common Rue, boiled in common Oil imposed upon the place affected.

But if the Malady be not remedied by these medicaments, neither the blood that
is shed forth without the Vessels may by them be dispersed, then if the place
will bear it, Cupping-glasses are to be administered; which are the most
effectual Remedy for the extracting of whatsoever is contained in a deep place;
and moreover if need require, Scarifications are also to be made use of, that
some of the Blood may manifestly be evacuated and emptied forth.

But now if by all these there cannot be made that Resolution of the Blood that
ought to be, and withal if there be present any tokens and signs of a
suppuration, as for example, if the place swel up a little and appear soft to
the touch; if there be a certain bearing pain, and a redness begin to appear
round about, then the suppuration (in the common and received Opinion and
Judgment of Surgeons) is to be helped on and by all means to be furthered.
The Suppuration being thus finished and wrought, the Ulcer is then to be purged
and cleansed, filled up with Flesh, and at length closed up with a Cicatrice.
Yet notwithstanding in the use of these suppuratives great caution is to be
had; and of these only such as are gentle, mild, and moderate, are to be
administered. For if there be any error committed in the use of these, and that
we be not extraordinary careful in this point, there may easily be excited in
the part a sordid and filthy Ulcer, and a putridness withal. When therefore some
of the latter Surgeons and those of our time well consider the Premises, and
what we have said, they advise, that when we perceive that the Contusion is
converted and turned into an Impostume, a perfect suppuration is not then to be
expected. For if the Pus or purulent matter that is generated from the
congealed and clotted blood be any long time detained and kept in the place
affected, it may then excite and cause many evils, as Fevers, pains, and an
extraordinary putridness; and may likewise corrupt the near neighboring parts,
the Nerves, and the Bones; whereupon afterward Ulcers of dangerous consequence,
and Fistulaes also even from hence oftentimes take their Original. Neither
likewise do these admit of any Emollient and suppurating Emplasters and
Cataplasms; in regard that by these a putridness, and those other evils and
mischiefs that are wont from thence to arise, may easily be excited in the
part. But they counsel and advise us rather that such a place wherein there is
contained any clotted blood (which now exciteth the Apostem) be forthwith
opened with a Penknife; and that in the Wound made by Incision there be
conveyed in a Tent anointed with Unguent Aegyptiack; and that the whole place be
well senced and covered with some fit and convenient Emplaster that may preserve
the Native heat thereof, and defend it from putridness. And this they conceive
is more especially to be observed, if the contusion be made in the Sides, the
Belly, or the Back. For then there is diligent heed to be taken, whether or no
on the third, fourth, or fifth day (in that place wherein the Contusion or
bruising happened) there arise any Swelling with a pain, and thenceforth from
day to day increase; and whether or no there be a beating pain excited; and
that the sick Person cannot well endure that the said place be touched; and
whether there be another kind of redness appearing in the Circumference; and
whether the breathing be difficult; and some kind of preternatural heat
discovering it self in the Body. For wherever these things appear, (albeit
there be appearing no wanness or Leaden color in the external parts) it is a
sign and token that the Pus or corrupt filth is gotten together, and that the
Impostume is excited. Whereupon (lest that the Pus convert it self unto the
more inward parts, and there raise as it were Conny-burrows (for so they term
them) and gnawing assunder eat through the more inward parts, and so by this
means hasten upon the sick Party a sudden Death, or long continuing Diseases,
the the place is speedily to be opened; for the place being thus opened, the
Pus very easily issues forth. Let the Wound be afterward handled and ordered
as we said before; and herein we must not neglect or omit Venesection, and
Vulnerary Potions; but they conceive that there is scarcely any, or at least
very little benefit arising and accrewing to the Patient from Emollients and
Suppuratives.

But if the Contusion be great, or that any error has been committed in the
Cure, or that the place begin to look black ahd bluish, and to be mortified
(by reason of the suffocation of the Native heat, so that a Gangrene and
Mortification be feared, as like to ensue) then in the first place
Scarification is to be administered; or likewise, if need so require,
Cupping-glasses are to be applied, that so the corrupt blood may be evacuated.
After this the part is to be fomented with warm Vinegar, or the Decoction made
of the Reddish Root, of Serpentaria or Vipers Grass, Cuckowpint, Solomon's Seal,
and Wine as much as will suffice. For such like Remedies dissolve the clotted
blood, and draw it forth from the very bottom unto the outmost part of the
Skin. And after let there be applied the Diachylon-Flower-de-luce Emplaster. Or,

Take Southernwood, Cumin Seed, Camomilo Flowers, of each one dram; the Juice
of Wake-robbin or Cuckowpint as much as will suffice; make hereof a Cataplasm.
Or,

Take Oylan ounce and half, Wax an ounce, the Juice of Marjoram an ounce and
half; let them dissolve together at the Fire, and then add of the Spirit of
Wine one ounce.

And to conclude, that which Paraeus advises is to be taken notice of; to wit,
that in the contusion of the Muscles (and especially those about the Ribs) the
Flesh a little swells up, and becomes as it were snotty and purulent;
insomuch that if it be pressed down and squeezed together is sends forth a
flatulent Air, with a certain kind of low noise and gentle hissing, and withal
the print and impression of the Fingers remains, and is to be seen for some
while after. And thereupon (in that void space that the Flesh separating it self
from the Bones has lest) there is a purulent and rotten filth gathered
together, by which there is caused a syderation and putrefaction. If therefore
this shall happen, the Malady is speedily to be taken in hand, the best means
used, and the part most strictly and closely to be drawn together; and
furthermore, Oxycroceum or Ireat Diachylon, or the like Digestives are to be
administered.

And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken touching Tumors arising from
the Blood; there now follow those Tumors that arise and proceed from Choler.

Chap. 17. Of the Tumor Herpes.
HAving hitherto treated of and explained the Tumors arising from the blood; it
now remains in the next place, that we likewise explain and declare those
Tumors that proceed from Choler. Among the which the Erysipelas is commonly
wont to be first propounded and reckoned up. But since that, as we conceive,
the Erysipelas (as it is now adays with us) or as it has been by the Ancients
vulgarly termed, Rosa, may more fitly be recounted among the Tumors arising
from the blood; we have therefore treated thereof above, among the Tumors
proceeding from blood, in the seventh Chapter; where we handle the Erysipelas.

But now Herpes is truly and properly a Tumor proceeding and taking its
original from Choler. And it is termed Herpes from its creeping; to wit,
because it seems to creep like unto a Snake; and for this reason, because
that no sooner does one part seem to be healed and well, but the Disease
instantly creeps unto the next adjoining parts. And although (to speak truly)
there are very many Maladies that Creep along; yet in special, that Tumor is by
Physicians termed Herpes that is excited in the superficies of any part (from
yellow choler sincere or simple, that is, severed from all other humors) and
from thence creeps along unto the parts next adjoining. For as the Erysipelas
arises from blood very than and choletick; so the Herpes proceeds from
excrementitious Choler. Celsus seems to propound and mention Herpes under the
name and notion of Ignis Sacer, or the Sacred Fire: whereas other Latin
Physicians understand an Erysipelas under this appellation of Ignis Sacer.

The Causes.
The containing Cause of Herpes being sincere, pure, and sharp Choler, severed
and separated from the rest of the humors; which by its implanted thinness
penetrateth and pierces even unto the outward or Scarf-skin, and is by and
through it diffused; it hence appears and by consequence follows that the
Tumor or swelling in it is yet less than in an Erysipelas. For as in an
Erysipelas the Swelling is less than in a Phlegmone by reason of the small store
and thinness of the matter that is found in the one more, in the other less: so
again in the Herpes, the swelling is less than in the Erysipelas, for the very
same cause. But as for the Antecedent and Procatartick Causes, they are almost
the very same, as in an Erysipelas; yet notwithstanding somewhat more disposed
to the generating of an excrementitious yellow choler, then to the breeding of
a choleric Blood.

The Differences.
The Differences of Herpes are taken from the diversity of the containing
Cause, and the humor: For although every Herpes has its original from Choler
and a thin humor; yet notwithstanding, since there are certain degrees of its
tenuity, thinness and purity; if that humor, or choler, be simple and of a thin
substance, then the Affect that reteineth the general name is termed a simple
or single Herpes. But then if there be any portion of Phlegm mingled therewith,
there is produced an Herpes that causes and raises little Bladders in the
Skin like unto the Millet, whereupon it is called Herpes Miliaris. And lastly,
if the Choler be more sharp and biting, so that it eat through the skin unto
which it adhereth, it is then termed Herpes Esthiomenos, that is, the eating
Herpes; and this same by Galen (in his 14. Book of the Method of Physic, Chap.
17.) is called absolutely and only Herpes, and is almost of the same nature
with an exulcerated Erysipelas; from which notwithstanding it differs in the
thinness of the humor. For so says Galen in the place before alleged: It is
(says he) an exceeding thin humor that exciteth the Herpes; even so thin, that
it does not only pass through all the interior parts, which likewise are of a
fleshy substance, but also the very Skin it self, even unto the utmost part of
the Scarf-skin, the which alone (in regard that it is kept in and retained by
it) it both gnaweth, and likewise eats through; whenas if it could also in
like manner pass through it by sweating, it would not then excite and produce
any Ulcer. But now the exulcerated Erysipelas and the Herpes Esthiomenos differ
likewise in this regard, that the exulcerated Erysipelas does not only seiz
upon the Skin, but also upon some part of the Flesh that is underneath it; but
the Herpes exulcerateth only the Skin.

Signs Diagnostick.
In regard that the Herpes is apparent and manifest unto the Senses, it is
therefore easily known. For it is a broad Tumor that has little or no height
in it; so that the part is scarcely lifted up at al; but may seem rather to be
exasperated, then to swel up unto any height. There is moreover present to
accompany it a certain kind of hardness, and a pain, and as it were a certain
sense and feeling of an heat and burning. But the Herpes Miliaris has diverse
small Pustules like unto Millet, in the very top and outside of the Skin; of the
which although some one or more of them be cured, yet notwithstanding there will
be still others arising; so that the Malady may seem by creeping still to move
forward unto the adjacent parts: and if the Pustules be broken there will
something that is of a quality and resemblance betwixt Pus and rotten dregs flow
forth, the place it self will be very red; and oftentimes also it will have a
middle color, neither ablosutely red, or pale, but between both. But then the
Herpes Esthiomenos (or the Herpes that eats through) is, when there appear
many small creeping Ulcers, and holes, which yet notwithstanding proceed not
beyond the Skin; or, as Celsus (in his fifth Book Chap. 26.) writes, It is a
Malady with an excoriation and exulceration of the highest and utmost Skin,
without any height at all, broad, somewhat pale and wan, yet unequally, the
middle whereof becomes whole and sound, when at the same time the extreme parts
thereof are in their progress and motion forward; and oftentimes that which
seemed to be altogether whole and sound is again exulcerated; and the Skin that
is next about it (which the Malady is even now ready to seiz upon) is somewhat
more swollen and harder, and has a Color changing from Red to that which is
dark and blackish.

But, that we may likewise here give you to understand this, the more modern
and late Physicians (whom we commonly style Barbarous) almost all of them
comprehend the Herpes Miliaris and the eating Herpes under the name of Formica,
as being deceived either by the likeness of names, or else by Ignorance;
whereas notwithstanding with the Grecians Murmecia, that is, Formica, is a
certain kind of Warts.

Prognostics.
1. The Herpes (albeit there be no danger in it, unless it be greatly
exulcerated, and extremely putrid) yet notwithstanding it is not easily cured;
and usually the Disease is of a long continuance, unless there be (in the Cure)
a due regard had unto the whole body.

2. Accordingly as the Choler from which the Herpes arises is more or less
peccant and offensive, so likewise is the Herpes to be accounted more or less
dangerous.

The Cure.
That so therefore the Herpes may be cured, there ought to be a due regard had
unto the Cause Antecedent, and Continent, as also unto the part affected; and
in the first place, and especially of the Antecedent. Since therefore that
Herpes has its original from yellow Choler and a salt humor, the said yellow
Choler is first especially to be purged out of the Body; for unless the Body be
purged, the sick Person will never perfectly be cured and made sound. For
although upon the applying of Topical Medicaments, in some one place the part
may seem to be found and well; yet notwithstanding it soon breaks forth again
in another. If the matter be extraordinary thin (as it is evermore in Herpes)
then Sudorisicks ought likewise to have their due and proper place. But if
there be any thing of Phlegm, or of the serous wheyish humor therewithal
mingled, then some of those Medicaments that purge Phlegm and Whey may therewith
be mingled. The Diet likewise that is prescribed ought to be such as is fit and
convenient where Choler and the adust humor offends.

Now when we have in the first place done what is requisite as to the
Antecedent Cause, we are in the next place to take into consideration that very
Cause that we call containing. And therefore first of all, when there is in the
Skin an extreme and intense heat of Choler, then Coolers are to be administered,
that may both extinguish the fervent heat of the Choler, and likewise repel
and drive back moderately; such as are those Refrigerating Medicaments that are
commonly wont to be administered in the Erysipelas; as for instance, Lettice,
Knotgrass, and Navel-wort (which last some call Venus-Navel, or Kidney-wort) and
the like. After that the fervency of the heat is somewhat abated and qualified,
that which remains behind is to be digested and dissipated by Medicaments
that are rather of a drying Nature than such as moisten: as for example,
Linseed boiled in Wine and Oil, and the spume or froth of Silver. And these are
more convenient in a simple heat. But now if Pustules shall chance to happen,
because that they are sometimes broken and putrefie, (lest that there be excited
in the part a putridness) those Refrigerating and Repelling Medicaments ought
not to be cold and waterish, but cold and dry. And therefore in the first
place, we are to make use of the young Shoots of the Vines, the tops of the
Black-berry bush (or as some call it the Dog-berry tree) the Leaves of the
Sallow tree, and Plantane. Here is likewise useful the Cataplasm that is made
of the Rinds of the Pomegranate, and Barley meal boiled in Wine. There may also
be administered, Galls, Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate flowers, Bole-armenick, and
Terra Sigillata. And when at length there is need of Digestives, there may be
Cataplasms compounded of the Meal of Millet, Beans, Flax, and Lupines, boiled
in Wine. If the Pustules break, and the Pus flow forth, there are likewise
Cleansers to be administered. For this end and purpose, this following is fit
and proper:

Take Plantane, Shepherds Pouch, the tops of the Bramble bush, of each one
handful; the cups of green Acorns twelve pair; Myrtle leaves one ounce;
Pomegranate flowers, Myrrh, and Frankincense, of each half an ounce; boil them
in Water out of the Smiths Forge. Or,

Take Rosin, Turpentine washed with Rose water, of each one ounce; Oil of Roses
half an ounce; the Yelks of two Eggs, the juice of two sweet Oranges: Mingle
them, etc.

In the Herpes Miliaris this is likewise very useful:

Take Chalk, Oil of Olives, and Vinegar, of each of much as will suffice:
Mingle them and make a Liniment.

Valescus de Taranta, in a proper and peculiar Chapter of the cure of Formica,
commends for a secret this that follows:

Take the moist juycy Wool of a Sheep, let it be held to the fire until it be
black, and then let it be made into a Powder: afterward let it be mingled with
Rose water that it may become like unto Varnish; with the which let the part
affected (with a feather) be anointed thrice every day, until it be well. Or,

Take Barley meal, Bean meal, the meal of Lentils, of each one ounce and half;
the powder of red Roses, Wormwood, the prickly Dock, of each half an ounce:
boil them in the Decoction of Pomegranate rinds, Pomegranate flowers, Plantane:
add hereto afterward the Oil of Myrtle, and Honey, of each a sufficient
quentity, and make an Unguent.

Unto which (if use and need require it) we may also add and mingle the flower
of Brass, and such like. And the very same likewise are convenient in the
Herpes Esthiomenos; as for instance:

Take Sumach, Plantane, Galls, of each an ounce and half; of branny Bread one
ounce; Powder of Roses half an ounce: boil them all in Wine, and make a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take cleansed Barley, Lentiles, Beans, of each one handful; Arnogloss (or
Lambs Tongue) two handsuls; Pomegranate flowers, Roses, the grains of Myrtle,
Sumach, of each half an ounce. Let all except the Barley be grossly poudered,
and then boil them in Wine until the Barley be soft, and make hereof a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Rinds of the Pine tree burnt and washed a dram and half; Ceruss three
drams; Frankincense one dram; Goats fat six drams; Oil of Myrtle two ounces;
Wax at much as will suffice: make herewith an Unguent.

But if we have a mind to dry more than ordinarily, we may ad the prepared
file-dust of Iron, the flower of Brass, and Lime washed.

This is likewise commended:

Take the spume or froth of Silver half an ounce; the juice of Leeks and Beets,
of each sive ounces: Mingle them, etc.

Hieronymus Fabricius writes that (with very good success) he made use of this
following Remedy:

Take the juice of Tobacco three ounces; green or Citron-coloured Wax two
ounces; Rosin of the Pine tree an ounce and half; Turpentine one ounce; Oil of
Myrtles as much as will suffice for the making and forming of a soft Seoer-cloth.

But if the Ulcer be already putresied, we must then betake our selves to the
Remedies that are stronger and more forcible; such as are the little sweet Bals
of Andro, Musa, and Polyidas: a for example;

Take Litharge, and Ceruss, of each two ounces; the Rinds of Pomegranates half
an ounce; Myrrh one dram; Frankincense a dram and half; the flower of Brass and
Alum, of each a dram; and with the Oil of Myrtle and Way (a sufficient
quantity of each) make an Unguent.

But if these will not serve the turn, and that the Ulcer and putrefaction creep
further, and become broader, we must then have recourse unto the stronger sort
of Remedies.

They refer likewise unto choletick Tumors those that we call Phlyctaenae,
Impetigines, Lichenes, Sudamina, and Epinyctides. But because that these little
risings or swellings proceed not from pure Choler, but from Choler mingled with
serous and salt Humors, we will therefore treat of them below, with the rest of
the Tumors of this kind.

Chap. 18. Of the Tumor Oedema.
LIke as those Tumors that we have already hitherto handled, have their
original from hot Humors; so there are likewise some certain peculiar Tumors
that arise from cold Humors; and in the first place, Oedema, that has its
original from Phlegm. For although Hippocrates, and other ancient Physicians
under the name of Oedema understand al other Tumors whatsoever in general; yet
notwithstanding those of latter times by Oedema do understand some one certain
kind of Tumor only, and this they specially term Oedema; being a Tumor that is
lax or loose, soft, without pain, yielding unto the touch and compression of
the singers, having its original from thin phlegm, or else from the more cold
and moist part of the Mass of blood.

The Causes.
The containing Cause of this Tumor is that phlegm that is contained in the
blood, to wit, if it be so increased, that it irritate and stir up the
Expulsive Faculty. For then Nature being stirred up and provoked thrusts
forth the matter out of the greater Vessels unto the less, and expels it
from the more noble parts unto the weaker, until at length it be received and
retained by the most weak and infirm part. The cold and heavy Humor it self
likewise very often by its own weight tends downwards, and also unto the
extreme parts. And thereupon it it, that although the Oedema may be excited in all parts whatsoever of the body; yet notwithstanding it chiefly and more
especially arises in the Hands, and the feet, (as it evidently appears in
Persons that are Hydropical, Cachectical, and Phthisical) in regard that those
parts are more remote from the fountain of heat. But now this Oedema is not
suddenly generated, but by degrees, and by little and little. For why? the
Humor is thick, and therefore altogether unfit for any speedy and sudden motion.

Galen, in his second Book to Glauco, and third Chapter, determines that the
Oedema is caused by a Pituitous or flegmy substance, or else by the Spirits
when they are full of vapors; and such a like Tumor or swelling happens in
dead Carcasses. From which place (as likewise from the 14. of his Method of
Physic, Chap. 4) Johannes Philippus Ingrassias, in his Book of Tumors, the
first Tome, page 113. endeavoreth to prove a twofold kind of Oedema; the one
from thin phlegm; the other from a vaporous spirit: and that (to wit, the
former) he asserteth to be a Disease; and the latter a Symptom only that
follows upon Phthisis, and the water betwixt the Skin, (one species of the
Dropsy) and the Cachexy. But yet although it be not to be denied that
Carcasses (in the very first beginning of there putrefying, and as it were a
certain kind of fermentation) swel up in some sort; yet that in the Cachexy, or
Phthisis, the Oedematose swellings of the Feet should in this same manner be
caused, I cannot easily believe; in regard that such a like putridness does not
then happen; but it is far more credible, that such like Tumors are caused from
a serous wheyish Humor abounding in the body, and descending unto the Feet, and
there abiding and sticking fast, as in a part more cold than the other parts of
the Body. And be it indeed granted and admitted, that in the similar parts
there may be some kind of slatulent Spirit collected, and that it may lift up
the part into a Tumor; yet notwithstanding this Tumor is not properly Oedema,
but is rather to be termed Empneumatosis, or Emphysema. And albeit such a like
Tumor is by Galen, in his 14. Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 4. called a
Symptom; yet we say, that Galen then uses the name of a Symptom (in the
general) for every Affect preternatural that follows another.

But if we well weigh and consider what this Tumor properly is, we affirm that
it is altogether and in all respects a Disease; in regard that it is magnitude
augmented, and for the most part an impediment and hindrance unto men in their
walking. And although such an Oedema does not indeed requite a peculiar Cure;
yet notwithstanding it is not for all that to be razed out of the number of
Diseases, and placed among the Symptoms. For those Diseases that simply depend
upon other Diseases require not any proper and peculiar kind of Cure; but those
being removed, these likewise are taken away.

But now that very Humor that is the cause of Oedema is generated by an error
and default in the sangnification; touching which we have spoken in the third
Book of our Practice, third Part, second Section, and first Chapter.

The Signs Diagnostick.
Oedema is known in this manner: The Tumor is soft, and loose; and if it be
pressed down with the singer, it easily yields and gives way by sinking, and
so there is a little pit and print of the singer left behind. For the moist
phlegm softeneth and looseneth the part, and is more thick than ordinary, and
therefore the more unfit for motion. It is either altogether without pain; or
certainly if there be any it is very little, and scarcely sensible. For the
phlegm looseneth the part; neither does it by dissolving unity excite any pain.
The color is somewhat white; there is an absence of al heat; neither is there
in this (as in other Tumors) perceived any kind of pulsation or beating. By
which said signs it is easy to discern an Oedema from other Tumors.

Prognostics.
1. Oedema in it self is a disease of no danger; for neither is the disease it
self great, neither is the cause thereof of a dangerous consequence, nor is
there any il Symptom therewithal conjoined. And if there be (as indeed there
often is) any danger unto such as are affected with this Oedema (as it happens
in the Phthisis, Cachexy, and the Dropsy) this chances not by reason of the
Oedema, but from those Diseases that the Oedema follows. Whereupon we ought
to distinguish whether the Oedema arise of it self, or else whether it follow
upon other Diseases: since that the Oedema that follows after the more noted
and considerable faults of the parts designed for Nutrition, wants not for
danger. For although it be true, that oftentimes (without any danger) the Feet
swel after Diseases of long continuance (from crudities collected by the
disease) yet notwithstanding if such like Oedema's shall happen from a
Refrigeration, or by reason of any other fault to the Liver, they are then
dangerous; and threaten death by reason of those causes upon which they depend.
But if there be no such thing joined together with the Oedema, then there is no
danger at al to be feared.

2. But yet, although Oedema be a disease without any danger; yet
notwithstanding, it is of a long continuance; for the matter is colder, and
therefore is cannot be overcome but in a longer time.

3. But yet it is terminated by a Resolution; unless (which sometimes
happens) the matter be hardened.

The Cure.
As touching the Cure, we must first of al consider (as was said before)
whether the Oedema follow any other Disease of the more noble parts. For if
this shall happen, out care ought especially to be, that the Disease upon which
it depends be taken away; since that unless this be taken away it cannot be
cured, and that if this primary Disease be removed it then vanishes of its own
accord. If yet notwithstanding the Oedema bring along with it any trouble, and
that it prove hard to be cured, it will not be amiss then to rub the part well
with Oil mingled with Salt, or to foment it with a Sponge soaked in Wine, in
which Wormwood has been boiled. But if the Oedema arise without any other
Disease, then in the first place, the cause from which the matter is supplied
is to be removed and taken away. And therefore in the very first beginning, the
course of Diet that is to be ordained must be such that in the least tends
not to the generating and breeding of phlegm, but rather such as wastes and
destroys it. And therefore let the Air in which the sick person abides be
dry; and likewise, let the meat and drink that he lives upon have a power and
quality of attenuating and drying. Let the sick party therefore be very sparing
and temperate in meat and drink, that so the Natural heat be not oppressed and
overwhelmed, and so by the weakening of it Grudities be generated; but that the
said heat may rather wast and consume those crudities, and the more fitly and
effectually work upon them. Let his Bread be well baked, and leavened: and let
him altogether abstain from bread unleavened; and let him but seldom eat either
Pot Herbs or Broths. Fish is altogether unfit for him, unless it be fresh River
fish, and of them such as are of a more solid substance, and these likewise
(even as al other his food) are to be seasoned and sauced with Spices and
drying herbs. Al endeavor must be used that the Belly may daily discharge its
office; which if of it self it cannot do, it will then be requisite that before
his meals he take some Aloes, which looseneth the Belly, and consumes and
dries up the superabundant humidity. Before meals (if it may be done without
any offense and prejudice unto the part affected) let the sick person exercise
himself, that so the superfluous moisture may be consumed, and the Native heat
excited and stirred up: and to conclude, let him sleep only in the night, and
let his sleep then likewise be but short.

Secondly, In an Oedema properly so called Venesection has no place at al; for
here the blood is no ways peccant, but only the phlegm: but the cold and crude
humors in the body are to be concocted and evacuated. And first of al, the
matter is to be digested concocted by Medicaments that heat and dry, such as
are elsewhere often propounded in the preparation of the flegmy humor; of which
a certain Hydromel or Oxymel may most fitly be compounded. But yet
notwithstanding if the humor be only wheyish, there is then no need at al of
concoction.

Afterward the matter is to be evacuated by Medicaments that draw forth the
phlegm, which are elsewhere propounded. As for what concerns the part it self
that is affected, the pituitous or flegmy humor which has flown together into
it ought to be evacuated; and this may be done by Repellers and Digestives, or
those things that discuss and scatter. But if Repellers be made use of, they
are to be administered, not so much to drive back the humor, as to confirm and
strengthen the part, and to dry up and consume the ma^ter; unto which likewise
there may not unfitly be added some of those Remedies that have in them a power
and virtue to discuss. To this end and purpose, Galen makes use of a new
Sponge (or if a new one may not be had, than any other) thoroughly wet and
soaked in Nitre and Ley, and Posca, that is, a mixture of Vinegar and Water.
There may likewise be used the courser part of Hemp (which we call Hurds)
instead of the Sponge. Which said Medicament if it accomplish not our desire,
the quantity of the Vinegar may then be augmented, and a little Alum therewith
mingled. And if neither this effect our purpose, nor satisfy our expectation,
we ought then to betake our selves unto those that are stronger and more
forcible. As,

Take Flowers of red Roses, Camomile, the Leaves of Myrtle, and of Wormwood, of
each half an handful, Pomegranate Flowers, and the Cypress Nut, of each one
handful; Alum, and common Salt, of each one ounce and half; boil them in
Vinegar and Water, or in Ley, and so apply it with a Sponge, a Linen Cloth, or
Hurds. Or else,

Take the Leaves of the Sallow Tree, Myrtle, Wormwood, the Flowers of Camomile,
and of St. John's Wort, of each half a handful: let them be all boiled in Ley
until all the Ley be consumed; afterward, let them be well pounded and bruised,
and then add the Oil of Myrtle, of Roses, and of Wormwood, of each one ounce;
Salt half a handful, Nitre one ounce; make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate Flowers, of each half a handful; Flowers of
Camomile and red Roses, and the Leaves of Wormwood, of each half a handful, the
meal of Barley and Lupines, of each half an ounce. Alum three drams; Aloes and
Myrtle, of each one dram; Saffron one scruple; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water and Vinegar; and make a Cataplasm.

Afterward in the state we are to proceed unto those things that discuss and
dry much. For this purpose there is commended the Water of Lime, or a Ley of
the Vine ashes applied with a Sponge; Or,

Take Marshmallow Roots, one handful, the Flowers of Camomile and Melilote, of
each half a handful; boil them in Wine and Vinegar, adding afterward of Hoggs
Fat two ounces, old Oil half an ounce, the Spume or Froth of Silver one ounce;
Mingle them, and make a Cataplasm.

That Medicament is also very efficacious that is made of Rue, Honey, and Salt.
Or,

Take Sulphur one ounce, Pigeons Dung ten drams, Bean meal one ounce and half,
the meal of Lupines one ounce, Honey one ounce and half; and so make a
Cataplasm with the Decoction of Camomile flowers. Or,

Take Sulphur, Myrrh, Salt, of each one ounce, old Oil and Vinegar, of each as
much as will suffice, and make a Liniment. Or,

Take Bryony roots two ounces, Wormwood, Bearfoots, Camomile, Melilote, of each
half a handful; boil them in Water of Honey, and being well bruised and searced,
add to them the powder of red Roses, the Meal of Beans and Lupines, of each
half an ounce; old Oil as much as will suffice, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Root of Asphodil, and the wild Cucumber, white Lilly roots, and
Flowers of Camomile, of each one handful; boil them until they be soft, and
then add of Leaven, Tartar, washed or slaked Lime, and Sulphur, of each an
ounce, Frankincense six drams, the Fat of a Heart, the Marrow of the Thigh-bones
of Oxen, of each ten drams; make a Cataplasm.

There is likewise commended Ox dung, or Cow dung; for it both mollifieth and
resolves; of which with Sulphur, Frankincense, Honey, Vinegar, and the Broth
of a Cabbage or Colwort, there may be made a Cataplasm.

In the applying of all which Medicaments, it is requisite that we observe,
that before ever the Emplasters, or Unguents, and Liniments, be applied, the
part be first made hot by frictions or rubbings and fomentations; for otherwise
the Medic^ments will not easily effect and accomplish our desire and
expectation, by reason of the coldness of the part. The frictions may be made
with hot Linen Clothes; the fomentations may be of the Decoction of Camomile
flowers, and Melilote flowers, and of the Leaves of Betony, Sage, Rosemary,
Lavender, Organy, Wormwood and the like. For by the said fomentations and
frictions the heat together with the blood is called back unto the part; and
the excrements and superfluous humors are somewhat dispersed and scattered.

But if it be so that the Oedema seem to wax hard, and to pass into a Scirrhus,
then we are likewise together with the former, to make use of Emollients or
mollifying Medicaments. And for this use and purpose there is to be applied
Vinegar, in which the Lapis Pyrites (we commonly call it the Fire-stone) or a
piece of Millstone taken red hot out of the Fire has been quenched; and after
this the part is to be anointed with old Oil in the which the Root of the Wild
Cucumber, and Marshmallow Roots have been boiled. Or,

Take the Mucilage of Marshmallow roots, Linseed, Fenugreek, Goose fat, the
Marrow of a Leg of Veal, the Flower-de-luce root, Camomile flowers, of each two
ounces; Styrax liquid, Mirrh, Frankincense, and oil of Camomile, of each one
ounce; Wax as much as will serve the turn; and so make an Emplaster.

But touching these Remedies we shall speak further, when we come to treat of a
Scirrhus.

And although indeed it be true, that the Oedema is most frequently discussed
and dispersed by Resolution; yet sometimes notwithstanding (as is apparent out
of Hippocrates in his Book of Prognostics Text 27.) it comes to a
suppuration, but this is but seldom, to wit, if it be in a place somewhat hotter
than ordinary, or else that any other humor be therewith mingled, as it
happens in the Oedema Phlegmonodes; and this if it happen there is then
perceived in the next adjoining part both a pain, and a pulsation or beating.
And therefore at such a time the Suppuration is to be furthered and hastened on
by those Medicaments that we call Emplastick; such as are Diachilon simplex,
and other Remedies made of the Roots of Marshmallows, the common Mallows,
Linseed, Fenugreek, with the Fat of a Hen, or such like. As for example,

Take Bearfoot, Marshmallows, the Roots of white Lillies, of each one handful;
boil them, and when they are sufficiently bruised, add to them the meal of
Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each two ounces; Hogs Grease, and Hens fat, of each
three ounces; Saffron half a dram, and thereof make a Cataplasm.

The matter being concocted and suppurated, we are not to expect a spontaneous
or self-effecting Cure, in regard it will be a long time ere it come to this.
Wherefore let the place be opened either with the Instrument for that purpose,
or else with a potential Cautery; and afterward let the Impostume be thoroughly
cleansed and purged with Turpentine, Frankincense, Honey, the Juice of
Wormwood, and Honey of Roses: furthermore, let the Cavity or hollowness be
filled up with the Unguent Basilicon, the Unguent Aureum, and the Unguent of
Betony, and such like; and at length let there be a Cicatrice drawn over it.

Chap. 19. Of a Scirrhus.
HAving treated of those Tumors that arise from the Blood, Choler, and Phlegm;
and it now remaining that we handle those Tumors that arise from Melancholy
and black Choler; and it being so that a Scirrhus (to speak the truth) arises
from both Melancholy and Phlegm, the next thing therefore that we have to do,
is to treat of the Scirrhus. Now then a Scirrhus is a hard Tumor without any
sense or pain (or if there be any it is certainly but very little) arising from
a thick humor that is Viscid, Clammy, and Cold; such as it the melancholy
humor and phlegm fixed and fastened in the parts. For there are two humors, (to
wit, Melancholy and Phlegm) out of which either singly and severally, or else
mingled together, the Scirrhus arises, as they commonly determine. Now here
(in this place) by Melancholy we are to understand, not that black humor which
arises either from the Natural and adust Melancholy humor, or else from
yellow Choler adust; but here we are to understand that Melancholy that is
Natural, and properly called the Melancholy humor, to wit, the thick and more
feculent or dreggy part of the Blood, or else likewise the Natural Melancholy
Excrement, or else also (thirdly) a thick humor arsing from an hardened
Inflammation; the which if any one shall please to term Preternatural, I will not
in that gainsay him. But by Phlegm we are not to understand that Natural Phlegm,
or the Phlegmatic humor (which is moist and thin, and from which the Oedema
proceeds) but a thick Phlegm, extraordinary dry, Glutimus, Visci^, and Clammy.
Of both these humors re^^^ed in the part over long (whenas the more subtle and
thin parts thereof are vanished and gone, and the more thick and gross parts
left behind) is the Scirrhus generated. For although some humor that is thick
may flow unto some certain part; yet notwithstanding a humor so thick and
glutinous that it instantly causes and produces a Scirrhus, does not easily
flow unto any part whatsoever, but it by degrees and after some time becomes
such in the very place affected, whenas the thinner part of the humor being
wasted and consumed, the thicker and grosser are left to remain behind. From
whence it is, that (for the greatest part) the Scirrhus follows upon other
Tumors (as for instance, Inflammations, Erysipela's and Oedema's) when they are
not sufficiently and rightly cured, and that the thinner parts by means of
heating Medicaments are either unseasonable, or overmuch and excessively
dissipated; or else are by Repellers and Astringents repressed, so that the
more thick and gross parts only are left behind; which being further
incrass^^ed and thickened, do cause and produce this Tumor, that (as we said
before) is hard, and without pain and sense. From all which Premises it may
easisily be collected, that this Tumor is not suddenly all at once generated,
but by little and little.

Yet notwithstanding Paraeus dissenteth from this common and received Opinion;
and asserteth that the Scirrhus is caused, not from the excrementitious humors,
but from an alimentary juice (yet such as is more thick than is fit and
convenient for the nourishing of the flesh) when it becomes hardened; unto
which notwithstanding there is (says he) another humor adjoined: and this
hardening proceeds (as from diverse other causes, so likewise) from an
Inflammation; not that the blood that is not discussed or suppurated is thus
hardened, or condensed by the over frequent and unseasonable application of
cold things; but that the blood being discussed by the vehement heat of an
Inflammation, the juice and moisture of that part that was inflamed is thickened
and hardened.

But now a Scirrhus is twofold, viz. Legitimate (as we may so term it) and
Illegitimate. Which said distinction (as Fallopius truly tells us) is not taken
from the diversity or the matter, and the containing Cause, but from the diverse
and different accidents and proprieties of the matter. For before such time as
all the more subtle and thin parts are either dissipated or consumed, there is
as yet no absolute Scirrhus, neither do all things then want sense, neither is
there as yet any perfect hardness appearing. But if (all the thinner parts being
wasted and consumed) only the thicker shall remain behind, and these shall harden
even almost unto the hardness of a Stone, and that the part is void not only of
al pain, but likewise even of al sense; then the Scirrhus is now already
absolute and perfect. But perhaps there can nothing be said to the contrary,
why we may not term the Scirrhus that is not as yet absolute impure likewise,
and bastard, or spurious. Or if this distaste, and please not; the Scirrhus (we
say) may furthermore be divided into that which is pure, and truly so called,
and that that is impure and spurious or counterfeit: and that may be called
pure which has its Original from melancholy alone, or from thick phlegm; and
that impure and spurious which has another humor mingled together with it,
from whence it is called Scirrhus Phlegmonodes, or Scirrhus Cancrosus. There be
some certain Authors that give us also another difference of a Scirrhus, from
the parts wherein it resideth. For although in very many parts it has no
peculiar appellation, but it only defined by adjoining to it the name of the
part affected (a^ we say the Scirrhus of the Liver, and the Scirrhus of the
Spleen) yet notwithstanding in (...) certain parts it has a proper
appellation: for in the N^^es it is called Ganglion, in the Glandul^^ (or
kernels) Struma, in the Joints Porus; of which in their proper places.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Scirrhus is known from two signs especially, to wit, the hardness, and the
absence or want of pain: unto which this may likewise be added, That when it is
pressed it wants sense; and then we say, that the Scirrhus is altogether
absolute and confirmed. And it is not to be wondered at, that the part thus
affected should have no sense, or that there should be so little, if any sense
at al, in a Scirrhus; for both the influx of the natural spirits is hindered by
the matter that is impacted and fast fixed; and also the very temper it self of
the Member is so changed that the part becomes altogether stupid. Others there
are that add other signs also; viz. a Color somewhat black and wan; which yet
notwithsanding is only a sign of that Scirrhus that arises from the Melancholy
Humor; and if the temper be very cold, by reason of a thick and cold Humor, it
is then likewise perceived by the touch.

The Differences.
The Differences are taken from the Sense, either dull, or none at al. For if
there be no sense at al present, the Scirrhus is now Legitimate and absolute:
but if there be yet any manner of sense left remaining, it is not Legitimate
and absolute. There are some likewise that add this, that in a Legitimate
Scirrhus there grow hairs upon the part. The color will inform us whether it
has its original from phlegm, or from Melancholy; this color in phlegm is
something white; but in Melancholy, blackish, and wan.

Prognostics.
As for what concerns the Event, that Scirrhus that is altogether destitute
of al sense, is incurable.

2. But that Scirrhus that is not destitute of al sense, although it be not
altogether incurable, (especially if at the beginning fit and proper Remedies
be applied) yet notwithstanding it is not very easily cured; especially if it
stick in any one of the more noble parts, as the Liver, or the Spleen likewise;
since that the Liver and the Spleen will hardly bear or admit of those so strong
Medicaments which are requisite in a Scirrhus that is perfectly hardened; and
those that are weak avail but little or nothing.

3. If there be any hopes of a Cure in a Scirrhus, yet this is not to be
brought unto perfection, but in a long time. For to mollify and soften the
matter that is thick, cold, and hard, is a thing that is not easily done;
neither indeed can it be done at al, but by little and little, and in a longer
time than ordinary.

4. But when they may be cured, it is to be done in a twofold manner: either by
Resolution and Discussion; or else by Maturation and Suppuration. But it is
seldom that they are suppurated, and then likewise not without danger: for when
they are suppurated they easily degenerate and pass into Cancers; especially
those of them that proceed from a Melancholy Humor.

The Cure.
As for what therefore concerns the Cure, although there be a plain and
absolute Tumor or Swelling already appearing, and that in the Cure we ought
especially to have respect unto the containing Cause; and that we are to do our
endeavor that it may be removed by Topical Remedies; notwithstanding the
Antecedent cause is also not altogether to be neglected; and here we must
prevent the augmentation of the Malady by the supply of any new matter.

Wherefore (first of al) whatsoever it be that generateth thick blood is
carefully to be avoided; and such meats are to be chosen that are easily
concocted, and such as make a supply of good Nutriment; and such as incline and
tend to humidity and moistness.

Secondly, the Humors (whether phlegmatic or melancholic) are (being first well
prepared) to be evacuated by convenient and fit Medicaments; touching which we
have already elsewhere spoken.

But thirdly, and principally, we ought to use our utmost endeavor, that the
Containing Cause and the matter that makes the Scirrhus be quite and clean
taken away. But as for Repellers, here is no place for them. For since that the
matter is both thick and cold, it will not yield nor give place unto Repellers;
but rather by the use of them is the more incrassated and thickened, and as it
were impacted, and made to stick the faster in the part. Neither likewise are
those Medicaments that greatly heat and dry fit and proper in this place; for
by these the matter is only the more hardened. But those Medicaments that are
here most conveniently administered, are, those that have a virtue and quality
to mollify that that is hardened, and such as afterward discuss and scatter
the matter when it is softened. Malactick or mollifying Medicaments are
therefore to be administered and applied, that are of a hot temperament, and yet
notwithstanding but meanly, and not greatly drying; but neither yet manifestly
moistening: but such as obtain as it were a certain middle nature between
Moisteners and Dryers, and such as accomplish (as it were) a resolution and
softening of the hardened substance. And such are, The Oil of sweet Almonds,
the Oil of Camomil, and white Lillies, Hens fat, Goose fat, Swines fat, the
Marrow of Veal, and of a Heart, the Mucilage of Marsh-mallow Roots, Linseed, and
Fenugreek; and such are likewise the Leaves and Roots themselves, of
Marshmallows, Mallows, Linseed, Fenugreek, the Root of white Lillies,
Bears-foot, dried Figs that are full and fat, Wax, etc. And stronger than these,
are, Bears fat, old Oil, Bdellium, Styrax liquid, liquid Pitch, fat Rosins,
Ammoniacum, Galbanum. But we must carefully observe, when those Medicaments
that are more mild and moderate are to be made use of, and when the stronger
sort.

In a Scirrhus that is but newly begun we are to use those Medicaments that are
of the milder sort: but in an old and inveterate Scirrhus that is become hard,
those Remedies that are more strong and prevalent are to be put in practice.
Moreover, the very Body it self, and likewise the part affected, are to be
considered. For unto an hard body the stronger sort of Medicaments are to be
applied; but for the tender and more soft bodies the milder and gentler sort of
Remedies are most convenient. The part if it be harder and thicker (as if the
Scirrhus be in a Tendon or Ligament) then we ought to administer and make use
of the stronger Medicaments. And in the general we are to observe this for a
Rule, That we handle the Scirrhus with all manner of care and caution. For if we
administer those Remedies that do overmuch and more than is fitting Resolve,
then (as we also already said before) the Scirrhus passes into a stony
hardness. But if we too much mollify, there is then a fear the the Scirrhus
may degenerate into a Cancer. Wherefore it is most safe in this case to follow
the counsel and advice of the Ancients, that we use not alone any Medicament
that has in it a power either only to dry, or only to moisten; but that we
administer such Remedies as mollify and discuss; not together, but by turns,
and one after the other; or otherwise that we mingle together Emollients or
Mollifiers with Digestives. And for this use Galen commends the fomentation
of Vinegar, wherein the fire-hot Pyrites stone has been extinguished in this
manner; Let the part be fomented with the Decoction of Marshmallows, Mallows,
Bears-foot, the seed of Fenugreek, Linseed, and the like Emollients. Afterward,
take the Pyrites or Fire-stone, or a piece of a Millstone, and having made it
red hot cast it into the Vinegar; or else let the Vinegar be cast and poured
upon that hot and glowing stone, and then let the vapor of the Vinegar steam up
and be received into the Member affected. After this, let the Emollients be
again administered; and let these Remedies be (as they ought) often repeated at
many several time, and successively. And in this manner the Scirrhus that is
almost desperate may be cured. But if it be over tedious to use these
Medicaments (in the aforesaid manner) at several times, and by turns, then let
them be al mingled together. For by this means, at one and the same time, and
together, the Tumor is mollified, and that that is mollified is discussed and
dissipated by exhaling and breathing forth. For which end and purpose, out of
the Simples before mentioned there may be diverse Medicaments compounded. As,

Take Unsalted Butter, Scammony, Wax, of each as much as shall be thought
sufficient; and then mingle them. Or,

Take the Meal of Fenugreek, Linseed, Marshmallow Roots, the Powder of the
Holly-hock Root, of each one ounce; boil them, and afterward add, of fresh
Butter an ounce and half; Styrax liquid, Bdellium, Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, of each half an ounce; Mingle them. Or,

Take Marsh-mallow Roots, the Roots of white Lillies, boiled and well bruised,
of each three ounces; fat and full dried Figs boiled, in number six; Ammoniacum
and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, of each one ounce; Styrax liquid half an
ounce; Goose fat, Hens fat, the Marrow of a Leg of Veal, of each three ounces;
Oil of white Lillies, Oil of Camomil, and Wax, of each a sufficient quantity;
Make an Emplaster. Or,

Take the Meal of Beans, Fenugreek seed, Lin-seed, of each six drams, the Root
of Marshmallows one ounce; Pitch five drams; Goose fat, as much as will suffice;
Make an Emplaster. Or,

Take the Mucilage of Marsh mallow Roots, and Fenugreek, of each one ounce; Fat
dry Figs three ounces; Oil of white Lillies, Camomil, Lin-seed, of each two
ounces; Hens fat, Goose fat, Swines fat or Hogs Grease, Goats suet, Turpentine,
Litharge of Gold, of each four ounces. Boil them al, until the moisture be
consumed, and then with a sufficient quantity of Wax, and adding thereunto
Ammoniacum, and Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, of each three drams; and
Flowerdeluce Root well bruised two drams; make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Styrax liquid dissolved in
Vinegar, of each one ounce; Litharge of Gold ten drams; let them boil in
Vinegar: afterward add, Pellitory, live Sulphur, of each half an ounce; Oil of
white Lillies and Wax, of each a sufficient quantity. Make an Emplaster.

But now in the administering of these Medicaments we ought always seriously to
observe whether the Scirrhus arise from phlegm, or else (in truth) from a
Melancholic humor. For if it has its original from this last, it is then more
warily and cautelously to be handled, than if it proceeded from phlegm, lest
that it turn into a Cancer; and especially, if it incline toward a suppuration,
we must have a care that it be not too much irritated by hot Medicaments.

Chap 20. Of a Cancer.
THe Cancer (by the Greeks called Carcinos, and Carcinoma, so termed because it
resembles the Water-Crab or Crevish) is generated from an adust Humor, or
black Choler. And yet notwithstanding Celsus seems to put a difference
between Carcinoma and Cancer. For in his fifth Book, and 28. Chapter, he calls
the disease that we treat of in this Chapter only Carcinoma. But in the same
Book, and 16. Chapt. he gives the name and appellation of a Cancer (in
general) unto certain creeping Ulcers; under which he likewise comprehended the
Erysipelas that is exulcerated, the Gangrene also, and the Sphacelus. But yet
notwithstanding al other Physician whatsoever use the words Carcinoma's and
Cancers as Synonyma's, that is, as words signifying one and the same Disease.
For a Cancer is a Preternatural Tumor arising from black Choler, round, of a
wan color, or somewhat blackish, painful; and which (when the Veins every where
round about are filled and strut out) resembles the feet of the Crab, Crevish,
or Crawfish.

The Causes.
The Cause of a Cancer is black Choler, in which either yellow Choler, or the
Melancholy Humor has degenerated, by reason of its being burnt. For the
Melancholy Humor, while it yet continues to be Natural, and is not yet burnt,
does never cause or produce a Cancer, but another Species or kind of Scirrhus.
But from the black Choler alone, if it be burnt, (which sticks fast in the
Veins, neither can it by reason of its thickness penetrate into those straight
and narrow passages, as the Melancholy humor does that causes the Scirrhus)
the Cancer is excited and generated. But now of this black Choler there is a
certain difference; for some of it is more mild and moderate, or less hot and
sharp; but then another sort of it is very sharp and hot. That which is more
mild causes a secret hidden Cancer that is not exulcerated; but that that is
more hot and sharp exciteth an exulcerated Cancer. Now the said black Choler is
more or less sharp, according as it is more or less burnt, or arise from a
humor that is more or less sharp. Whereupon it is, That that which proceeds
from yellow Choler adult and burnt is worse than that which has its original
from a Melancholy humor. And leek by how much the longer it abides in the
place affected, and by how much the more it is putrefied and burnt, by so much
the more it is rendered the worse. And hence it is that the Natural Melancholy
humor also which first exciteth a Scirrhus if it stick and abide long in the
part, and especially then when it is not handled with all care and caution in
the applying of heating and moistening Medicaments, it afterward exciteth and
causes a Cancer. But whether the Cancer be without any Ulcer or no; and
whether the black Choler be mild and moderate, or else exulcerated, and the
cause more sharp; yet however notwithstanding, in, and of it self it is always
without a Fever; although accidentally a Fever may happen thereupon. In the
mean time (we say) the Cancer it self is a hot Tumor. For although some there
be that doubt whether a Cancer be to be ranked and reckoned up among the hot or
the cold Tumors; (as there be likewise that question whether black Choler be a
hot or a cold humor;) and although by the Arabian Physicians a Cancer is
accounted and reckoned up among the cold Tumors, and Galen seem to incline
thereunto, in his Book of black Choler, Chap. 4. and in his 2. to Glauco, Chap.
10. yet notwithstanding it is by the same Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 8,
10, 11. most rightly and truly reckoned up among the hot Tumors; since that it
has its original, not from the Melancholy humor cold and dry, but from black
Choler, hot and dry. For albeit the Melancholy Humor may possibly give the
first occasion of this Tumor; yet however notwithstanding the Cancer is not
generated from it, unless the said Melancholy Humor degenerate and turn into
black Choler; whether this happen in the Vessels, or in the part affected; like
as sometimes a Scirrhus (as ere while we told you) that is produced from a
Melancholy Humor may pass and turn into a Cancer. And this is the conjunct
cause of a Cancer; to wit, black Choler, a humor hot and dry, sharp, Salt,
corroding and corrupting al things; generated and bred from the heat of other
humors, the heat now ceasing, or at least being not so vigorous that it may
excite and cause a Fever; as it is wont to be in a Phlegmone and Erysipelas.

It is likewise generated from other Causes. For now and then a hot distemper
burns up and inflameth the Humor, and so generateth black choler: and
sometimes the Food (Meat and Drink) being such as has in it a disposition and
tendency unto the generating of such a like humor, by the frequent use thereof,
and in process of time, becomes the Cause of black Choler: and sometimes the
very Spleen it self being grown weak, and not able to attract and draw unto it
self that that is generated of the Melancholy humor, does thereupon leave this
humor in the Body, which after it has been for a while detained in the Body is
inflamed and burnt up. The very same likewise happens, if either the monthly
Courses (in Women) be suppressed, or the Hemorrhoids obstructed.

And in truth, the Cancer is generated and bred in all the parts, both external
and internal; and yet notwithstanding it especially appears (as Celsus tells
us in his (fifth Book, Chap. 28.) in the superior parts, about the Face,
Nosethrils, and Ears, Lips, the Paps or Breasts of Women; which chiefly (by
reason of their laxity and looseness) do very easily receive that humor; and
then again (in regard of the consent and agreement it has with the Womb) they
readily admit of those vicious and naughty humors that ought to have been
purged forth through the Womb.

The Signs Diagnostick.
At the first beginning the Cancer is not so easily known; because that at
first it is scarcely so big as a Vetch or a Bean: but then afterward, when it
is grown, and has gotten so much augmentation and enlargement that it is now
lift up into a greater bulk, it has with it then signs and symptoms so evident
and so grievous, that it by any one may be most easily known. For this Tumor is
hard, it has a leaden, or wan, or blackish color; and yet notwithstanding this
is more or less such, according to the diversity of the matter. There is
present likewise a pain to attend it; the which (although it may indeed be
sometimes greater, and sometimes less) yet notwithstanding the Cancer is never
wholly without it. There is likewise present an heat, pulsation or beating; and
round about (as it were in a Circle) it has Veins distended, and strutting out
with black Blood. Now although the Scirrhus arising from a melancholy humor
has some kind of likeness and affinity with a Cancer; yet notwithstanding by
the aforesaid and other signs it may easily be discerned from it. For a Cancer
has evermore a pain and pulsation conjoined therewith, together with an heat
more than ordinary; and most commonly it begins of it self, and suddenly
gets increase, so that from a very small and inconsiderable bigness it
becomes exceeding great and bulky; and there is for the most part a humor
residing in the Veins, which said Veins being therewith filled very full
resemble the Feet and Claws of Crevish or Craw-fish. But now in the Scirrhus
there is no pain appearing; and for the most part it has its original from the
Change and alteration of other Tumors; and the humor that produces the
Scirrhus does not chiefly and principally reside in the Veins, but in the
spaces and Pores of the Parts; from whence also it is, that the Veins are not
ample, wide, and large, neither turgid, and strutting out; and the increasing
and growth thereof is much more slow than that of a Cancer. But now if the
Cancer be already Ulcerated, then the Ulcer is nasty and stinking, the lips are
swollen, thick, and pale or wan.

The Prognostics.
1. In the general, every Cancer is a most grievous and a dangerous Disease;
and such as is seldom or never cured. For the Cause thereof being over thick is
obstinate and malignant; and oftentimes it seizes and surprizeth even those
Veins also that lie low and deep; insomuch that it cannot be removed and taken
away, either by the purgation of the Body, or by Repellers, or Discussives, or
cutting and lancing, or lastly, even by actual Cauteries and burning; for as
for the milder sort of Remedies, it sleights and contemns them; and as for the
stronger sort of Medicaments, it is by them exasperated.

2. Where there are secret and hidden Cancers, there it is best not to cure
them; For they that are cured die within a very short time after, but those
that are not cured of these aforesaid Cancers live a longer time, so says
Hippocrates, in the sixth of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 38. For why, those Cancers
that before were not exulcerated when they have Medicaments applied to them may
and do easily become exulcerated.

3. They likewise that have Cancers in the Cavity of the Body, or in the palate
of the mouth, or in the Buttocks, or in the Womb, if they be either cut or
burnt, the Ulcers cannot by any means be healed up, and covered over with a
Cicatrice. But those that are thus affected while they lie under Cure are
tortured and tormented (even to death) by the afflicting pain they undergo;
whereas without a Cure (and if they shall not at all submit themselves unto the
means tending thereunto) they may live a longer time, and with far less trouble
and grievance; as Galen has it i^ his Commentary upon the aforesaid Aphorism
of Hippocrates.

4. Those Cancers only therefore are to be attempted in the way of Cure, which
are and appear in the outward part of the Body; and there likewise it will be
more safe to attempt the Curing of them by Medicaments in the very first rise
of them (while they are yet but small and inconsiderable) than when they are
grown and become great; for then they are not to be cured without the help of
the Hand; (which we term the Manual operation) neither indeed so, unless they
have their residence and situation in those parts that may without danger be
lanced and burnt, together with the very Roots, that is to say, the Veins in
them that are full of burnt of adust blood.

5. For when the Cancer has once gotten possession of a great part; or when it
sticks fast in a more noble part, or any other that may not safely and
conveniently be cut or burnt, it is then altogether incurable.

6. Yea moreover, (in the general) there are very many, and indeed the most
Physicians, that are of opinion, that no Cancer confirmed and exulcerated can
possibly be cured.

And it is oftentimes observed, That although Cancers be cut out, and now and
then cured in the external parts; Yet notwithstanding, that the same have
returned again either in the very same part, or else even in some other parts;
as for instance, when the Cancer has been cured in the paps or breasts another
has soon after risen and sprung up in the Womb. And therefore we ought rather,
so far forth (and no further) to cure those Cancers that are already
inveterate, and of the greater size, that their further growth and augmentation
may be impeded and hindered.

Whether an exulcerated Cancer be contagious?

Zacutus Lusitanus will have it to be contagious; and he proves it,

1. From Reason.


Cardanus in his first Book of Poisons, and 12. Chapter, affirms that the
Cancer is not contagious; and yet he gives us no reason at al for this his
Assertion; but presupposes, and takes it for granted, as a thing apparent and
manifest. Neither (to my best remembrance) do I know any one, who accounts
and esteems the Cancer to be in the number of contagious Diseases; excepting
only Zacutus Lusitanus, in the first Book of his Practice, and Administr. of
Physic, and 124. Observat. who does it, and endeavoreth to prove it both by
Reason and Experience. His Reasons are, 1. Because, that in an exulcerated
Cancer there is present a certain putridness and noysom stench (as it were of a
dead Carcass) that by its purulency infecteth the body that is nigh unto it.
His second Reason is, Because the Cancer is the same Disease with an
Elephantiasis, and Leprosy of one only Member; but now the Elephantiasis is
most contagious. An Answer thereto.
But these his Reasons do not sufficiently conclude any thing. For first, Al
things that are putrid and ill favored and noysom are not contagious. For in a
Gangrene and Sphacelus there is an extraordinary putridness and stench; and yet
notwithstanding the stander by is not therewith infected. And moreover,
although a Cancer has some kind of similitude and resemblance with an
Elephantiasis; they are yet notwithstanding several and different affects, as
Cardanus in the place alleged has very rightly determined. And therefore
Experience is to be consulted. 2. From Experience.
Now Zacutus Lusitanus in the place before alleged brings in and produces
this Experience: He there writes, That a certain poor woman having had a
Cancer exulcerated in her Breast for many years together, and lying in bed with
her three sons, they were all infected with the like contagion; and that she
after five years dying, two of these her three sons seized upon and dispatched
by this Disease departed this life; but the third (somewhat stronger of
constitution than the other two) after that the Cancer had been cut away by the
hand of the Surgeon, with much pains and ado was cured and healed. An Answer
to the aforesaid Experience.
But this being but one example, Experience is yet further to be consulted: and
the rather in regard that it may be here objected, that those her sons might
contract this Disease, not by contagion, but from an hereditary infection.

The Cure.
As for what therefore concerns the Cure of a Cancer not exulcerated, in the
very first place (and this indeed is generally to be practiced in all Cancers
whatsoever) before any thing else be done, we are to use our diligent endeavor
to prevent the increase of black Choler, and that none be generated for the
future; and that what is already in the body may speedily be evacuated. The
breeding of black Choler and the Melancholy Humor is to be hindered and
prevented by the Patients abstaining from those Meats that may any way yield
and afford matter to the black Humor; such as are al things that are thick,
feculent, salt, bitter; and such are old cheese, flesh that is thick, old,
salt, or smoak-dried, Garlic, Onions, Mustard, Pepper, and al other Spices.
Let the sick person likewise shun and avoid al those things that do any way
conduce to the generating of the black Humor; such as are Grief, and sadness of
the heart, overmuch watching and want of rest, and the like. But rather let the
Patient use a Diet that is moderately moistening and cooling; viz. Ptisan of
Barley, Lettice, Mallows, Borrage, Succory, the four cold Seeds, Veal, Wether
Mutton, Kids flesh, Chickens, Rear Eggs, River fish, the Whey of Goats Milk,
and such like.

Furthermore, If there be any adust Humor already generated in the Body, let it
be with all speed evacuated. And therefore in the first place (if it be at al
requisite) blood may be drawn forth by opening a Vein. In Women, the provoking
and bringing down their Courses will be most proper and convenient; and in men
let the Hemorrhoids be opened, if it may be done. After this, let the body be
thoroughly purged with those Medicaments that e^^cu^te the black adust Humor;
among which there is especially commended Epithymum, (we vulgarly call it Mother
of Time) black Hellebore, Fumitory; and the Compounds thence derived, viz. the
Pills of Fumitory, and the Confection Ha^^ech. But now that the Purgation may
the better succee^, that thick and gross Humor is first of al to be prepared;
yea moreover, whereas the whole Humor may not at once and al together be
evacuated, then the Purgers and Preparers are often to be repeated, by turns,
and successively. Now for this Affect, those things that are very proper and
convenient, are, the Syrup of Apples, of Fumitory, of the Juice of Borrage and
Bugloss, Syrup of Lupulus or the Hop: or other Compound Medicaments like unto
these. Neither will it be amiss, or any whit incongruous, likewise to strengthen
the Heart and the Liver; and if there be any distemper chanced unto either or
both of them, to amend and rectify it by Medicaments, or Borrage, Bugloss,
Roses, Citrons, Sanders, Corals, Margarites, Pearls, and those other
Medicaments that are made and compounded out of these.

And then in the next place, we are to apply our selves unto the very part
affected; And, 1. By Topics the Matter that has flown in is a little to be
driven back again, and discussed; and the part is to be confirmed and
strengthened; and those Medicaments that have in them a power and virtue of
Repressing, Corroborating, and Disucssing, are to be applied. For by this
means, so much of the Cancer as is already generated is quite taken away; and
likewise the further growth and increase thereof is prevented. But now, let
those Medicaments have in them a mediocrity (or mean) of strength and virtue;
and let them not be sharp and biting. For if the Medicaments be over weak, they
then afford no help or benefit; and again, if they be too strong and violent,
they then indeed either repress or discuss the more thin parts; but for the
more thick, they do not only leave them behind, but also render them the more
unapt and unfit to be afterward discussed and dissipated. There is for this
use and purpose very convenient, the Decoction or Juice of Nightshade, and of
the several Species of Endive and Succory. But more especially there are
commended the Cockle-fish boiled, River Crabs or Crevishes; and principally
green Frogs, out of which there is a most excellent Oil to be distilled, for
the moderating of the pain, and the healing of the are Cancer; the destillation
is by descent, after this manner:

Take Green Frogs, living either in the Reeds, or in pure and clear Waters;
fill their mouths with Butter, and afterward put them into an Earthen Pot that
is glazed, and having in its bottom many little holes. Let this Pot be put into
another Pot, and that other Pot put into and surrounded with the Earth, in the
which it is to be as it were shut up: and then let as well the Pot that has the
Cover, as that Pot which is put into it be carefully luted and stopped; that so
nothing may exhale. Afterward, let the fire be kindled round about the Pot on
every side; and the Oil will destil into the lower pot, which is to be taken
forth, and together with the Powder of the Frogs mingled, for the making of an
Unguent.

Others there are that make up an Unguent with the Ashes of Crabs or Crawfish
mingled together with Coriander seed, and the Oil of Roses. And here likewise
we are to make use of the greatest part of Metallicks washed, and so becoming
altogether without any biting quality (their power and virtue being here of
singular use:) such as are Lead, Tutia or Pompholyx, Litharge, Ceruss,
Antimony. Lead is chiefly and most highly commended by all; and it may likewise
be administered any manner of way. Whereupon it is that al those Medicaments
that are to be applied in the Cancer are most fitly and properly made up in a
Leaden Mortar, with a Leaden Pestle, touching which Galen is to be consulted;
see in his 9 Book of the Faculty of simple Medicaments, and the Chapter of
Lead; which is made by rubbing together two Leaden Plates (whereon the Oil of
Roses has been poured) so long until the Oil become somewhat blackish, and that
it has gotten the consistence of a Liniment; or if in a Leaden Mortar the Oil
of Roses be stirred about with a Leaden Pestle, so long, that it likewise wax
something black, and become thick. Or,

Take Oil of Roses two ounces; the Juice of Nightshade an ounce and half;
Ceruss or white Lead washed, Lead burnt and washed, of each one dram: Litharge,
Frankincense, Pompholyx or the soil of Brass, of each half a dram; White Wax as
much as will serve the turn: make an Unguent. Or,

Take Terra Sigillata or the Sealed Earth of Lemnos, Bole-armenick, Ceruss, of
each half an ounce; Tutia prepared two drams: Powder of green Frogs three
drams: Litharge one dram and half; Oil of Roses an ounce and half; Oil of Frogs
an ounce; Vinegar six drams; Wax a sufficient quantity: shake and stir them
about for a good while in a Leaden Mortar, and so make an Unguent.

And indeed this is the safer way of curing Cancers that lie hid and secret in
the body, and such as are not a yet exulcerated. For albeit Avicere command
that the lesser sort of Cancers (and such as may be perceived) be cut up by the
very roots, and after this excision that the thicker blood should be pressed
and squeezed forth on al sides, and round about, and that the place be
afterward feared and burnt with a Cautery, that so by this said burning the
relics or remainders may be consumed, the Member strengthened, and the
Hemorrhage or flux of blood hindered; yet notwithstanding this kind of Cure
has much danger in it; and we ought here to remember that above alleged 38.
Aphorism, Section 6. For the Cancer (especially if any thing great) if it be
wholly cut forth, and as it were stub'd up by the roots, then instantly there
will follow thereupon (the Veins and Arteries being cut asunder) an
extraordinary and dangerous flux of blood; which if it be intercepted with a
binder, then there will be an extraordinary great and grievous pain excited in
the other parts; if they be feared and burnt, this likewise cannot be done
without much inconvenience; and yet nevertheless there will be great danger of
its returning.

The Cure of an exulcerated Cancer.
But now, whereas the most are of Opinion that the exulcerated Cancer is not at
al to be attempted or meddled with, yet notwithstanding it being very inhumane
to leave the sick person (even in such a Disease) altogether destitute of help
and assistance, there is therefore by Physicians appointed and set down a
twofold way and method of curing these exulcerated Cancers; the one true and
genuine, which tends to the removal of the very Cancer it self; the other
only Palliative (as they term it) which eases, asswageth, and in some sor^
qualifieth the Cancer, so that the sick person may live with somewhat the less
pain and grievance. The true Cure is performed either by Incision, or Searing,
or burning Medicaments; which indeed are most especially to be administered, if
the Cancer has not yet attained unto any considerable growth and bigness; or
else if it be in those parts where it may without danger be cut forth, or
burnt. It may be amputated and cut away even to the very quick, that so
whatsoever is vicious and corrupt may be wholly taken away, so that there may
be no fear left of any remaining contagion. And sometimes only cutting will
suffice, and by it the whole Cancer may be grubb'd up even by the very roots.
The amputation being made, the blood is not to be suppressed and stopped from
flowing, before it shall manifestly appear that al thereof that is vicious and
corrupt be flown forth out of the Veins: afterward dry Liniments are to be put
upon the part that was cut, and the Ulcer is to be concocted or ripened,
cleansed, filled up with flesh, and a Cicatrice drawn over it, and so the Vein
to be shut up. But sometimes again, if the Cancer be overgreat, and black Choler
has likewise seized upon the greater and deeper Vessels, then in this case
Section alone will not suffice, but besides the said cutting burning is also to
be administered. And therefore in the first place, that Skin being taken off,
the Cancerous part it self, together with all the blackish Veins, is as much as
possibly may be to be taken forth, and the blood likewise (according to the
strength of the Patient) is not instantly to be suppressed and stopped, but
rather to be further pressed and squeezed forth, that so all the black Choler
may by this means flow forth of the Veins. After this the place is to be feared
with a fire-hot Iron, that so the Hemorrhage and bleeding may thereby be
stanched, and the relics of the malignant matter wasted and consumed. And at
length those things that take away the crust, cleanse the Ulcer, generate and
breed flesh, and produce a Cicatrice, are to be administered. But others (lest
that the sick person should be endangered by the Hemorrhage and extreme
bleeding, or together with the loss of his blood should lose his life also, and
lest the Surgeon by the flux of blood might likewise be hindered in his
operation) do not in the like manner as aforesaid amputate the whole Cancer, and
after that at length burn the whole; but first of al they cut off a certain part
thereof, and then (after that a sufficient quantity and portion of the blood is
flown forth) they burn and fear the said part; and then again a second time
they amputate and cut off another part thereof, and again burn it; and thus in
this manner, by turns iterating and repeating the Section and amputation, as
also the burning and learing, they do at length quite take away the whole part
affected with the Cancer. The Cancer may also be burnt with Caustic
Medicaments, among which there is commended Sublimate Arsenick. But there ought
to be a special regard had unto the places and parts that lie round about it*
neither in this respect may crude Arsenick be (without much hazard and danger)
thus administered. That Arsenick is more safe that is poured forth mingled, and
fixed with Salnitre, or the Salt of Nitre.

But now, in regard that the great fear that here especially perplexeth
Physicians is touching the recidivation and return of the Affect, those
Medicaments therefore that evacuate black Choler are often to be repeated, and
likewise those that have in them a power and virtue to draw forth the
Hemorrhoids, and the Courses. Instead of which (if they be wanting) some there
be that cause Issues to be made. But in this case, we are not only to
administer such Medicaments as prepare and purge forth black Choler, but those
likewise that resist and oppose poisons, and such as are known to be expedient
in regard of their whole substance, and such as have in them the property and
sovereign virtue of Antidotes. And for this purpose we are to administer
Treacle and Mithridate, with Borrage, Cichory, and the Juice or Syrup of
Sorrel, the Broth of River Crabs out of Asses Milk, and the Antidote likewise
that is made of their Blood.

Antonius Chalmetaeus (in all kind of Cancers) commends this Water; which he
likewise uses nine days before the excision, or cutting forth of the Cancer.

Take Thapsus barbatus or sweet white Mullein, the Root of Water Betony, of
each two ounces; Dropwort, Spleenwort, Agrimony, Tormentil, Scabious, Avens,
Toad-flax, of each one handful; Nettle seed three drams, Flowers of Elder,
Rosemary flowers, of each one pugil or small handful. Make a Decoction, which
may be dulcified with Sugar; with some part of which Decoction the place
affected may be likewise fomented, and thoroughly washed, and afterward a Magma
or sweet Confection may be applied in the form of a Cataplasm.

The other way of curing the Cancer is that that we call a Counterfeit or
Palliative Cure; by which we only use our endeavor that the Cancer may not be
augmented and get any further growth; and that the pain thereof may be
assuaged; that so the sick Person may lengthen out, and lead the remainder of
his life with the less excruciating and afflicting misery. Such Medicaments are
those that do not putrify, neither corrode and bite the part, but do
moderately dry and cool it; and they are such as are above mentioned; and more
of them you may likewise see in the fourth Book of our Practice, Sect. 3. Part
1. Chap. 7.

Lupus or the Wolf, and Noli me tangere.
There may be referred unto a Cancer (or at least, certainly, thereunto
subjoyned) those Tumors or Ulcers which they vulgarly call, Noli me tangere,
and Lupus, the Wolf.

Now some there are that divide the Cancer into three Species or kinds; into
the Cancer that is by the Greeks and Romans absolutely and specifically so
called, and which is commonly and well known by that name; into the Noli me
tangere, and the Wolf. And they then only term it Noli me tangere, when there
arises a Tumor or Ulcer upon the Chin, and especially about the Mouth and
Nose, bearing a resemblance with, and being very like unto an exulcerated
Cancer, growing and increasing very slowly at the beginning; which (as
Theodoricus truly tells us) continues for one whole year no bigger than a
Pustule, and is as it were a very small and inconsiderable Push; and which
afterward and at all times creeps less than the Cancer: and Rogerius in his
fifth Chapter writes, that the Cancer does corrode more in one day, than Noli
me tangere does in a Month. And it is so called, either because it ought not to
be rubbed (since the more it is handled and rubbed the worse it becomes) or else
in regard that it is a Contagious Malady; or else lastly, because it is rather
exasperated then mitigated by Remedies, and is thereby caused to creep into the
sound parts.

But they call it Lupus or the Wolf, if it be in the Shins, Ankle-bones, and
Thighs. But in all other parts of the Body, although it retein still the same
pravity and malignancy, they conceive that it is not to be absolutely called
Lupus. Yet notwithstanding (when it arises and appears in the midst of the
Body) others term it Cingulus, a Girdle; as Guido tells us in his Sermon. 7.
Tract. 4. Sum. 1. Chap. 24. but it is so named by reason of its vehement
corrosion, and eating through. The vulgar People likewise will have it to be
from hence so called, to wit, because like unto a hunger-starved Wolf it
consumes the Flesh of Hens, yea and other flesh also. This Opinion is indeed
by Joh. Philip. Ingrassias exploded, and termed a fatuity and vain foppery. But
that some such thing there is done, is related and asserted by diverse, and it
is confirmed by the History that Mauritius Cordaeus relates in his first Book,
Comment. 7. upon Hippocrates, touching Women. There was (says he) a certain
Noble and Choice Woman, living nigh unto the Castle of Nenve, that had all the
right side of her Face possessed and overspread with a Cancer, and that
likewise exulcerated of a long time, insomuch that her Face was most grievously
tortured with pains and griefs of all sorts. She having in vain and to no
purpose at all sought for help unto the Physicians, as well French and Italian,
as Spanish and Germans (together with other foreign Physicians) was at length
perfectly cured by this following expedite and speedy Remedy that she had
learned of an ordinary and vulgar Barber Surgeon. She cuts Chickens into
very small and broad pieces, the which she daily applied unto the part affected,
oftentimes changing and renewing them: and at length by this one only Remedy
she recovered her former perfect health and soundness.

Menardus (in his seventh Book, Chap, 1.) refers the Tumor Lupus or Wolf,
and likewise the Noli me tangere, both of them to the Tumor Phagedenae.

Chap. 21. Of a Watery Tumor.
THere arise in like manner from a Waterish and wheyish humor diverse kinds of
Tumors; and from this humor it is, that sometimes certain parts of the Body, and
sometimes again the whole Body is caused to swel up; of this nature and kind, are
the Dropsy, Hydrocephalus or Head-Dropsie, Dropsy of the Lungs and Chest,
Hydromphalus, Hydrocele, Dropsy of the Womb, etc. touching all which having
already treated in their proper places, we will here speak somewhat only in
general concerning a watery Tumor.

The Causes.
The Cause (to wit, the next and immediate) of watery Tumors, is the collecting
or gathering together of a watery or wheyish humor in some one or more parts.
But now from what causes these watery and wheyish humors proceed and come to be
gathered together, we have already declared where we treated of the Hydrops or
Dropsy. Now for the place, the watery and wheyish humor is collected in some
part that is loose, or that has in it a Cavity or hollowness.

Signs Diagnostick.
These watery Tumors are soft, lax or loose, and without pain. If they be
pressed and thrust down, the print of the finger that makes the Impression
does not remain: and if we view them well either by daylight, or Candlelight,
they appear transparent, and such as may welnigh be seen through.

Prognostics.
1. The very watery Tumors themselves that are fomented and cherished by some
vice or default in any of the Bowels are not at all dangerous.

2. But those that have their original from something amiss either in the Liver,
or in the Spleen, although they are not in themselves dangerous, yet they do
notwithstanding threaten danger, in regard of the Bowels that are ill affected.

3. Although watery Tumors are not dangerous; yet notwithstanding they are not
easily cured, since that the humor is hardly or not at all to be concocted, and
is likewise discussed very slowly.

The Cure.
That so the Cure may rightly be performed, the the watery humor which causes
and cherishes the Tumor is to be evacuated and emptied forth; and special
care must be taken that no more of it be generated in the Body for the future,
and the humor it self that is in the part affected is to be evacuated.

In the first place therefore, the watery and wheyish humors are to be evacuated
by Stool, by Urine, and by Sweats; and we must likewise so order it, that the
Diaphoresis and insensible transpiration may be free and uninterrupted.

Secondly, If there be present any fault in any Bowel that is by Nature
destined and ordained for Concoction (by which this watery humor is supplied)
this is to be corrected; and of this we have already spoken in its proper place.

Thirdly, The watery matter (the next and containing Cause of the Tumor) is to
be evacuated; which is to be performed, either insensibly by those things that
Resolve and digest, and dry much; or else sensibly, by opening the Tumor, and
pouring out the Matter. Those things that Resolve, Discuss, and dry up the
watery humors, are, Rue, Wallwort or Danewort, Elder, Camomile, Dill, the
Flower-de-luce root, Aristolochy or Birthwort, Laurel berries, the Meal of
Beans, and of the bitter Vetch Orobus, Ashes, Salt, Sulphur, Ammoniacum, and
Bdellium. As,

Take Leaves of Rue, of the Elder Tree, and Wallwort, the Flowers of Camomile,
of each one handful; Laurel berries two ounces; boil them in Ley and Wine, for
a Fomentation. Afterward.

Take Sal Nitre half an ounce, Sulphur three drams, the Powder of Laurel
berries one ounce, Ammoniacum half an ounce, Oil of Rue and Wax, of each as
much as will suffice; and make a Liniment.

But if the matter cannot be discussed and scatterred, then let the Tumor be
opened, and the matter emptied forth.

The Diet.
Let such a Diet be ordained and appointed that may not in the least make any
supply, or add unto the watery humors; and let it have regard unto the Causes of
the collection of the watery humor; touching which we have also already spoken
in its proper place.

Chap. 22. Of Exanthemata, Ecchymata, Papulae, Pustulae, Phlyctenae, and
Eczesmata.
BUt now it is very rare (and a thing that but seldom happens) that one only
humor should excite and cause any Tumor whatsoever; but for the most part, many
humors mixed together, and especially the Choleric, Salt, and ferous or
wheyish humors, meeting together (and sometimes also black Choler) do excite and
produce diverse sorts of Tubercles or small Tumors; of which we intend now to
treat; and here in the explanation of their several names, we meet with much
difficulty. And first of all, Exanthemata, Exanthemata.
and Exanthesis (that is to say, Efflorescences) are so called, in regard that
like unto Flowers they break forth in the Skin. Hippocrates 3. Epid. Comm. Text
51. calls them likewise Ecthymata, from the Greek, because they impetuously
break forth, as Galen in his Comment upon Hippocrates explaineth it. Pliny (in
his Book 24. and Chap. 4. and Book 26. Chap 11.) calls them Eruptiones. But
now the name [Exanthemata] seems to be a general name, so that it may
comprehend under it whatsoever of its own accord breaks forth in the Skin;
neither indeed is there any certain and particular species of those Tubercles
or small Tumors, whereupon it is that they are likewise called Exanthemata
Sublime broad, red, round, small, Exanthemata of sweats, Elcode, by Hippocrates
in his third Book of Aphorisms, Aphor. 20. But whether or no there be any
general Latin word that may answer unto this Exanthemata of the Greeks, I very
much question. We indeed meet with the name of Papulae, and Pustulae, that is
to say, Wheals, Blisters, Measels, and Pushes. But now whereas there is a
twofold sort of Exanthemata, one that which only changes the color of the Skin
(as it is wont to be in those Fevers that we call Petechiales;) and another, in
which there are certain Tubercles breaking forth in the Skin, the name of
Papulae and Pustulae seems not to agree with, and answer to both of them, but
only unto the latter sort of the Exanthemata; for Papulae and Pustulae signify
only Tubercles in which there is some certain humor contained. And yet
notwithstanding we find that the name of Papulae is a more special name; and
that it seems not to be used by Celsus and Pliny, in one and the same manner.
For by Pliny the hotter sort of Exanthemata, and which are elevated higher than
ordinary into a sharp-pointed head, are termed Papulae; of which
notwithstanding seeing that there are many differences (viz. red, hot, black,
Papulae of sweats) this name seems to be general enough. But now with Celsus
the name Papulae is a special and peculiar name, and signifies only that
affect which the Greeks call Lichenes, and the Latins Impetigo. For thus he
writes (in his fifth Book, and 28. Chapter) That the Papulae by the smallest
sort of Pustules do exasperate the Skin, and likewise that they corrode and
creep forward but slowly; and that where the Disease begins round, there it
also proceeds after an Orb-like and round manner; and that that which is less
round is more difficultly cured; and that (unless it be taken quite away) it
turne^h into the Impetigo. For he makes two species of Lichenes, as the Greeks
likewise do. One he terms Agria, that is, wild; the other more mild; and that
the wild Papula is cured by rubbing it with fasting Spittle. All which things
before mentioned agree with the Lichenes of the Greeks.

The name likewise of Eczesmata seems to be general. For although some by
these Eczesmata understand only Hidroa, or Sudamina; and others refer them unto
the Head alone; yet without al doubt this name is general, and signifies a
Pustule, or very hot Papula, as the name it self imports.

Of the Tumors Phlyctaenae.
But that we may treat of these in their several species or kinds; the first in
order to be handled are those we call Phlyctaenae. Now they are called
Phlyctaenae, Phluctides, Phluzacia, and Phluseis (from two Greek words that
signify to Boil or become fervent hot) being Pustules, and little Bladders,
excited and caused by the humors when they are as it were boiling hot, and most
sharp; like unto those Pushes and small Bladders that are raised by the fire,
and scalding hot water. By others they are likewise named Ignis Silvestris, or
wild fire. The Arabians call them Sahafati. And indeed these kind of Pustules
and little Bladders very frequently break out in the Skin, or rather in the
Scars-skin; and sometimes privily in the Cornea Tunicle of the Eye; touching
which we have already spoken in the first Book of our Practice, Part 3. Sect.
2. Chap. 17. They oftentimes arise in the Thighs; and in Infants they sometimes
break forth in their whole body; but seldom so in men.

The Causes.
The Phlyctaenae proceed from a Choleric and extreme hor humor, mingled
together with a humor that is salt and wheyish. But now from what Causes such
like humors are generated, we have elsewhere declared. They sometimes likewise
befall women, by reason of their Menstruous blood over long retained and
corrupted. But now those Humors are called forth unto the Skin, when any one
having been in the cold suddenly approaches near unto the fire, or else
betaketh himself to a hot Bath; and so on the contrary, when after heat the
pores of the Skin shall be altogether close shut up by the external cold.

The Signs Diagnostick.
The little Bladders that resemble those that are raised by the fire or
scalding hot water do suddenly break forth; and when they are broken, there
issues forth by little and little a yellowish humor: the Crusts thereof wax
hard, and then they fall off. By reason of the acrimony and fervent heat of the
humor they excite an itching in the Skin.

Prognostics.
1. Phlyctaenae (as Aetius tells us, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 2. Chap. 63.) abide and
continue sometimes for two or three days.

2. Phlyctaenae if they be not well and rightly cured, they now and then
degenerate into an Herpes.

The Cure.
If such like vicious humors abound in the body, then (in the first place) such
a kind and course of Diet is to be prescribed thai will not increase those like
Humors, but such as may rather correct that Cacochymy. And moreover, the said
vicious Humors are by convenient Medicaments to be evacuated.

Now as for Topics, let the Phlyctaenae first be fomented with the Decoction
of Lentils, Myrtle, and Pomegranate Rinds. Or,

Take the Mucilage of Fleabans or Fleawort seed, Rose water extract six ounces;
the Juice of Purslane, and Nightshade, of each two ounces: mingle them, and let
the place affected be anointed therewith.

If they bre^k not of their own accord, and thereupon cause a grievous pain,
they are then to be p^^ckt and pierced through with a needle; and the Pustules
are to be hard squeezed; and upon the Ulcer lay this following Cataplasm:

Take Barley Meal, the Meal of Lentils, and of Beans, the powder of Pomegranate
Rinds, of each an ounce; with a sufficient quantity of the Oil of Roses make a
Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Leaves of Plantane, Mallows, Myrtle, of each one handful; boil them
to a softness, and pass them through a hair sieve; then add unto them Barley
Meal, the Meal of Lentiles, and crumbs of white Bread, of each as much as will
suffice, and make a Cataplasm.

Or else let a Liniment made of Swines Fat, with the Spume or Froth of Silver,
in a Leaden Mortar, he laid on. Or,

Take Juice of the Root of sour Sorrel, and Scabious, of each two ounces; Oil
of Roses four ounces; the Fat of an old Hog six ounces; boil them until the
Juyces be consumed; and afterward add Litharge of Gold one ounce; live Sulphur
six drams; Turpentine half an ounce; stir them well together in a Leaden Mortar,
and (...) a Liniment. Or,

^^ke L tharge, live Sulphur, Myrtle Powder, (...) one ounce; stir them well
together with (...) ^ar in a Lead^n Mortar; and adding there^^ a ^^fficient
quantity of the Oil of Roses, make ^^ Unguent.

See more of this in Aetius, Tetrab, 1. Sermon. 4. Chap. 21.

Chap. 23. Of Vari or Pimples.
VAri are Tubercles or little Swellings somewhat near of kin unto Psydracia, by
the Greeks called Jonthoi, because that like unto Dung they are the defilement
and the disgrace of the Countenance, by fouling and disfiguring of the Face.
Galen in his second Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 2. reckons up these
among those names that neither represent the place affected, neither the cause
that produces them. They are likewise by some named Acne or Acna, as Aetius
tells us, Tetrab. 2. Sermon. 4. Chap 13. Although Hermolaus in his Gloss upon
Pliny reads the word Acmas, as if this kind of Affect were commonly so termed
by the Greeks, in regard that it is wont to seize upon those that are of ripe
and full age. Celsus in his fifth Book, Chap. 6. writes thus: It is almost but
a mere folly (says he) to attempt the curing of these Vari or Specks, and
Pimples in the Face, or the little Pushes and heat-wheals of the same. But Vari
and Lenticu^ae or Pimples, are very well and commonly known: and yet
notwithstanding you cannot possibly take from Women the care they take in
tricking themselves up, and especially in trimming their Faces. In Galens
Opinion (as we have it in his fifth Book of the Composition of Medicaments
according to the place, Chap. 3. and in his Book of making those Remedies that
may be provided, Chap. 51.) Jonthos is an hard and little swelling in the Skin
of the Face, raised from a thick Juice that is there gotten together. The which
in regard that it is altogether void of the wheyish moisture, it is therefore
not at al itching, neither does it require or stand in any need of scratching.

This Humor is for the most part alimentary, insinuating it self into the Pores
of the Skin. But yet there is likewise oftentimes therewithal mingled an
excrementitious Humor, and atrabiliary blood.

Signs Diagnostick.
We have before told you out of Celsus, that this Tumor is sufficiently and
commonly known.

Prognostics.
1. This Affect has in it no danger; so that Celsus thinks it mere folly so
much as to will or desire the Cure of this Tumor.

2. Those Vari that arise only from the thicker and grosser Aliment, are firm
and stable. But if an Excrementitious Humor be mingled with them, the Tubercles
pour forth an Ichor or thin Excrement; and if they be suppurated they turn into
Ulcers.

3. If together with the Pushes there be an Intense and extraordinary redness
in the face, the Malady is then very hard to be cured, if not altogether
impossible: and although the Pustules may be removed by strong Medicaments, yet
the redness will notwithstanding remain, and increase unto a higher pitch.

4. When there is a redness conjoined with the swelling and puffing up of the
Face, and a hoarsness of the voice, this is a very shrewd sign of an
approaching Lepra, or Leprosy.

The Cure.
These Tubercles are to be cured by Emollients, Discussers, and likewise
(unless they in a short time yield and give place) by corroding Medicaments. As
for instance,

Take Meal of Lupines, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of each one ounce and half;
of Mallows peeled, and Flowerdeluce Root, of each two drams; Salt Ammoniack one
dram; with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth make Trochisques, which at the time of
using them may be dissolved in Milk. Or,

Take Honey, and the sharpest or sowrest Vinegar, of each one ounce and half.
Mingle them. Or,

Take Litharge of Gold three drams; Turpentine half an ounce; common Oil as
much as will suffice: mingle them. Or,

Let the Face be anointed in the Evening with bitter Almonds well pounded and
made into a Mash, and so mingled with Vinegar; and in the morning wash the Face
with Milk.

If the Vari be harder than ordinary,

Take Black Soap half an ounce; Animoniacum, Frankincense, of each a dram and
half; let them be dissolved in Water, that they may get the thickness of a
Cerote. Or,

Take the Juice of the sharp Dock two ounces; Vinegar of Squils half an ounce;
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar two drams; Borax a dram and half; Alum half
a dram; mingle them, etc. Or,

Take the Root of sour Sorrel, and Elecampane cut into small pieces, of each one
ounce; Hysop and Penyroyal Leaves, of each half an ounce; boil them in Vinegar
until they be soft and tender, and then bruise them very small. Add hereto of
soft Soap half an ounce; Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar two drams; Myrrh,
Frankincense, Borax, of each half a dram: mingle them.

Chap. 24. Of Sudamina, and Sirones.
SVdamina (which the Greeks call Hidroa, and likewise Exanthemata) are with us
those Esflorescences or Pushes, or Wheals that stick and have their residence
in the utmost Skin of the body, like unto the grains of Millet, that by their
exulceration do exasperate the Skin. Some there are that will likewise have them
to be called Eczesmata. By Pliny in his third Book, and Chap. 4. they are
termed Papulae Sudorum, or sweating Pustules. Rhases and Avicen name them Asef,
or else (with the Article) Alasef, or Hafef, and Alhafef. It is an Affect that
is very common and familiar unto Children and young persons (especially those
that are of a hot temperament and constitution, and such as in the hot Summer
time use overmuch motion and exercise) happening and arising in the Neck,
Shoulder-blades, Breast, Arms, and Thighs; but yet notwithstanding more
frequently near about the privy parts, and the Fundament or Arse; whereupon it
is that Hippocrates in the third of his Aphorisms, Aph. 21.) reckons it up
among the Summer Diseases.

The Causes.
Now these Sudamina have their original from the many Choleric and sharp
biting sweats that corrode the Skin, and cause a roughness or ruggedness
therein, exulcerate after the manner of Ulcers, and excite in the said Skin a
certain kind of itching. And they arise more especially in a hot and moist
Summer, after the use of those things that are hotter and sharper than
ordinary, extreme labor and pains, from inhabiting in a place hot and moist, a
wi^d not sufficiently piercing and purifying, overgreat and excessive sweats;
and lastly, the filthiness and nastiness of the Apparel.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Tubercles are sufficiently manifest. For in the Skin there appear a
roughness, and itching Pustules.

Prognostics.
The Affect is not in the least dangerous; but for the most part is cured by
the help and strength of Nature, without the use and application of any
Medicaments.

The Cure.
And therefore let the Patients wearing Apparel be sweet and clean, and let him
often shift himself.

If the Affect be mild, gentle, and moderate, it is then cured by only washing
with Rose Water, or Plantane Water; unto which notwithstanding there ought to
be added a grain or two of Camphire.

But if it be more grievous, and if that Choleric Humors abound in the Body,
they are to be altered and evacuated.

Afterward this Bath is to be made use of:

Take the Root of sour Sorrel, and white Lillies, of each half a pound; Briony
three ounces; of these Herbs following, viz. of Mallows, Violets,
Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Bears-foot, of each one handful; Fumitory
three handfuls; the flowers of the Water-Lilly, Red Roses, and Beans, of each
one handful; Bran two pound. Boil them in pure and sweet Water for a Bath.

After the Bath, if there be occasion let this Unguent be administered:

Take Oil of Violets, of Roses, of the Water Lillies, or at some call it, the
Water-cress, of each half a pound; Juice of Lemmons three ounces; Litharge one
ounce; Ceruss or white Lead half an ounce; Camphire one dram; let them be well
stirred together in a Mortar, and make hereof a Liniment.

Sirones.
Hither likewise belong those Pustules that the Germans call Seuren, that arise
either in the hollow of the Hand, or on the soles of the Feet, or both, in the
which there lies hid and secret an exceeding small sort of Worms under the
Scarf-skin, which they term Sirones, or Chirones. Now the Affect arises
chiefly in these places, because that the more thick and gross Ichores or
ulcerous Excrements are in every scabbiness detained and held under the Skin
which in the aforesaid place is more thick than elsewhere.

Signs.
We may know whether or no these Worms lie hid in the Pustules, if the itch
that is here felt be greater than that which is wont to be (at other times)
perceived in these places.

These Chirones are (for the most part) dug forth with the Neddle; and after
this (that so they may not be bred anew) the place is to be well washed with
Wine or Vinegar, in which Salt, Alum, or Nitre has been dissolved; or else
with a Ley that is made of the Ashes of Broom Sprigs, or the Boughs of the Oak
Tree. After it has been washed and thoroughly dried again, let it be anointed
over with this Unguent following, viz.

Take the sharp Dock (or as some call it, sour Sorrel) Scabious, Wormwood,
Tansey, the Leaves of Peaches, of the Ash tree, of Henbane, and of the Walnut,
of each one handful; let them be al well and thoroughly bruised together; and
together with those Juyces, take of the Fat or Lard of an old Hog, two pound
let them boil all together until the Juyces be consumed: and afterward add of
Ship Pitch one pound and half; and let the whole be stremed through a Cloth; and
then,

Take Myrtle, Frankincense, Mastick, of each two ounces; let them be poudered
very small; and let them be put into the streining; and then let them be moved
and stirred about with a Spatula until they have the likeness and consistence
of an Unguent. And whenever there is any occasion to make use of, and to do
and act any thing herewith, then unto six ounces of this Unguent we may add one
ounce of Quicksilver, extinguished and killed with fasting Spitrle, or shaken
together with the white of an Egg, and by this means you may Cure within
fifteen days all kind of Scabbiness whatsoever it be of this Nature, or those
Sirones that are accompanied with an itching. And thus much may suffice to have
been spoken touching these Tumors (or rather Tubercles) Sudamina and Sirones.

Chap. 25. Of Epinyctides, and Terminthi.
EPinyctis is so called, because it arises in the Night; as Galen (in his
second Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 2. and Celsus (in his fifth Book,
and 28th Chapter) has informed us. Yet notwithstanding Paulus Aegineta (in his
4. Book, Chap. 9.) and Aetius Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 2. Chap. 61. conceive that they
are so called, not because it arises in the night, but because in the night
time it does more vehemently excruciate and torment the Party thus affected.
But both these reasons may very well stand together, to wit, that this Tubercle
arises by night, and that it does likewise in the night time most grieve and
excruciate the Party affected therewith. Paulus Aegineta therefore, and Aetius
(in the places alleged) define the Epinyctides to be small Ulcers breaking
forth of their own accord, like unto Phlyctaenae or Blisters, somewhat reddish,
which being broken there issues forth a bloody filth and matter. They do not
greatly excruciate the Party in the day time; but by night they torture and
torment him with a pain that is more then usual in an Ulcer. But yet, although
Paulus and Aetius define Epinyctides by little Ulcers; yet notwithstanding
without all doubt they understand Pustules degenerating and turning into
Ulcers. Neither are they generated only of Choleric and bloody filth and
corruption, but likewise from other humors also. And therefore Pliny in his
Book 20. and Chap. 6. calls them pale and wan Pustules, and such as disquiet
in the night time. But Celsus in the place alleged does most clearly and
plainly describe them, in these words; It is (says he) the worst of all kind
of Pustules, that is called Epinyctis. It is wont to be in color either
somewhat pale and wan, or somewhat black, or else white. About this there is also
a vehement Inflammation, and within there is found a snotty and nasty
exulceration. The color is like unto its humor from whence it arises. The
pain that it causes is greater than its bigness, and transcendeth its
magnitude, for it is no bigger then a Bean. And it likewise arises in the
eminent parts, and most commonly in the night time; for which cause it has
this name Epinyctis imposed upon it by the Greeks.

There are some that conceive these Epinyctides to be Essere of the Arabians;
but they are mistaken, as it will appear by the Chapter following; for Essere
(unless it be very much scratched and clawed) pours forth no humor at all.

The Causes.
The Causes of this Tumor are a Salt and wheyish humor, and Phlegm, together
with which there is sometimes mingled some of the Blood, and Choleric Ichor,
and now and then likewise some of the black Choler. From whence also it is that
the color is not always one and the same, and by reason of the Phlegm therewith
mingled the Pustule being opened there is found within a certain snotty and
filthy exulceration. And the Tumor is almost if not altogether such as that
which causes the Carbuncle, but only that there is here no malignity present;
neither is the Tumor likewise here so great as it is in a Carbuncle; neither is
it (as we told you out of Celsus) bigger then a Bean. But that it is more
exasperated by night, the Cause hereof is a black humor (that is wont to be
moved more in the night) and the nocturnal cold, which shuts and closes up
the Pores of the Skin.

Signs Diagnostick.
It is not at all needful that we declare the signs and tokens of this Tumor;
since that it may be sufficiently known from the aforementioned description of
Celsus.

The Prognosick.
To tell you the truth, these Tubercles are not dangerous; and they denote the
strength of the expulsive faculty: yet notwithstanding they are very grievous
and troublesome by reason of the pain they cause; and they bring restlessness
likewise upon the Party in the night time, and they signify that an adust and
vicious Juice does superabound in the body.

The Cure.
And therefore the naughty a vicious humor is to be evacuated; and if the blood
too much abound, a Vein is then to be opened; and withal there is such a kind
of Diet to be prescribed that may not generate and breed an adust humor.

As for Topical Remedies, such a like Bath, or Lotion, may be appointed, Viz.

Take Mallows, Violets, Pellitory of the Wall, Bearsfoot, of each three
handfuls; Nightshade one handful; Marshmallow seeds, and the four cold seeds
well bruised, of each one ounce; boil them in sweet water, for a Bath.

Paulus and Aetius commend the liquor of Laserpitium, with salted water, in
regard that it dries without any corrosion at all; as also the Leaves of the
Hemlock or Henbane bruised and pounded small together with Honey; as likewise
the Green Coriander, and Nightshade bruised and mingled together; or the Leaves
of the Wild Olive bruised. For those Ulcers that spring and arise from
Pustules, this following Medicament is very proper and convenient;

Take Ceruss half an ounce, Litharge one ounce and half; Fenugreek seed half an
ounce, Roses two drams, the Juice of Endive as much as will suffice; let them be
mingled and stirred together until they attain unto the thickness of Honey, or
a Liniment: But let there be a careful abstinence from whatsoever is sharp,
acid, and salt.

Terminthus.
Some there are that refer likewise Terminthus unto these Epinyctides. But it
does not yet sufficiently appear what this Tumor Terminthus of the Ancients is
properly; but only what we have from Galen, who in Epidem. 6. Comment 3. Text.
37. thus writes; that the name of Terminthi does signify certain black
Pustules, arising especially in the Thighs, derived from the likeness and
resemblance they have in figure, color, and bigness with the fruit of
Terminthi, that is Cicers, (as they vulgarly render it; but as others, and that
more rightly, the fruit of the Turpentine Tree.)

Chap. 26. Of Essere.
THere is also a certain kind of Tumor (which we but very seldom meet with in
the writings of the Greeks and Latins; but oftentimes mentioned by the
Arabians, and now and then likewise by the Physicians of our own time, such
especially as live near us in our own Country) which they call Essere, Sora, and
Sare; to wit, when litcle Tubercles, inclining to a red color, and somewhat
hard, do suddenly and unexpectedly seiz upon the whole Body, together with an
extraordinary and troublesome itching; Just as if the Party had been bitten and
stung by Bees, or Wasps, or Gnats, or stung with Nettles; and yet
notwithstanding so that after a long time they vanish again; and the Skin
likewise (without the issuing forth of an ichorous excrement, or any other
moisture whatsoever) recovereth its former smoothness and color. There are
some indeed that refer these kind of Tubercles unto the aforesaid Epinyctides
of the Greeks; but they are here in mistaken. For Epinyctides and Essere are
Tumors altogether differing one from the other; in regard that Epinyctides pour
forth out of them a certain humor, which Essere does not, but vanishes without
any kind of humor issuing there from. Moreover the Epinyctides (according to
the name they have thereupon Imposed on them) do afflict and grieve the Patient
most of all in the night time; but the Essere very rarely break forth in the
night, but (for the most part) in the day time. The way and Method of Curing
them is likewise very various and different.

It is somewhat doubtful whether or no this kind of Tumor was at all known to
the Grecians; since that we meet not (in any of their writings) with the true
and proper kind of this Tumor; neither do they make any the least mention
hereof; unless happily there be any that will refer this Tumor Essere unto
Exanthemata that are without any Ulcer.

Serapio in the fifth of his Breviary, and Chap. 8. makes a twofold sort of
this Tumor, differing according to the Nature and quality of their Causes. The
one he deriveth from choleric blood; the other from a salt and nitrous Phlegm;
but this more rare. Others there are that assert that this kind of Tumor does
arise from an exhalation or vapor of hot fervent Blood, or else the admixture
of the Choleric and Salt humors.

The Causes.
Whosoever knows and understands the Nature of serous wheyish humors will
not deny that such like Tubercles may possibly be excited from serous or
wheyish humors, being such as are sharp and easily moved, and likewise such as
without much ado vanish and are discussed. Which appears, and may be
confirmed even from hence, that this Malady may be, and is removed especially
by Venesection or blood-letting, which said Venesection does chiefly and
principally qualify and allay that extreme and fervent heat of the serous and
wheyish part of the blood. Yet notwithstanding the itch that is sometimes
greater, and sometimes less, likewise teaches us, that there is not one alone
difference of this wheyish humor; but that sometimes this said whey is more mild
and moderate, and sometimes again more sharp and hot; sometimes thinner, and
sometimes thicker; as likewise thus much (which I my self have very often
observed) that these Tubercles (while the the Patients are in a hot place) they
then break forth and appear, and that when they expose themselves unto a cold
Air, the Essere then vanish; and as soon again (on the contrary) to bud forth
in the cold Air, and to vanish in a hot place: the former whereof seems from
hence to happen, to wit, because the humor is very thin and moveable, and
therefore is instantly driven in again by the cold ambient Air; but the latter,
because the Humor is not altogether so movable and thin, but somewhat more
thick, which for that very cause cannot transpire in a cold Air; but in a
hotter Air it will transpire or breathe through.

But this wheyish and thin Humor is for the most part generated from the fault
of the Liver; which from some preternatural cause is disposed to generate and
breed this humor. Now that said Humor waxes extremely hot from the Causes
Procatartick (as they call them) that stir and move the blood. And this
happens likewise in the Winter time, and in cold Regions, rather than in hot.

Signs Diagnostick.
It is easily known by those notes and marks that are above mentioned; to wit,
there sometimes goes before an Ulcerous Lassitude; and then there break forth
in the whole body itchy Pustules; as if the party had been pricked by Bees, or
stung with Nettles.

The Prognostics.
1. These Tubercles vanish of their own accord within a very short space,
although there be no course taken for the curing of them; and they are not
suppurated; neither does there issue forth of them any humidity at al. And if
this should sometimes so happen, yet this chances rather by reason of the
scratching of them, and also from the vehemence of the Itch (which is extreme
troublesome to the sick persons) than by means of the Tumor.

2. Sometimes these Essere go before Choleric Fevers; and therefore such as
are very frequently molested and grieved with these Tubercles ought not in any
case to neglect the Cure, lest that they fall into Fevers, and some more
grievous Disease.

The Cure.
For the most part, there is no need at al to administer Topics; but if the
fervent heat of the Blood and Humors be (by Venesection and the administering of
Medicaments that alter) qualified and kept under, the Tubercles will then soon
vanish, and the smoothness and Natural color will forthwith return unto the
Skin. To wit, in the first place a Vein is to be opened, and so much of the
blood drawn forth as the state and condition of the body requires. And
afterward, if there be any need at al thereof, the Choleric and wheyish Humor
is to be drawn forth by Tamarinds, Myrobalans, Rheubarb; afterward let there be
administered the Juice and Syrup of Pomegranates, Ribes, Syrup de Agresta, or
Varjuyce, Whey; with the Emulsion of the four cold seeds, and the like; Milk
tart and sour, etc. It is likewise very requisite to put the sick person into a
Bath of warm Water.

Let his Diet likewise be cooling and moistening.

Chap. 27. Of Scabies, or Scabbiness.
SCabies or Scabbiness arises likewise from adust matter, as does also the
Itch; that is (as it were) a certain Praeludium and forerunner of Scabbiness,
and the like Affects. Now Scabies by the Greeks and Latins is called Psora, an
Affect sufficiently known; in the which there is not only present some kind of
foulness and deformity of the body, but a distemper also even of the very Skin,
together with a swelling and exulceration; from whence it is, that the actions
of the Skin are likewise hurt. But more especially, in the Scabies or
Scabbiness, the top and utmost part of the Skin is affected; insomuch that out
of it (as Galen tells us in his fourth upon the Aphorisms, and the 17. Aphor.)
there is some such like thing cast forth, that bears a likeness and
resemblance with the casting of Serpents. From whence it likewise differs
from the Itch: for in the Itch there is only a roughness of the Skin, in which
there is nothing that falls off notwithstanding the scratching; whereas in the
Scabies there is not only a roughness of the Skin, but likewise a distemper
with a swelling; from which (by scratching) the bran-like bodies are easily and
readily separated; and together with them diverse Ichores likewise, and filthy
purulent Excrements.

The Causes.
But what the Cause of the Scabies is, in this Authors seem not so well to
agree. Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 1. and 3. tells us that Sabies also,
and Lepra are Melancholic Affects; and likewise in the seventh Sect. Aphor.
40. that Cancers, Elephantiases, Lepra's, and Psora's, are al of them
Melancholy Affects; and the same he also tells us in other places. But Avicen in
the seventh Book of his fourth Tome, Tract. 3. Chap. 6. writes that the matter
of Scabies is the blood; with the which Choler is mingled, and that converted
into Melancholy or salt phlegm: and with him the other Arabian Physicians agree.
But the very truth is, that although in the Scabies the humor be not always
one and the same, yet in every Scabies there is some kind of mixture of the
adust and melancholy, hot and dry humor. And furthermore, there is one sort of
Scabies that is moist, another that is dry. The moist, in the which there
sloweth forth a certain matter that is moist, and withal rotten, filthy, and
purulent; but the dry is that in which there is but little or none of the
aforesaid matter cast forth. And concerning this latter it is that Galen seems
to speak, as being such wherein that melancholy humor does more superabound.
But Avicen and the rest of the Arabian Physicians understand hereby al kind of
Scabies whatsoever. Now albeit the next cause of Scabies be a humor sharp and
salt; yet notwithstanding Avicen does not altogether absurdly assert that blood
is the matter of the Scabies. For seeing that Scabies is an Univerversal Affect
of the whole Body, it cannot therefore easily proceed from any other humor,
unless that blood be likewise therewith mingled; and yet notwithstanding the
blood cannot properly be said to be simply the cause of Scabies; to wit, so
long as it retains its benign and tempeperate Nature. For whilst it
continues benign and good, it can in no wise excite and cause the itching,
neither yet those Ulcerous Tumors or Swellings. Wherefore, before such time as
the blood can possibly produce and breed the said Scabies, it must of necessity
be corrupted, and other humors that are sharp and biting there with mingled.
And true it is indeed, that yellow Choler is sharp and corroding, but then it
scarcely flows in so great abundance, or is of that thickness as to excite
such like Tumors. But black Choler and salt Phlegm are Humors very fit and most
apt to produce the said Scabies. For these Humors being thick, hot and dry, and
withal biting and corroding, if they chance to be thrust forth unto the Skin,
there they stick fast in it; and there they excite a hot and dry distemper, an
itching, a swelling, and an exulceration.

But now as for the primitive Causes (and more especially for the generating
and breeding of those salt, biting, and sharp humors) the kind and ordinary
course of Diet that is kept does exceedingly advance and further the same,
Meats (to wit) of a bad juice, and that afford an unwholsom and corrupt
aliment; such as are salt, sharp, and that are easily corrupted. And hence it
is, that the poorer sort of people (who live upon these kind of unwholsom
corrupt meats) are most frequently infested with the Scabies or Scabbiness; as
likewise Children, and young people in general, in regard that these are
altogether careless and heedless in their Diet; whereupon they contract great
store of excrements, that being retained in the outward part of the body are
there corrupted, and so they get an acrimonious quality. But then from these
bad and naughty meats those sharp and salt humors are the more easily bred if
there be present a hot and dry distemper of the Liver. And hitherunto likewise
relates the uncleanness and nastiness of the body, to wit, when there is
altogether a neglect in the keeping it sweet and clean; and if the foulness and
impurities of the Skin be not duly washed off, or the garments not shifted and
changed often enough; whereupon it is, that filth and impurities sticking in
the superficies of the body do not permit so free a passage forth unto the
excrements; and by this means the said excrements acquire a certain acrimony,
and so corrupt the other humors. The Scabies arises likewise sometimes after a
Crisis, and after Diseases both acute, and those also that are of a long
continuance; to wit, when Nature expels forth unto the Skin those naughty
and depraved humors, which it is not able any other way to discuss and
evacuate. And lastly, Congium is likewise accounted and reckoned up among the
principal causes of Scabies; which cause Galen also acknowledges, in his first
Book of the Differences of Fevers, Chap. 2. and Book 4. of the Differences of
Pulses, Chap. 3. For in the Superficies of the Skin of those that are Scabby
there is a certain viscous and clammy moisture gathered together, which being
either by the Apparel, o^ by some other means communicated to the body,
corrupts the humors therein, after the like manner, and produces the like
Affection, and that especially in these bodies that are now already disposed
unto the Scabies. And indeed the humid or moist Scabies is the more contagious,
in regard that in this there is generated more of the aforesaid viscid and
clammy humidity.

The Differences.
Some there are that reckon up very many Differences of Scabies; as that one is
new, another old and inveterate; and that one seizes upon the whole Body,
another upon the Hands only, and the Thighs: but the main and special
Difference is that which is taken from the Difference of the Humors; that one
arises from a black and melancholy humor, (and this is called a dry Scabies)
in which although there be a concurrence of other humors, yet notwithstanding
the greatest part thereof is of this last mentioned humor; from whence it is,
that out of the parts affected with this Scabies, either there is nothing at
all sent forth; or if there be any thing issuing our, it is thick, dry; and the
Ulcers themselves, as likewise the prints and footsteps (as we may so term
them) of these Ulcers are wan and pale, and sometimes black: another is humid
and moist; in which there abounds a salt phlegm; out of which there
plentifully flows forth much moist filth and corruption, that is thin and
subtle, sharp; and now and then likewise it will be thick.

Signs Diagnostick,
The Scabies or Scabbiness, is an Affect very well known, and it may easily be
discerned, (as may also its Differences) and from those signs and tokens
especially that we but even now mentioned. And yet notwithstanding those signs
do now and then vary, and are something changed, according as the aduition of
the other humors is greater or less.

Prognostics.
1. Now although the Scabies be in this respect troublesome, to wit, in regard
of the foulness and deformity that it causes in the Skin, rather than that it
brings with it, or threateneth any other danger nigh at hand; and that in
youth it oftentimes preserves, and likewise freeth from other Diseases: yet
notwithstanding it is not always secure and safe. For if it be of any long
continuance, it may (and sometimes does) turn into the Lepra or Leprosy; and in
Ancient persons it is contumacious and stubborn, and hard to be cured.

2. And among the several species and kinds of them, the dry is more difficult
in curing than the moist. And therefore (whatever kind or sort it be of) it is
not at any hand to be neglected; but by a due and fit Cure (even for the very
deformities sake, if there were no other cause) speedily to be taken away and
removed.

Of the Scabies retiring inwardly.
That Scabies that has its rise and original, not from any contagion, but from
some internal default of the humors, for the most part breaks forth (as it
were) critically, and arises from some internal vice of some one or other of
the Bowels; in which so soon as any vicious humors are generated, they are
immediately by Nature thrust forth unto the outward part of the body: the which
motion if Nature be not able to perfect and accomplish it; or in case she be by
Medicaments administered unseasonably hindered in her operation, diverse Diseases
are from hence excited. Many Diseases proceeding therefrom.
Touching the Quartan we have spoken before, where we treated of Fevers. There
are oftentimes other Fevers, (long continued, and sufficiently dangerous) and
likewise very often intermingling Fevers; but for the most part, they are
inordinate Fevers that arise in this manner, and by this means. Of this I here
cured (in the year 1636. in the month of April) a certain man of a melancholy
Constitution; An example of a continual Fever from the Scabs retiring inwardly.
and who had withal likewise a continued Fever, together with a sore and very
grievous Cough, by means of which he cast forth and brought away much Spittle,
and sometimes also great store of blood; he was likewise afflicted with a
difficulty and shortness of breathing, insomuch that there was now great cause
to suspect and fear a Phthisis or Consumption. Now having for eight days made
use of Medicaments to very little purpose, I made a further and more strict
enquiry into the Cause of the Disease; and then the Patient gave me to
understand (which until now he had concealed from me) that before he was taken
with this Disease he had the Scabies (or scabbiness, as we call it) the which
was no sooner vanished and gone, but this Fever and Cough followed thereupon.
The which I no sooner came to understand, but that I used the utmost of my
endeavor, (by Medicaments made of Fumitory, and such like) to cause the Scabs
again to break forth. Which I had no sooner effected, and administered such
other Medicaments as I thought fit, but both the Fever and the Cough ceased;
and the man is yet living, and perfectly sound, without any the least fear of a
Consumption.

I have told you elsewhere of a certain Student; Another example of blindness
from the same cause.
this man affected with this Scabies (after, and immediately upon the striking
in of the Scabs) became instantly blind, and for two days could see nothing at
al; this his blindness was likewise accompanied with an extraordinary
streightness of the Breast, difficulty of breathing, and black Urines. This man
upon the use of fit and convenient Medicaments that were administered to
evacuate the adust humor (as Fumitory, and such like) within four days
recovered his sight again. The same party (a quarter of a year after) being
again afflicted with the same Malady did not lose his sight as formerly, And
likewise of the Epilepsie.
but had one fit of the Falling Sickness. But yet notwithstanding, having had
fit and proper Medicaments prescribed him, he again recovered.

I have likewise seen many that from Scabbiness have been surprised and invaded
with prickings and shootings in the Breast, And many other discommodities and
inconveniences arising from the same cause.
with the bastard Pleurisy, and dangerous stitches, and likewise with the
Cachexy. I knew also a youth (aged fourteen years) that upon the unseasonable
use of inunctions (against the Scabies) to made his Urines black, lost his
sight; and at length being seized upon by the Epilepsie (and the fits thereof
being become very frequent) in the end he died thereof. Wherefore we say that
this Scabies is no way to be slighted, neither driven inwardly, or up and
down; and if it arise from any internal vice of the humors, and the Cacochymy,
then external Medicaments are by no means to be administered before the use of
Purgers, and other internal necessary Medicaments.

But now what has been said touching the Scabies or Scabbiness; The same is
likewise to be taken and understood touching the Achores in Infants:
the same is likewise to be asserted touching the Achores or running sores in
the Head, yielding a thin excrement in Infants. Concerning these Hippocrates
(in his Book of the Epilepsie or Falling sickness, which he calls Morbus
Sacer) writes thus; Those Infants (says he) that have Ulcers breaking forth
upon their Heads, and upon their Ears, and upon the rest of their Body; and
such as spit often, and abound with Snot, these are they that in the progress
of their age live most at ease. For hither flows (and from hence is likewise
purged forth) that Phlegm which ought to have been purged in the Mothers Womb;
and these Infants that are thus purged are never seized upon by the Falling
sickness. Whereas on the contrary, i^ ^^ther the Physicians, or the
Women-Doctors (as they call them) do without due caution and unseasonably
administer astringent and Repelling Medicaments, and thereby heal up the said
Achores, the Infants must then unavoidably fall into Fevers, the Epilepsie,
Convulsions (the vicious humor retiring and running unto the internal parts)
and sometimes likewise they (within a very short space) even die hereupon.

The Cure.
Now therefore in the first place, there is a due care and regard to be had in
point of Diet; and there must be a total abstinence from those Meats that
generate adust and salt humors; Viz. all things that are salt, sharp, bitter,
Oils themselves, and whatsoever partaketh of an oily Nature: and on the
contrary, Meats of a good and wholesome Juice are constantly to be fed upon. And
this may also be observed, and taken for a general rule, that it is more
convenient that the food that is given unto Persons that are thus affected (to
wit, with Scabbiness) be rather boiled than either roast or fried. For what is
either roasted or fried, does especially generate a more sharp and dry humor.
After this, the acrimony and sharpness of the humors is to be qualified and
tempered; and the distemper of the Liver is especially to be reduced unto its
pristine Natural state; and the salt and sharp humors are likewise to be
evacuated. And therefore (in the very beginning) the first ways and passages
(as we term them) are to be purged and emptied; as for example;

Take Electuar. Diatholic. half an ounce, Powder of prepared Seen half a dram;
and so with Sugar make a Bole.

If there be present any extraordinary store of Blood, that the humors are
overhot, it will then be very requisite and proper to open a Vein in the Arm.
For Nature is wont to expel the vicious humors out of those greater internal
Veins unto the external branches, and those that lie under the Skin; which from
thence (a Vein being opened) are together with the Blood evacuated.

Afterward (in a moist Scabies from salt Phlegm) Preparatives are to be
administered, of Cichory, Agrimony, the Hop, and Maidenhair; and Purgers of
Agarick, Rheubarb, and Seen Leaves. In a dry Scabies, Preparers of Fumitory,
Borrage, Bugloss, Violets; and Purgers, of Epithymum (we commonly call it
Mother of Time) Polypody, Seen, black Hellebor: from whence (for this present
purpose) various forms and Receipts may be made and compounded. As,

Take the Roots of Cichory one ounce, Polypody, sour Sorrel, the inward rind of
the black, Alder Tree, of each half an ounce; of Sassafras wood, rasped
Liquorish, of each two drams; Fumitory, Sorrel, Agrimony, Scabious, of each one
handful; Epithymum, the Flowers of Borrage and Bugloss, of each half a handful,
Raisins one ounce and half; boil them in a sufficient quantity of common water,
or else Whey; and for two pound of the streining clarified, add of the Syrup of
Endive and Cichory with Rheubarb, of each half an ounce; of Elder Vinegar, two
ounces. Mingle them well together, and let the Patient take hereof four or five
ounces. Or,

Take Cichory roots six drams; Lichorish three drams, Fumitory two handfuls,
Endive one handful, Flowers of Borrage, Violets, Bugloss, of each half a
handful; the seed of Melons, and Endive, of each one dram; the Leaves of Seen
one ounce, the Rinds of Mir^bolans Citrin. and Ind. of each half an ounce;
Polypody of the Oak five drams, the whitest Agarick four drams, choice Rheubarb
two drams, Spike one scruple, Cinnamom, and Ginger, of each half a dram; let
them boil in a sufficient quantity of Scabious and Fumitory water for two lib.;
let them stand for one night, and afterward strain and clarify them; and let
them be aromatized and spiced with Lign. Aloes, and red Saunders, of each one
scruple. The Dose is four or five ounces. Or,

Take the Decoction of Seen nine ounces, Syrup of Fumitory, Epithymum, and of
Cichory with Rheubarb, of each two ounces; Mingle and aromatize them with
Cinnamom, and Spec. Diarrhod. Abbat. half a dram; give hereof at once four or
five ounces. Or,

Take Fumitory one handful, the four Cordial Flowers of each one pugil,
Epithymum half a dram, rasped Liquorish two drams, the Leaves of elect and
choice Seen three drams, black Hellebore one scruple, Polypody of the Oak three
drams, Raisins stoned two drams, Anise seed one scruple; boil for four ounces.
In the streining infuse of the most choice Rheubarb one scruple, Cinnamom half
a scruple, Spike and Schaenanth, of each three ounces; unto the streining
pressed forth add of the Syrup of Fumitory, and Bizantin. simp. of each three
drams; Make herewith a Potion to drink; and let it be taken down as often as
need requires.

If it be requisite, and that the Body stand in need of any further purging,
then let the stronger sort of Purgers be administered. As,

Take Confection of Hamech three drams, Elect. Roses of Mes^nes one dram and
half, and so make a Bole. Or, dissolve these Electuaries in the simple water,
or the Decoction of Fumitory, three ounces thereof; and then add Syrup of
Epithymum and Fumitory one ounce, and mingle them: After other preparations and
purgations, we may then safely use the infusion of black Hellebore, in this
manner prepared.

Take the roots of Cichory, and Polypody of the Oak, of each one dram and half;
Fumitory half a handful, Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, and Cichory, of each one
pugil; Epithymum and Raisins, of each two drams; boil them for five ounces: in
the streining infuse for the space of one whole night, of the true black
Hellebore a dram and half; Cinnamom one scruple, Carrot and Anise seed, of each
half a scruple; Cloves five grains; unto the streining pressed forth add Syrup
of Fumitory, and of Cichory with Rheubarb of each three drams; Let them be
aromatized with one scruple of the Species of Diarrhodon Abbati^.

But more especially there is here to be administered (as that that is of
singular benefit) the Whey of Milk, and chiefly that of Goats Milk; which
indeed (in the moist Scabies) may first of all be administered, with one ounce
of Succus Rosarum or the Juice of Roses, that it may withal purge; and after
for four or five days may only alter. If the Scabies be dry, then there may be
added two or three ounces of the Juice of Fumitory, or also two ounces of the
Emulsion of the seed of Melons; and thus it is a most efficacious Medicament
both against the Scabies and the Itch.

Or else the Whey may likewise be prepared after this manner.

Take the Whey of Goats Milk one quart, Mirobalans bruised two ounces,
Epithymum one dram and half; infuse them for a night, and in the morning give
the Patient one ounce of the streining. Or,

Take the Roots of Cichory, Fumitory, Sorrel, the Sprouts or tendrels of Hops,
Agrimony new gathered, of each one handful; Wormword and Rosemary of each one
pugil; boil all these in a sufficient quantity of Goats Milk while it is yet
warm, until a fourth part thereof be consumed. Afterward let there be dropped
thereinto two of three spoonfuls of Elder Vinegar; and when the Milk is
Curdled, the thin and clear Whey may be taken in the morning, either alone, or
(which is better) with the Syrup of Cichory with Rheubarb.

When the Body is sufficiently purged, then it will not be amiss to administer
those things that provoke Sweat. As,

Take Treacle, and Mithridate, of each one scruple, the thickened Juice of
Fumitory half a scruple, Syrup of the Juice of Sorrel, two drams; dissolve them
in Fumitory Water, and so let them be taken in the morning; and the Patient
being well covered in his Bed, let him Sweat for some hours. For this use and
purpose, Fumitory alone may be administered, and so may Pimpernel, Columbines,
and Elder. But if the Scabies be stiff and stubborn, and will not yield unto the
Remedies aforesaid, we may then also use the Decoction of Sarsaparilla; unto
which notwithstanding it will not be amiss to add, and therewith to mingle the
Water or Syrup of Fumitory.

When these things have been made use of, we are in the next place to betake
our selves to Topics. And here we commend unto you (in the first place) the
use of Baths, as well sweet Baths, as Mineral and hot Baths, among which those
that proceed from Sulphur are chiefly commended: the continual use whereof,
notwithstanding since that it does extremely dry, for this reason it is
sometimes requisite and convenient in a dry Scabies, by turns to make use of the
sweet and Sulphury Baths, so that the Patient make use of the sweet Baths
twice, and four times of the other, to wit, the Sulphury. For by the only use
of such Baths, and Whey alone, even the most contumacious Scabies is oftentimes
cured. But seeing that those mineral Baths are not every where to be found, we
may therefore ^ubstitute and appoint others in stead of them, that have a
faculty and power to digest and cleanse, and to open, thoroughly cleanse, and
purge the Pores or the Skin; which if they be mingled together with those
things that cool, and mitigate the pain and itching, you have then a most
excellent and sovereign Remedy. As,

Take Alum one ounce and half, Sulphur two ounces, Nitre one ounce, Salt a
handful; Make hereof a Powder which may be cast into a Kettle full of warm
water. Or,

Take Common Salt half a pound, Alum three ounces, Vitriol four ounces, Tartar
and Nitre, of each two ounces; let them be thoroughly bruised, and then cast
into the Bath.

In the Bath there may likewise be boiled, Mallows, Fumitory, Scabious,
Mugwort, Beets, the Root of sour Sorrel; and a Bag hung therein, filled with
Bean meal and Bran. There may likewise this following Bath (or such like) be
provided. Viz

Take Roots and Leaves of the sour Sorrel three handfuls: Elecampane Root three
ounces: Briony half a pound: Mallows, Scabious, Fumitory, Selandine, Sopewort
(which some call Bruisewort) of each two handfuls: whole Barley, Lupines, Beans,
of each half a pound: Bran one pound: Camomile flowers three handfuls: boil
them for a Bath.

For this same use and purpose, Liniments likewise and Unguents are prepared; a
great number whereof we meet with every where in Authors. They are compounded
and made (as I have told you) of such Medicaments as cleanse and purge the
Skin; such as are Nitre, Flowerdeluce, bitter Almonds, Southernwood, Hellebore,
the Root of Briony, of white Lillies, Bean meal, the meal of the bitter Verch
Orobus, the meal of Lupines, Turpentine, Sulphur, Tartar: Unto these you may
add and mingle therewith Anodynes, that is to say, those Remedies that mitigate
the itching, and assuage the pain that is excited by other Medicaments; and
such are these, viz. Oil of Roses, Oil of Dill, and Oil of Camomile, the Fat of
a Hen, Goose Fat, the Fat of a Calf, new and fresh Butter, Hogs Lard, etc.
Adding likewise those things that correct and amend the distemper of the Skin;
and such are these, to wit, the juice of Sorrel, Milk, the seed of Melons:
those Medicaments are likewise herewith to be mingled that are of thin parts;
as Vinegar, and the juice of Lemmons.

From al which, and other such like (as we see occasion) diverse Medicaments are
compounded; according to the nature, condition, and constitution (together with all other circumstances) of the body thus affected. For all kinds of Scabies or
Scabbiness are not easily to be cured with one only Medicament: and whosoever
they be that attempt this, they are justly to be accused either of negligence
or ignorance. For the milder sort of Medicaments are most fit and proper in a
mild and moderate Scabies, in Children, Women, tender and delicate persons; and
so on the contrary: And likewise the moist Scabies requires one kind of
Medicaments, the dry another.

The milder and gentler sort of Remedies are these that follow: Viz.

Take Litharge first dissolved and diluted with Rose Vinegar, the Roots of
white Lillies, of each two drams: Oil of Roses two ounces: Bean meal one ounce:
Juice of Lemmons two drams: Camphire four grains: those of them that are to be
pulverized, let them be beaten into a very small and fine powder, and so mingled
with the rest into the form of a Liniment. Or,

Take Juice of sour Sorrel, and Elecampane, of each one ounce: Juice of Lemmons
six drams; Turpentine an ounce, Litharge half an ounce, Ceruss two drams,
common Salt half a dram, Oil of Roses as much as will suffice; and make a
Liniment. Or,

Take the Fat of a Hog an ounce and half: Oil of Roses one ounce. Turpentine
half an ounce: Oil of Tartar, and the Yelks of Eggs, of each one dram: Powder
of Frankincense two drams: common Salt one scruple: and mingle them carefully.
Or,

Take fresh Butter, and Turpentine, of each four ounces: Oil of Roses, and
Myrtles, of each one ounce: two Yelks of Eggs: Ceruss one ounce: Salt two
drams: Mingle them well. Or,

Take the juice of sour Sorrel, and Elecampane, of each an ounce and half:
Vinegar half an ounce: Oil of Roses and Wax, of each a sufficient quantity: and
make an Unguent. Or,

Take Turpentine washed with Rose water half an ounce: the juice of sour
Oranges three drams: the Yelk of one Egg, Butter two drams, Oil of Roses as
much as will suffice to make a Liniment. Or,

Take Turpentine washed in Scabious water one ounce: Oil of Roses half an
ounce: fresh Butter and Hogs Grease, of each two drams: Salt half a dram:
Litharge one dram: the Yelks of two Eggs: Juice of Lemmons six drams: Wax as
much as will serve the turn to make an Unguent. Or,

Take Juice of sour Sorrel one ounce: Turpentine, and Styrax liquid, of each a
dram and half: Elecampane Root two drams: Frankincense one dram: the Yelk of
one Egg: Salt one dram: Vinegar a dram and half: Hogs Grease and Oil of Roses,
of each half an ounce: Wax a sufficient quantity to make a soft Unguent. Or,

Take Litharge half an ounce: Ceruss two drams: Mastick, and Frankincense, of
each two drams: the juice pressed forth of an Orange (the Orange being cut in
pieces together with its rind) one ounce: Oil of Roses as much as will suffice.
Stir them well about al together in a Leaden Mortar, and so make an Unguent.

For the Rich, and such as are tender and delicate, there are wont to be made
Unguents of Apples; which they therefore call Pomata's or Pomada's; as for
instance, thus:

Take Cinnamom and Cloves, of each three drams: Lavender flowers two scruples,
Nutmeg two drams, Styrax Calamite one dram, Benzoin five drams, Camphire one
scruple, sweet smelling Apples one pound and half, Rose water the like
quantity, Wine four ounces, the fat of a Hog fresh and sweet one pound: boil
al, and strain them, and then add of Musk half a scruple: and make a Liniment.

But in such as are of full age (especially where the Scabies is confirmed and
settled) the stronger sort of Medicaments are necessary. As for Example:

Take the Juice of sour Sorrel one ounce; Sulphur Citrine three drams; Nitre
two drams; Liquid Styrax, and Lupine Meal, of each two drams and half; Oil of
Roses as much as will suffice; a little Wax; and to make an Unguent. Or,

Take Sulphur half an ounce; Nitre one dram; Oil of Roses, and Oil of Nuts, of
each one ounce; Juice of Lemmons two drams: mingle them, etc. Or,

Take the Roots of Elecampane, sour Sorrel, of each one ounce; boil them in
Vinegar, and let them be passed through a fine sieve. Then add of live Sulphur
one dram; common Salt half a dram; of the Juice of Lemmons six drams; of the
white Unguent of Rhasis, and of the Cittine Unguent, of each half an ounce; Oil
of Tartar, and Oil of Roses, of each as much as will suffice; a little Wax: Make
an Unguent. Or,

Take good Wine that is sweet scented, a pint and hal^; Sulphur three drams;
Frankincense two drams; Salt one dram and half; Hogs grease three ounces; Wax
one ounce and half; let them boil together to the consumption of the third
part; and in the end add of liquid Styrax a dram and half; Mingle them. Or,

Take Root of Pimpernel, sour Sorrel, Elecampane, of each half an ounce; let
them be infused in the Water of Fumitory, and afterward let them be boiled;
unto the straining strongly pressed forth add Turpentine three ounces; Oil of
Roses two ounces; let them boil until a third part or the one half be consumed;
and then add of Sulphur half an ounce; Alum two drams; Salgem, and Nitre, of
each half a dram; Oil of Eggs and Wax, of each a sufficient quantity; and make
an Unguent. Or,

Take unsalted Butter four ounces; Turpentine an ounce and half; Sulphur two
drams; Salt half a dram; the Yelk of one Egg; and mingle them well together. Or,

Take Turpentine four ounces, Citrine Sulphur half an ounce; the Root of
Pimpernel, Elecampane, Lapis Calaminaris, of each half a dram; Salgem three
drams; Litharge, and Ceruss, of each one dram; the Yelks of two Eggs; Alum two
drams; a little Vinegar, and Oil of Roses as much as will suffice, and make an
Unguent.

There are some likewise that mingle Quicksilver and Sublimate with those
Unguents and Liniments they make use of in this Affect. But in regard that
there oftentimes thereby accreweth unto the Patient much damage and danger; it
is therefore the more safe and advised course (in the said Scabies) altogether
(or as much as possibly may be) to abstain from Quicksilver and Sublimate,
inasmuch as the said Scabies may be cured by other Medicaments.

And sometimes likewise (for the anointing of the Hands) there are provided
little round Balls, Sopes, and those Washballs they commonly call Smegmata; as
for example:

Take Powder of the Flowerdeluce Root half an ounce; of Elecampane two drams;
Feculae Brion. and Gersae Serpentariae (by both which you are to understand a
Powder made by Art of the fresh Roots of Briony, and Wake-Robin or Cuckowpint,
the powder of which last is called Gersa Serpentatia, and it is as white as
Starch or Ceruss) of each one dram; Choice Frankincense two drams; Oil of
Tartar three drams; Liquid Styrax two drams; the meal of Lupines half a dram;
the Juice of sour Sorrel three ounces; Venice Soap dissolved in Rose water and
Fumitory water, as much as will suffice; Musk if you please half a scruple, or
somewhat more; mingle al these, and make a Mass, and of it little Balls that may
be wrapped about with Silk. Or,

Take the distilled Water of sour Sorrel one pint; the Juice of Plantane two
ounces; Rose water one ounce and half; Juice of Lemmons one ounce; Litharge
three ounces; Ceruss two drams; Mercury sublimate six drams; common Salt two
drams; Sulphur one dram and half; Powder what is to be poudered, and then
mingle them in the Waters; let them stand infusing twenty four hours, and
afterward destill them.

Another experimented Remedy, in all kinds of Scabies or Scabbiness.

Take Roots of sour Sorrel (while they are yet green) and of Elecampane, green
likewise, of each half a pound, Swines fat three ounces; bruise the Roots well
in a Mortar, and let them boil a little over a gentle fire; and after let them
be hard pressed and squeezed, and so make hereof an Unguent.

Of Malum Mortuum.
Some Physicians make mention of a peculiar kind of Scabies, which they call
Malum Mortuum, because therein the body appears black, and as it were
mortified; which is a Scabies with a wanness and blackness, and crusty Pustules
that are black, soul, without any matter, sense, and pain, especially in the
Hips and Ankles, taking its Original from Natural Melancholy when it is become
adust; and thereupon it is that it follows the use of Melancholy Meats, the
obstruction of the Spleen, and the retention of the Hemorrhoids; and without
doubt, it wants not the scorbutical malignity. And it is a Malady (as are
likewise al Melancholy Affects) of a long continuance, and very hard to be
cured.

But yet it is to be cured by preparing the Melancholy Humor, and purging of it
in a fit and convenient manner, and by correcting the fault of the Spleen (upon
which it depends) touching which (as in the Scurvy, so likewise elsewhere
here and there) we have already often spoken. The body being evacuated, we are
to continue those Medicaments that temper the Melancholy humor; unto which
there are to be added those Medicaments that are good and proper against the
Scurvy.

Furthermore, let the body be washed with this Bath, prepared and made of the
Roots of Polypody, sour Sorrel, Elecampane, Flowerdeluce, the rinds of the
Elder, Danewort, Wormwood, Fumitory, Parietary, and Mallows. When the Patient
goes into the Bath, let there be given him the Conserve of Fumitory, or the
Syrup or Water thereof with Treacle.

Afterward let the place affected be anointed with Unguent Diapompholygos, or
such like.

Take Juice of Fumitory, of sour Sorrel, Selandine, Spoonwort, and
Watercresses, of each an ounce; the fat of an old Hog three ounces; boil them
until the Juyces be consumed; and then add of live Sulphur half an ounce; Oil
of Nuts an ounce; Unguent Diapompholygos one ounce and half; Frankincense two
drams; Turpentine half an ounce; mingle them well together in a Leaden Mortar,
and make an Unguent.

Chap. 28. Of Lepra of the Greeks.
LEpra (so called from the Greek word Lepis, in Latin Squamma, in regard of
the resemblance it has with the scales of fishes) is a certain high, or indeed
the highest degree of Psora or Scabies. But now (at the very first, and before
we proceed any further) lest that any one should be troubled, and made to doubt
in the reading of Authors, it is to be observed that we here speak of the Lepra
of the Grecians, and not that of the Arabians. For that Affect which the
Arabians call Lepra, is the same with the Greeks Elephantiasis, touching which
we shall speak in the next Chapter, which is nothing else than an universal
Cancer of the whole body; as it is manifest from the description that is given
it by Avicen in his Tertia Quarti, Tetrab. 3. Chap. 1.) where he says thus:
The Lepra is a Disease having its original from black Choler dispersed
throughout the whole body; and from whence the temperament of the parts, the
form and figure, and at length also the very continuity it self is corrupted;
and it is a Cancer common to the whole Body.

But now again the Arabians call the Lepra with the Greeks, Albaram nigram, or
the black Albaras; as appears out of the same Avicen, Albaras nigra, or the
black Albaras.
in his Septima Quarti, Tetrab. 2. Chap. 9. The black Albaras (says he) is
that very same affect that we otherwise also call Impetigo Excoriativa; and it
is a scabbiness happening unto the Skin, rough, vehement; and it makes scales
like unto fish scales, with an itching, and it is accompanied with a melancholy
humor, and it is one of those things that precede and go before the Lepra: By all which words Lepra of the Greeks is manifestly described. For why? Lepra of
the Greeks is a Scabies in the highest degree, and differs from the Scabies
only in the vehemence of the Affect. From whence also it is that Paulus
Aegineta in one and the same Chapter, viz. Chap. 2. of his fourth Book,
handles both the Lepra and the Scabies: But Avicen (whom I had rather follow)
treats of them in several and peculiar Chapters; to wit, of Scabies, in the
seventh Section of his fourth Book, Tetrab. 3. Chap. 6. But he handles Lepra
of the Greeks in the place alleged.

For in Lepra there is a far greater corruption of the Humors, and consequently
a greater distemper than there is in Scabies: and in Scabies there fall off only
certain bran-like substances; whereas in the Lepra that that falls off
resembles the scales of Fishes; so that from the itching, by the Scabies,
there is an easy and ready passage unto the Lepra. For this itching is a
certain kind of light roughness in the Skin, in the which (unless happily it be
the more violently scratched) there falls off nothing at al from the Skin. In
the Scabies, afterward the Humor becomes more evident; and upon the scratching
there fall off certain branny bodies. In the Lepra the swelling is greater; and
there fall off no longer certain small branny substances, but scaly bodies,
whether there be any scratching or not. For in the Scabies the matter is more
thin, and preyeth upon the highest and utmost Skin alone: but in Lepra the
matter is more thick, and therefore does not only feed upon the utmost
superficies, but likewise upon the deeper parts of the Skin.

And without al doubt, Celsus his Impetigo.
Celsus in his fifth Book, and 26. Chap. under the name of Impetigo propounds
and comprehends this Lepra of the Greeks, and in no wise does he understand
the Greeks Lichen (which by others is called Impetigo) when he thus writes:
But now (says he) there are of Impetigo four species or kinds; of the which
that is least hurtful that in likeness represents the Scabies. For it looks
red, and is harder, and is also exulcerated, and corrodeth. But it is
distinguished from the said Scabies, because that it is more exulcerated, and
has Pustules like unto Vari; and there seem to be in it (as it were) little
bubbles or wheals, out of which in process of time small scales are resolved;
and this returns at some more certain times. A second kind there is worse
than the former, almost like unto a Papula, i. e. Blister or Wheal, but rougher
and redder than it, and having diverse forms. There fall off from the utmost Skin
small scales, the corrosion is greater, its progress is swifter and broader; and
at more certain and set times it likewise both begins and ends; it is
sirnanamed Rubrica. The third sort is yet worse; for it is thicker, and harder,
and swells more; it is also cleft in the top of the Skin, and it corrodeth
more vehemently. It is also in its motion forward scaly, but black; and it
creeps afar off both slowly and broadly. At certain times it either arises
or ends; neither can it be totally taken away, it is surnamed the Black. The
fourth and last sort is that which altogether refuses to admit of any Cure,
and differing in color: for it is somewhat whitish, and like unto a new made
Cicatrice or Scar, and it has little pale Scales, and some of them are
whitish, and some of them like unto a Pimple, which being taken away now and
then Blood sloweth forth. But otherwise its humor is somewhat white, the Skin is
hard and cleft, and it proceeds broadwaies. Now all these kinds do chiefly
arise in the Feet, and Hands, and they also infest the Nails. There is not any
one Medicament whatsoever more effectual then what (out of my Author
Protarchus) I have already related, as appertaining to the Scabies. But
Serapion has prescribed of Nitre two pugils, and Sulphur four pugils, to be
mingled together, and made up into a Mass with good store of Rosin; and this
Remedy he himself likewise made use of. Thus Celsus.

Neither is there any Author either Greek or Latin that has made or mentioned
so many kinds of Lichenes: which yet are easily found in the Lepra of the
Greeks; neither do we meet with any one Chapter in Celsus, wherein he treats
of Lepra; which notwithstanding although it were unto him unknown, could not
possibly be so unto the most studious and knowing Hippocrates. Moreover, the
Impetigo is by Celsus said to be worse then even the least and lightest
Scabies; and furthermore Celsus writes that all the kinds of Impetigo do send
forth Scales; which indeed is most proper unto Lepra of the Greeks; and it is
thought likewise to have received its name from Lepis, that is, a Scale;
whereas on the contrary, never any hitherto has attributed any scales
whatsoever unto Lichen of the Greeks. We now proceed to the Causes.

The Causes.
The Cause of this Malady is black Choler. For although there be also some
certain of the Ancients that have asserted that Lepra likewise arises from
salt Phlegm: yet notwithstandinding this is not so to be understood as if Lepra
did arise and might be excited from salt Phlegm alone, but that salt Phlegm is
sometimes mingled together with black Choler. And therefore we say, that
whatsoever generateth and heapeth up black Choler, the same causes, or at
least very much advances the breeding and production of Lepra. All which have
been already made known out of our former discourse touching the Scabies; as
for instance, an unfitting Diet, a dry temperament, the Hemorrhoids or monthly
Courses suppressed, Issues stopped that had been long kept open and running and a
Quartane Fever. And lastly, Contagion likewise makes very much to the
generating of the Lepra, in like manner as it does in Scabies. For albeit there
be some that deny that the Lepra is contagious; yet notwitstanding they seem
thus to do without any evident Cause. For if Scabies be contagious, then
without doubt Lepra is so likewise, it being the worst Scabies; and the truth
is, it is most agreeable to Reason, that the excess of the Scabies should be
more contagious then the Scabies it self.

Signs Diagnostick.
Lepra is easily known, since that it has the very same signs with the
Scabies. This one thing alone is proper and peculiar unto Lepra, viz. that is
sends forth Scales. The Sweat is stinking, and the Malady will hardly yield
and give way to Remedies. The Skin (as in the Scabies) is rough, dry and
withered, there is present an itching, and there are certain substances
resembling the Scales of Fishes that fall off from them that are affected with
it, whether they scratch or forbear scratching.

The Prognostic.
Now this Malady is difficult, very stubborn and contumacious. And unless it be
maturely taken in hand, and dealt withal, it will degenerate into the Leprosy
or Elephantiasis; to wit, if black Choler be so heaped up together in the Body,
that it now seizes upon not only the exterior parts, but the internal also.

The Cure.
As for the Cure hereof: Seeing that Lepra is a Scabies in the highest degree,
it therefore requires likewise the same Medicaments that the Scabies does;
only they must be made somewhat stronger. Wherefore a good and fitting Diet
being ordained, the Body is to be evacuated (as has been said) the distemper
of the Liver to be corrected, and the matter that has invaded the Skin is by
Digestives and cleansing Medicaments to be taken quite away. And in the first
place, it will not be amiss here to provoke Sweating with the Decoction of
Sarsaparilla, or Guajacum Wood. To cleanse, Galen (in his sixth Book of the
making of simple Medicaments) does especially commend a Myrepsick Suppository;
which in regard that it has a very strong astringent power, if Vinegar be
therewith joined, having laid aside, and put off its astringent power and
virtue, will excellently well discharge the office of Cleansing, and deeply
penetrating in all affects of the Skin. Sulphur is here likewise very
commodious, by reason of its abstersive Virtue. The rest of the Remedies are
specified in the precedent discourse of Scabies. And more likewise (which may
very fitly be here made use of) shall be said below, in Chap. 4. where we treat
of the Elephantiasis.

Chap. 29. Of Vitiligo, or Leuce, and Alphus.
WHereas in the former Chapter we told you that the Lepra of the Greeks is by
the Arabians called the black Albaras (for the Arabians mention two kinds of
Albaras, the one white, the other black) and that the white Albaras of the
Arabians is the same with Leuce of the Greeks; and seeing that Leuce is a
Species of Vitiligo; we therefore judge it fit to subjoyn Vitiligo unto Lepra of
the Greeks. Vitiligo:


The truth is, there be some that strenuously dispute, whether or no Leuce and
Alphus, and the like Evils that we shall anon propound, do belong unto Diseases,
or else unto Symptoms; and they scrape together (out of Galen) diverse places,
in which he seems to assert, now this, now that, now one thing, and then
another. But since our purpose in this Book is to treat both of the Diseases
and likewise of the Symptoms of the extreme parts; we will not therefore
scrupulously dispute hereof. Let it suffice that we give you notice of this,
that if the recess from the Natural state (whether it be in the distemper, or
in the Organical Constitution) be so small that it hurts no action, it is then
no Disease, but only a symptom; and h^^herunto are to be referred the changed
colors of the Skin. For although in our former Books we propounded the
Diseases and Symptoms of the parts severally and assunder; yet notwithstanding
it could not here fitly be done, in regard that sometimes the same Affect
(according to the greatness of the recess from the Natural state) is one while
a Disease, and another while a Symptom only.

Now unto the word Vitiligo (from whence soever it be derived) there is no
general Greek word to be found that answers unto it; but it contains under
it these three Affects, Leuce, and both the Alphus, to wit, the white and
black. For so Celsus writes, in his fifth Book, Chap. 26. about the end
thereof. There are (says he) three Species of Vitiligo; Alphus where the white
color is somewhat rough, and not continued; so that there seem to be as it were
certain small drops dispersed. And sometimes it creeps broader, and with
certain intermissions. Melas differs from this color, in regard that it is
black, and like unto a shadow, other things are the same. Leuce has somewhat
like unto Alphus, but it is more white, and it descends deeper, and in it
there are white hairs, soft and tender as wool or down feathers. All these
creep, but in some faster, in others more slowly. But Galen (as we have already
said) has no common name under which to comprehend Leuce, and Alphus, but he
propounds them as diverse Affects; in his second Book of the Causes of
Symptoms and the second Chapter.

Among the Arabians we meet with the word Albaras, which they divide into white
and black not as one and the same Disease into its Species, but as a word into
its significations. For different Affects they are, and Albaras nigra or the
black Albaras is nothing else than Lepra of the Greeks, and the Impetigo of
Celsus. But Alba or the white, the Greeks term Leuce; which appellation Celsus
does both keep, and makes it a Species of Vitiligo. Like as Pliny also makes
mention of the white Vitiligo, in his Book 18. and Chap. 15. and in his Book
31. Chap. 10. But of Nigra or the black, in his Book 22. and Chap. 25. For
there is no word or name to be found among the Latins that may answer unto the
Species of Vitiligo, to wit, Leuce and Alphus.

To wit, Physicians do thus style Leuce,, (as Galen writes in his third Book
of the Causes of Symptoms, and Chap. 2.) from the Color imposing the name
thereon. For look what kind of flesh Locusts have, and so likewise almost al
kind of Oysters, the like hereunto have they also that have their Skins fouled
and defiled with Leuce. But Alphoi are so called from the Greek word signifying
to change, to wit, because the color of the Skin is changed; and yet
notwithstanding not of the whole Skin, but up and down here and there great
spots arise throughout the Skin; and for the most part in the Body also. And
the truth is, their generation (as Galen there tells us) is of the like kind, to
wit, from a vicious nutriment. Yet notwithstanding under these the whole flesh
is not vitiated; but only in the very superficies and top of the Skin there are
as it were certain little scales fastened thereupon: and the truth is, that
Alphi or the white arise from a phlegmatic, but the black from a melancholy
Juice. And yet they are not true and right scales, but there is a certain kind
of roughness perceived in the Skin, together with the change of color. For in
this the black Alphus differs from the Lepra or the black Albaras of the
Arabians, that in Albaras Nigra or the black Albaras there are both excoriation
and scales, whereas in the black Alphus there are neither.

Morphaea.
Alphus is likewise called Morphaea, without all doubt from Morphe, to wit,
because the color of the Skin is changed into white and black, Celsus has
used the Appellations of the Greeks, in distinguishing the several species of
Vitiligo; and he has named the first Species Leuce, or Leuca: but Alphus he
calls only by the single name Alphus; and the black he styles Melas.

But now this change of color (as well in Leuca as in Alphus) does not only
consist in the Skin, but is extended likewise unto the Hairs; and as Celsus in
the place alleged writes, in Leuca there are white Hairs, such as are like
unto the soft and tender Hair in new born Children; and the white Alphi
likewise (as Paulus Aegineta tells us in his fourth Book, and Chap. 6.) produce
white Hairs, and the black Alphi black Hairs. And Johannes Philippus Ingrassias
(in his first Tract of Tumors, Chap. 1. P. 142.) assures us, that he had more
then once seen even old Gray Headed Men that have had some part either of their
Beards, or of their Eyebrows black, like as it is in young Persons that are
altogether black, to wit, when Melas is become inveterate, or that there be
present the black Alphus; and yet notwithstanding all this while the part
affected with the Leuca or the inveterate Alphus, has continued white.

From what has hitherto been said it is apparent and manifest, that by reason
of the color there is truly an alliance and near relation between these two
Affects, Leuca and Alphus; and yet notwithstanding in other respects they much
differ the one from the other, since that in Leuce there is a change not only
in the color of the Skin, but of the flesh likewise, yea also a change in the
very substance; whereas in Alphus only the Skin, or rather indeed the
Scarf-skin, is changed in color.

The Causes.
For touching the generation of Leuca, Galen in his third Book of the Causes of
Symptoms, and Chap. 2. thus writes: When the flesh (says he) has for some
long time been nourished with blood both phlegmatic, and withal glutinous and
clammy, the flesh indeed as yet remains, but yet notwithstanding its form it
changed, and turned into another species; and it becomes in a certain mean
betwixt flesh that has blood, and that that is altogether bloodless. But when
it is become such it then so be^alieth it that for the nutriment that is
brought unto it from the rest of the body, it does no more so much as attempt
the converting thereof into the red species of flesh, but rather into the
likeness of the flesh of Locusts. And so it comes to pass, that very speedily
it is rendered and becomes both white and phlegmatic, and that not only in
part, but wholly; in regard that it cannot convert the nutriment into a
redness, and because that withal that phlegmatic humor continually flows
thereunto. And therefore what kind of flesh (even from the beginning) the
Locusts have, (and almost al kind of Oysters) the like (from this
transmutation) have they that are defiled and fouled with Leuca. For so they
call this vice of the flesh, imposing, to wit, the name from the white color,
like as they give the name unto black and callous flesh from the Elephant.

But as touching the generating of the Alphi, Galen immediately subjoyneth,
that the generation of them (together with the vices aforesaid) are of the like
kind, but yet so notwithstanding that under them the whole flesh is not
vitiated, but only in the superficies of the body there are as it were certain
scales fixed and fastened.

But now Alphus is twofold; the white that proceeds from phlegm, and by the
Arabians it called the white Morphaea; and the black that it generated from a
melancholy humor, and is called the black Morphaea. But yet notwithstanding
some there are that constitute other colors also; and they say that the Skin is
sometimes changed unto a citrine yellowish color, and sometimes likewise unto a
red, according unto the diversity of the corrupt humor. And indeed what they
say is not altogether ^rivolous and to no pupose: for the Skin (true it is) is
changed oftentimes, no: only no^^ (...) ^^^re color, or a black color alone;
but also (...) unto a citrine and yellowish color.

The Antecedent causes of these Vices are Humors of the same kind heaped up in
the Veins, and by Nature driven forth unto the circumference and superficies of
the Body. But now those humors proceed from a default and error in the
sanguification; which happens either by reason of an ill course of Diet, or
else from some sickness and distemper of the Liver. And yet notwithstanding
unto the black Alphus there concurreth likewise (and that more especially) the
vice and distemper of the Spleen. But now with this malady men are more usually
surprised and set upon than women. Foe in women those vicious humors are wont
to be evacuated together with the monthly or menstrual purgation. Children are
likewise less infested with this malady, in regard that their bodies are hot
and moist, and therefore the less apt to breed these kind of Humors; their
bodies are likewise open and perme^ble, and consequently most sit for
insensible transpiration.

Signs Diagnostick.
Those Diagnostick Vices are known by the change of the color of the Skin. And
indeed the signs of the black Alphus are manifest, in regard that there are
broad blackish spots (scaly as it were) here and there spread, and dispersed up
and down throughout the Skin. But because in Leuce and the white Alphus there
is every where, and on al sides, a white color, these two vices are therefore
to be distinguished. In the white Alphus the hairs in the place affected retain
their natural color; but in Leuce there arise white hairs, like unto the soft
and tender woolly hairs in young Children. And likewise in Leuce the Skin is
more depressed. Moreover in the Alphi, if the Skin be pricked with a Needle,
there issues forth blood; but in Leuce that which flows forth is not
altogether blood, but a certain waterish and white humor. And lastly, in the
Alphus the spots are not continued, but disjoined; but in Leuce they are
altogether continued, by reason of the equal vice of the Skin underneath, and
the flesh.

Prognostics.
1. The Vitiligo (to tell you the truth) has in it no danger of death; and yet
notwithstanding it is a very filthy and loathsome affect.

2. If it be cherished by any default of the Liver or the Spleen, the Malady is
then the harder to be cured.

3. Leuce is more difficult to be cured than Alphus; and the Alphus likewise
that has been of long continuance is more easily cured than Leuce that is but
newly beginning.

4. That Leuce which waxes not red when it is rubbed, and being pricked does
not bleed, is incurable.

5. That Leuce likewise is incurable which seizes upon, and possesses a large
and spacious room, is of long continuance, and grows and increases every
hour; and also, when all the Aliment that flows thereunto is corrupted.

6. On the contrary, that Leuce that has yet some kind of redness left in it,
and is but small, is curable.

7. That Leuce that is in the hand, or the foot, is of difficult Cure.

8. The white Alphus is likewise more easily cured than the black. And in the
general, look by how much the color recedes from the Natural color of the body,
by so much the more is the Malady the harder to be cured.

The Cure.
This Malady is cured if the Humor that exciteth it be wasted and consumed; and
if a course be taken to hinder the further afflux of the like humor unto the
skin; and this is done if care be taken that the humor that is already present
in the body may be evacuated; and such a course likewise taken, that may
preve^t the generating of any new humor for the future.

In Leuce and the white Alphus there is no need at al of Venesection. For the
blood does not here superabound, but that which too much abounds, is the
thick and cold humors: which are to be prepared by those Medicaments that heat,
cut, and cleanse; and such as these are made and provided of Hysop, Betony, the
opening Roots, Steechas, and others of this kind: and they are afterward to be
evacuated by those Medicaments that purge forth phlegm; such as are Agarick,
Mechoacan, Turbith, Colocynthis, and the like. Avicen makes use likewise of
Vomitories, and Diuretics, that is, those Medicaments that cause and provoke
Urine. And then in the close and conclusion we are to administer Treacle, to
consume and waste the cold crude humors.

Before Topics may be applied in Leuce the place is first of al to be well
rubbed with course rough clothes, that so the Medicaments may the better
penetrate. Let the Topics be so ordained and appointed, that they may cleanse,
discuss, and draw the blood unto the affected part; such as are those that make
red the place, which are very fit and proper in Alphus; but those that are
stronger, and blisterers, and as it were Causticks, are required in Leuce.

Those Medicaments that cleanse, are, Lupines, the seed of the bitter Vetch
Orobus, Gentian Root, Beans, Figs, bitter Almonds, the Asphodel or Daffadil
Root, Alyssum or Madwor^, Nightshade, Sulphur, Pellitory, wild Cucumber Root,
and Briony Root.

Those things that attract and draw the blood, rubefie or make red the part,
and that likewise excite and raise Blisters, are, Mustard seed, the Herb Rocket
seed, Thlaspy or Treacle Mustard seed, Nitre, Euphorbium, Cantharides, the Root
of Water Dragon, and other such like, that we have elsewhere mentioned and
explained.

From these there are diverse Compositions to be made and formed. As,

Take Root of the sour Sorrel, wild Cucumber, of each one ounce; the greater
Celandine, and Fumitory, of each one handful; boil them in Water, and a third
part of Vinegar; and then let the place be washed with the Decoction; and
afterward anointed all over with this Unguent, Viz.

Take the Juice of the greater Celandine, sour Sorrel, Fumitory, and Scabious,
of each one ounce and half; Mustard seed one ounce; the fat of a Hen as much as
will suffice, and make an Unguent.

Vesicatories or Blisterers, either of Mustard, or of the Flies Cantharides, or
such like, in Alphus, are to be held and kept at least so long in the part
affected, until there be sensibly perceived a certain kind of stinging and
biting; but in Leuce, so long until that the Scarf-skin be parted asunder, and
that Blisters be excited and raised.

In the black Alphus let the place (the Patient being in a bath) be anointed
over with the Powder of Mustard seed mingled with Water, and made up into the
form of a Pultiss; and let it be so long there detained until there be felt and
perceived a certain mordication or biting: or else let the Powder of Mustard
seed mingled with Soap be somewhat dissolved in Water, and so spread and
anointed upon the part. Or,

Take White Soap one pound; slice it, and let it be so dried that it may be
reduced and made into a Powder. Then add thereto Bean-flour, the meal or flour
of Lupines, of each three ounces; Mustard seed one ounce; the Crumb of white
Bread one ounce and half; let them be mingled well together with the Juice of
sour Sorrel.

But in the first place, it is mainly requisite that the Patiens be careful in
his Diet, that so the fault of the blood may be corrected and amended. He must
for this purpose feed upon meats that afford a good juice; and he ought
carefully to abstain from al sorts of salt meats, meats that are smoak-dried,
and meats that are acid, thick, viscous or clammy. The place affected is daily
every mo^ning to be well chafed and rubbed, either with a rough course Linen
cloth, or else with the hands, bring first al over wet with the Oil of bitter
Almonds.

Chap. 30. of the Tumors, Impetigo, and Lichen.
WE have already told you above in the 28. Chapter, That Celsus his Impetigo is
nothing else but the Lepra of the Greeks. But now the Impetigo of Pliny, and
that we likewise meet with in diverse others of the Latins (and of which it is
our putpose here in this Chapter to treat) is the same that the Greeks call
Lichen.

Mentagra
Unto these Lichens there likewise belongs that that Pliny calls Mentagra;
touching which he thus writes in his 26. Book, and Chap. 1. Even the very face
of men (says he) is now sensible of Diseases that are altogether new, and in all former ages unknown, not only in Italy, but likewise throughout almost all
Europe. Neither is it in all parts of Italy that these Diseases run up and
down, neither throughout Illyria, or France, or Spain, as here at Rome, and the
parts adjacent, where they most especially prevail and spread themselves; being
(the truth is) altogether void of pain, and having in them no danger at all of
death; but then they are so foul and filthy, and they so defile the face that
any kind of death is to be preferred before this impure Affect. The worst and
most grievous sort of these they call Lichenes by their Greek name; but in
Latin (in regard that the said Affect arose especially from the Chin) they
first of all only in a jesting and sporting manner (as too many there are that
are Naturally apt and forward to make themselves merry with the miseries of
others) but soon after they commonly (and as by a generally received name) call
it Mentagra, because of its rise, at I said before, principally from the Chin)
sezing upon, and in many places overspreading as it were the whole Countenance,
the eyes alone being free, and thence descending both into the Neck, the
Breast, and the Hands, together with a filthy kind of bran that it causes unto
the Skin. This Plague (if I may so call it) was altogether unknown unto our
Ancestors, and our Fathers before us were never sensible thereof. And it first
of all crept into Italy about the middle of the Reign of Tiberius Claudius
Caesar, one Perasinus a Knight of Rome, and being then Quaestor, ha^^^ (...) in
Asia, and thence bringing along with him the contagion thereof. Neither were he
Women only sensible of this Malady, or the Bond slaves, or the mean Plebeians,
or the middle rank of Citizens; but even the Nobles themselves caught it by the
swift and secret conveyance of a Kiss; and in many of them (those especially
that had submitted themselves unto the Cure that was then practiced) the
Cicatrice was more foul, deformed, and unsightly than the Disease it self. For
they were cured by Causticks; that so the body might not be burnt even to the
very bone, where the Malady proved rebellious and refractory. And out of Egypt,
from whence it first sprang, there came hither unto us such Physicians as
undertook the curing of such Diseases; and the pains they took in the Curing of
this one only Malady was very advantageous and gainful unto them. For certain
it is, that M^nilius Torquatus. one of the Praetorian Order, when he was sent
Ambassador into the Province of Aquitain, gave two hundred Sexterces for his
being cured of this same Disease. Thus Pliny.

There are some indeed than reprehend and blame Pliny, and that assert that
many years likewise before the Reign of Claudius Caesar these Lichenes were well
known unto the Grecians; because that Hippocrates in the third of his
Aphorisms, Aphor. 20. and in his second Book of Women's Diseases, makes mention
of Lichenes; and that it is probable that the Malady vexed Italy in like
manner; forasmuch as Galen also in his fifth Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 7. makes mention of these Lichenes
in the Chin; and yet notwithstanding he has not one word of their rise and
beginning under the aforesaid Claudius; and the truth is, that most of those
Authors out of which he cites the Medicinal Remedies against this same
Disease, lived before Claudius Caesar. But for this we must here know and take
notice, that the Lichen is twofold; the one is that which Hippocrates and the
other Greek Physicians before the time of Claudius the Emperor make mention of;
and which Pliny (with all other the Latins, Celsus alone excepted) calls
Impetigo; the other that which was before the time of Claudius, and altogether
unknown, the which others call Lichen agria and fera, or the wild Lichen; but
most of them have named it Mentagra. And this distinction Pliny seems
likewise to have observed, in his Book 20. Chap. 1. and 9. and Book 22. Chap.
25. and Book 23 Chap. 7. and elsewhere; and to have called these Lichenes of the
Ancient Greeks Impetigo; but this new kind he calls only by the single and
bare name Lichenes, to wit, that so he might not (with the vulgar) make use of
the word Mentagra, being the name that was at the first jestingly and corruptly
imposed upon it. And that this latter sort of Lichenes was held to be
contagious and Epidemical, Galen seems sufficiently to hint this unto us,
when he writes, and assures us in his fifth Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 7. That one Pamphilus by the curing
of the Lichenes got good store of Wealth at Rome, when the Disease Mentagra (as
the vulgar call it) raged and prevailed here in the City. Both kinds of thi^
Disease Celsus in his fifth Book, and Chap. 28. seems to comprehend under the
name of Papulae, when he thus writes: There are (says he) of Papulae two
sorts; the one whereof is, in which the Skin is exasperated by the smallest
Pustules, and becomes red, and is gently and lightly corroded; having the
middle part of it a little smoother, and creeping along but very slowly: and
this same Malady most usually begins in a round manner; and for the same
reason it proceeds and creeps along after the same round manner and
fashion. But now the other is that which the Greeks call Ag^^a, that is, Fera,
or wild. In the which indeed the Skin is likewise but far more exasperated and
exulcerated, and is more vehemently corroded and gnawed, and thereupon becomes
red. And sometimes it also sends forth Hairs. Thus far Celsus: All which
agrees very well with that which Galen asserteth in his fifth Book of the
composition of Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 7. as likewise Paulus
Aegineta in his fourth Book, Chap. 3. and Aetius writes in even very same
(where he treats of Lichenes) Tetrab. 2. Sermon. 4. Chap. 16.

What Lichen is.
But now Lichen or Impetigo (that we may give you the general description
thereof) is a roughness of the Skin with dry Pustules, and with an extreme
itching; creeping forward unto the near adjacent parts, and in a short space
much extending it self.

The Causes.
The Cause is a serous or wheyish, thin, and sharp Juice, mixed together with a
thicker humor. Now this humor is generated either from a bad and corrupt kind
of Diet, and salt and sharp meats; or else also from the heat of the ambient
Air; which being afterward thrust forth unto the Superficies of the Body, it
there exasperateth the same, and as it were superficially exulcerateth it. And
this happens more especially in the spring time; whereupon it is, that
Hippocrates (in the third Book of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 20.) reckons up
Lichenes among the Diseases of the Spring. It likewise now and then happens
in the Winter time, if by the Air the Pores of the Skin chance to be close shut
up, and that sharp and salt humors be therein detained. And yet notwithstanding
this Malady may likewise proceed and be contracted from Contagion, or Infection.

The Differences.
Now there is a twofold sort of Impetigo (as we told you before out of Celsus)
the one whereof is more mild and gentle, in the which the Skin is less and by
the least sort of Pustules exasperated; and it has its middle part somewhat
more smooth; and it creeps forward but very slowly. The other that which the
Greeks call Agria, the Latins Fera, or wild; in the which the Skin is more
exasperated and exulcerated

Signs Diagnostick:
The Impetigo is known by this, that the Skin is made hard, dry, rough, and as
it were full of scales: there is likewise present an itching, and the Malady
grows broader from day to day, and from a very final and inconsiderable
beginning ic diffuseth it sell unto an extraordinary great breadth.

The Prognostics.
1. This Affect is not in the least dangerous; and that which is newly begun,
and mild, is very easily cured.

2. But that Impetigo that is called Agria, or the wild Impetigo, and that
which arises from a worse kind of humor, is not to be cured but with much more
difficulty; and it may soon pass and turn into the Lepra or Leprosy.

The Cure.
Such a kind of Diet ought to be ordained, that will not heap and treasure up
such like vicious humors, to wit, those that are salt, and sharp.

Moreover if there be any signs, that many of these kind of virious humors do
abound in the body, they are then by convenient Medicaments to be altered, and
evacuated.

As for Topics; the Spittle of one that is fasting (if the part affected he
therewith anointed) heals and helps a mild and Recent or new begun
Impetigo; and so likewise does that liquor or moisture that sweateth forth of
green Wood while it is burning; as also the Leaves of Wall-Pellitory, or the
Root of four Sorrel bruised with Vinegar: as also the Gum of Prunes, if the
part be anointed therewith; that which is here of singular use and benefit, is,
the Oil of Eggs, and the Oil of Tartar by draining; especially if mingled
together with other fit and proper Remedies. Or,

Take Oil of Roses one ounce, Tupentine washed in Rose Water, three ounces; Oil
of the Yelks of Eggs six drams, and Oil of Tartar by draining two drams; and
mingle them. Or,

Take Unguent Diapompholyx, one ounce; the White Unguent of Camphire half an
ounce, Oil of Tartar by draining two drams; Mingle etc. Or,

Take Oil of Wax one ounce, Oil of Eggs three drams, and of Tartar by draining
two drams; Mingle, etc. Or,

Take Frankincense, Ammoniacum, of each half an ounce, Oil of Yelks of Eggs two
ounces, Wax half an ounce; Mingle them, etc. Or,

Take live Sulphur one ounce, Frankincense and Myrrh of each two drams,
Camphyre one dram: bruise them into a very small and fine powder, and add of
Borax one scruple, Rose Water a Quart; and destil them. Or,

Take the Flour of Cicers one ounce, Alum half an ounce, Honey as much as will
suffice, make an Unguent. Or,

Take the Raddish root, make it hollow by taking forth as much of the pith as
you please; and then fill it up with Salt, Mustard, and Wine, let them stand
for the space of one whole night; and then anoint the Lichenes with the Liquor.
Or,

Take Chalk beaten to a powder, and let it be mingled with the Juice of
Sengreen in the manner of a Liniment, with which let the place affected be
anointed.

But if the Impetigo be fierce, contumacious, and of a long continuance, then
there will be need of such Remedies as do cleanse more forcibly. And here we
must commend unto you (as that which is very efficacious) that liquor that is
destilled out of the Oil of Tartar per de liquium or by draining, and
Quicksilver; as for example,

Take Oil of Tartar by draining half a pound, Quicksilver two ounces, destil
them by a Retort. The Quicksilver will first come forth; and after it a Water
that is excellent against all contumacious and stubborn Lichenes. Or,

Take Turpentine washed in Rose Water one ounce, Oil of Roses half an ounce,
Swines Fat three drams, live Sulphur two drams, Nitre a dram and half, Alum,
Sugar, Salt, of each one dram, Seed of Stavesacre, Litharge, of each one
scruple; Yelks of two Eggs, Wax as much as will suffice, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take the Flour of Darnel one ounce, Stavesacre seed two drams, the Spume or
froth of Silver six drams, Ceruss two drams, burnt Lead, and Antimony, of each
a dram and half, Swines Fat one ounce, the Juice of Scabious and of Lemmons, of
each six drams; Quicksilver extinguished or killed with Hogs Grease half an
ounce, Oil of the Yelks of Eggs, and Oil of Tartar by draining, or (as it is
usually prescribed) per de liquium, of each two ounces; Mingle and make a
Liniment. Or,

Take the Leaves of Willows, of Mallows, of the Bur, of the Ivy Leaves, of each
one handful; boil them in red Wine. Let the place be washed with the Decoction;
and after the washing, let the leaf of the Bur be laid thereon.

This following Unguent is likewise commended by Valescus and Guido; Viz.

Take the Seed of Juniper shaken well together, one ounce, boil them, and to the
straining add of Hogs Grease six ounces, Turpentine one ounce; dissolve all
over the Fire. When they are removed from the Fire, and cooled, let the watery
part be poured off from them, and then let the remainder be diligently stirred
about in a Mortar, adding thereto of live Sulphur one ounce, and so make an
Unguent.

But if so be that the Malady will not yield ^or be removed by these
Medicaments, but that the part become Callous, we must then make use of
Excoriatives, such as Pamphilus heretofore used at Rome; touching which, and
other the like Remedies against the Impetigo, we are to consult Galen, in his
fifth Book of the Composit. of Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 7.
and Aetius, Tetrab. 2. Sermon. 4. Chap. 16.

Chap. 31. Of Gutta Rosacea.
A Tumor nearly allied to this Impetigo is that which the more modern style
Gutta Rosacea, and others Gutta Rosea; the Arabians Albedsamen, or Alquasen,
and others likewise Albutizaga, which is a spotted redness, or rather a redness
with Tubercles, with which the Cheeks, the Nose, and the Face is defiled and
polluted, as if it were all to be sprinkled with Rosy drops. And sometimes
these Tubercles get a growth and increase, in so much that the Face becomes
unequal, and frightful to look upon, and the Nose augmented unto an
extraordinary bigness, and deformity. There lived a year or two ago (not far
from Dresda) a man affected with this Malady, whole Nose grew to such a vast
greatness, that it hindered him in his reading; which Malady brought him to that
pass, that in the year 1629. he was content to have some certain parts and
small parcels of his Nose pared away and quite cut off.

Nicholaus Florentinus Sermon. 7. Tetrab. 6. Sum. 2. Chap. 15. makes three
Differences of this Malady. For there is sometimes present (says he) a
preternatural redness without any Pustules, Bladders, or Ulcers; and this we
call absolutely a red Face; and sometimes this redness is accompanied with
Pustules, or Bladders, and then it is called a Pustulous or Bladdery redness;
and sometimes it has attending it an Ulcer; and then we call it an Vlcerous
redness. And this last Difference seems very little to differ from that
Affect that we call Noli me tangere; which they thus describe, to wit, that it
arises in the Face, and especially above the Chin, near about the Mouth, and
the Nose; and they conceive that it is so called, in regard that (even by those
Remedies that seem most fit and congruous) it is rather irritated then any
ways mitigated, and notwithstanding all the means that are used, it is more
and more carried on by eating and consuming the sound parts. And hereupon it is
likewise, that in one and the same Chapter they treat both of Gutta Rosacea,
and the Noli me tangere. There is notwithstanding another Affect which they
likewise vulgarly call Noli me tangere, touching which we have already spoken
above in the 20. Chapter.

The Causes.
The Cause of this Affect is acknowledged to be a hot blood; and the same is
likewise thick and gross, and generated through some default in the Liver, that
produces such like blood; the which being carried especially unto the face (as
otherwise we see, even in blushing, the blood is easily and soon carried
thither, and there diffused) whenas by reason of its thickness it can neither
retire back again, nor yet be discussed and scattered, it there sticks fast
in that place; and first of al it causes a red color of the Face, and soon
after likewise (if the said Malady continue long) it generateth red Pustules.
Now this distemper happens unto some through a default and something amiss in
their Natural Constitution; and these let them live never so soberly and
temperately, yet notwithstanding they are nevertheless subject and liable unto
this Affect. But however for the most part this evil is contracted and procured
by such persons as are addicted to the pot, and given over to drunkenness and
swilling; and they are not only those that are excessive drinkers of Wine, but
likewise such as exceed in drinking of Beer: and I once knew a Student that was
notoriously affected with this Malady, and he had gotten a most foul and
deformed Face. This man traveling afterward into Italy and France (where
there is not that plenty of Beer) at his return home again was much the better,
and far less afflicted with the aforesaid Malady than formerly he had been. For
Beer is much thicker than Wine, and therefore it also breeds and supplieth a
more thick and gross blood.

The Prognostic.
This Malady is very hardly cured, and especially if the Face be full of
Pustules, and as it were exulcerated; and for the most part it accompaninieth
the person that has it so long as he lives.

The Cure.
Now this Affect is not any other way to be cured, but by taking away the fault
of the blood, and what is amiss in the Liver. For albeit that the containing
cause (as we call it) of this Malady may be dissipated in the Face; yet
notwithstanding it will not be long ere there be made a new and fresh supply of
the same matter. And therefore there must not only be an evacuation of the
blood and the choleric humor (which for the most part is mingled together with
the blood) and Cupping-glasses with scarification oftentimes fastened and
affixed unto the Shoulder-blades; but especially and in the first place, the
extreme heat of the blood and liver is to be brought unto a due and fit temper,
and the obstructions of the Liver are to be opened; touching which we have
sufficiently spoken before, in the third Book of our Practice, Part 6. Sect. 1.
Chap. 1. touching the hot distemper of the Liver, and there likewise, Chap. 2.
of the obstruction of the Liver. Those Medicaments that are made and provided
of Strawberries, Cichory, and whatsoever Compositions that have in them any of
the said Cichory, are here most useful and proper.

As for Topical Remedies, let them be cooling, when the Face is only red, and
not yet defiled with Pustules; but if with the redness there be also Pustules
accompanying it, then the Medicaments ought likewise to be such as have in them
a power and virtue to discuss.

Now these Remedies are administered in the form of Waters and Liquors, as also
of Liniments and Unguents. As first thus:

Take the Root of Solomon's Seal three ounces; Flowers of Elder, of the Valley
Lilly, of the bitter Mushroms, of each six ounces; white Tartar an ounce and
half; white Wine a pottle; Camphire two drams. Let them stand infusing in the
Wine ten days, and afterward destil them.

Take Wheaten Meal as much as you think fit, Goats Milk one quart; make hereof
Dough, and making it into Loaves bake them in the Oven; and let this Bread be
again macerated in Goats Milk for the space of twelve hours. After this add the
Whites of twenty Eggs, Camphyre one ounce; burnt Alum two ounces; Destil them,
and make a Water. Or,

Take Strawberries a pint, Goats Milk a quart* the Whites of twenty Eggs, the
Seed of Quinces two ounces, Camphyre two drams, Alum and Sulphur, of each half
an ounce; mingle and destil them.

Lac Virginis (as they call it) is likewise very good for this purpose, made of
one part of Litharge, and three of Vinegar. But this following is more
efficacious:

Take Litharge half an ounce; Vinegar four ounces; let them boil to the
consumption of the third part; and in another Pot boil of Salt and Alum, of
each half a dram; Frankincense one scruple; Rose water half a pint: Mingle both
these Liquors, and pass them through a Linen strainer; and keep it for your
use. Or,

Take Sulphur two drams; common Salt, and Camphyre, of each half a dram;
Ceruss, and Litharge of Silver, of each two drams; make them into a Powder, and
then mingle them carefully with the Water of Bean flowers, Rose water, white
Lilly Water, the Water of Solomon's Seal, of each two ounces: Mingle them, etc.
Or,

Take Camphyre one dram; pour unto it into the Mortar by a little at once, and
stirring it well about, of the Oil of sweet Almonds three drams; afterward pour
thereunto of the Oil of Tartar by draining two drams; and then moreover add of
the Yelks of two Eggs, and mingle them well together. After this add of
Saccharum Saturni or Sugar of Saturn, half a dram; mingle them with all possible
care, and then at the length pour in unto all the afore^^d (by a little at once)
the Water of Bean flowers, of white Lillies, and of Strawberries, of each two
ounces; and so mingle them al well together. Or,

Take Litharge one ounce; Alum three drams; Ceruss half an ounce; Vinegar two
ounces; the Water of Roses, and Plantane, of each four ounces; boil them until
a third part be wasted away, then strain them; and to the straining add a
little of the Juice of Lemmons; and with this mixture let the Face be anointed
in the Evening. Or,

Take the Kernels of Peaches clean peeled, bitter Almonds blanched, of each in
number six; beat them well in a Mortar with a little milk; and then let their
milky Juice be pressed forth; unto which add of burnt Alum as much as a Nut.
Afterward take of Quicksilver as much as a great Pease in quantity; which
together with Spittle shake well, and stir it about in the Mortar until it
become black, and be as it were mortified; and then mingle it carefully with
the former Liquor, with which about bedtime let the Face be anointed; and then
in the morning following let it be washed with Rose water, or the Water of Bean
flour. Or,

Take the whitest Tartar, Alum, and Nitre, of each four parts; Sulphur one
part; bruise them well, and then Calcine them; and in a Cellar from them make an
Oil per deliquium (as they speak) or by draining. Or,

Take Kernels of Peaches hulled four ounces; the seed of Gourds peeled two
ounces; let them be bruised, and then the Oil pressed out of them; with which
let the Face be well anointed both morning and evening, and afterward washed
with Rose water, and Bean flour Water, and the Water of Solomon's Seal. Or,

Take Camphyre, Litharge, burnt Alum, of each half a dram; live Sulphur a dram
and half; White Vitriol, and Frankincense, of each one dram; let them be
poudered, and carefully mingled with Rose water, and Bean flour Water. Or,

Take Live Sulphur one ounce; Choice Frankincense three drams; Myrrh two drams;
Camphire one dram; Ceruss half a dram; Powder them al very small, and pour
thereto of Rose water one pint, mingle them; and when the Patient goes into his
Bed let his Face be anointed with the said Liquor; and the morning following
let it be washed with the water of the infusion of Bran. Or,

Take Oil of Tartar one dram; Sulphur two drams; Camphire half a dram; Ceruss
and Litharge, of each half an ounce; Rose water as much as will suffice; and so
let them stand in the Sun in a Glass close stopped. Or,

Take one whole Egg, and put it into the strongest Vinegar for four days, until
the shel be softened; afterward take forth the white, and fill it up with
Frankincense, Mastick, and Ceruss, of each one dram; mingle them, etc.

Chap. 32. Of Crusta Lactea, Achores, Favi, Tinea, Ficus, Helcydrium,
Psydracia, and Phthiriasis.
OUt of the Humors mingled together there are likewise generated both Tumors
and Ulcers in Infants, that seize especially upon their Heads; touching which
we have already treated in the fourth Book of our Practice, Part 2. Chap. 3, 4,
5. where we handled the Diseases of Infants, and therefore I conceive it
altogether needless here to repeat any thing of what was there at large
delivered. I shall only therefore here further acquaint you with these few
things following. The first whereof is this, That the^e Affects here
propounded, as likewise those which we have next of al explained, are indeed by
the most referred unto Tumors: and yet notwithstanding (because there is here
an Ulcer evermore conjoined with these Affects, and the truth being that the
Ulcer seems rather to have in it the Nature of a Disease, than the Tumor
has, which is indeed but very small and inconsiderable) we judge that they may
alike fitly and properly be referred unto Ulcers. But yet how ever our purpose
is to continue the same Method (^^d ^s I may so say, to spin the same third)
that we find begun by most Authors, and according to their guidance and
direction. And moreover, as for what concerns the Affects here propounded,
what we are to understand by Crusta Lactea, and what we mean by Achores, Favi,
and Tinea, we have already told you in the place before alleged: as for
Helcydria, Psydracia, and other the like Affects of the Head (comprehended
under the general name Exanthemata) they are al together handled by Galen in
his first Book of the Composition of Medicaments, according to the places
affected, and the last Chap. but by the rest of the Greeks in diverse and
distinct Chapters. Halyabbas seems to comprehend them al under the name of
Tinea, whenas in the eighth Book of his Theory, and Chap. 18. he thus writes:
But these Ulcers Tineae (says he) are very small, and they happen unto the
Head; and there is in them a bladder that has many species and kinds. The
first whereof is that we call Favosa, which has its original from a salt phlegm:
the sign whereof is this, That there is an Ulcer whereby the Skin of the Head
is perforated, and full of little holes, in the which there is a certain
moisture like unto an Honeycomb. The second is that we call Ficosa, being round
and hard; in the upper parts of which there is a certain redness, and in the
concavity thereof something like unto the small grains and seeds that are in
Figs. There is likewise a third species that it called Ameda: and they are
Ulcers with the which there are in the Head many little holes that are somewhat
less than those that are in the Favosa; and out of these there issues forth a
certain humidity like unto the water of flesh. There is also a fourth sort of
Pustule; but they are small and red ones; the figure and form whereof is like
unto the Te^^s of Dugs; from which there flows out a moisture like unto the
wateriness of the blood. There is likewise a fifth species thereof, that is
dry, and of a white color, like unto the Lupina; from which there flow forth as
it were bulls, and white s^ales. Where he constituteth four moist species of
Tinea, and the fifth species dry; and under the moist he comprehends not only
Achores and Favi, but likewise even Papulae and ^icus. But now by Papulae we
are to understand al small Pustules out of which there issues forth an humidity
like unto waterish blood; so called from their figure, by which they resemble
the Tea^s of the Breasts. They are called likewise Elcydria: For although this
name (in the general) signifies any little Ulcer; yet notwithstanding Galen in
his first Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the places, and
last Chapter, attributes this name in special unto the Ulcerous Pustules in
the Head. And indeed Alexander (in his first Book, and Chap. 7.) yet more
especially ascribes this name unto the said Papulae; and so does Paulus
Aegineta in his third Book, and Chap. 3. And Aetius, Tetrab. 2. Sermon. 2. Chap.
70. And Celsus likewise under the name of a little Ulcer, seems in special to
understand Achores and Favi, when (in his fifth Book, Chap. 28. Title, touching
the several kinds o^ Pustules, and the Cure of them) he thus writes: But out
of Pustules (says he) there now and then arise likewise small Ulcers that are
either more dry, or more moist; and they are accompanied sometimes only with a
kind of Itching, but otherwhile they are also attended with an Inflammation, or
with pain: and there issues forth either Sanies or Pus, or both of them. And
this especially happens unto such as are yet in their Childhood, and then but
very seldom in the midst of their body, but very frequently in the higher parts
thereof. But now Sycosis or Ficus, Sycosis.
is a Tumor so called from the resemblance it has with a Fig (because that in
the Cavity thereof there is something found like unto Fig seeds) round,
somewhat hard, reddish, and Ulcerous; from which there is something small and
glutinous or clammy, tat now and then flows out of it, breaking forth of the
Chin, and especially the Beard; and sometimes also it breaks forth in the
Hair. From whence it is that Celsus (in his sixth Book, and Chap. 3.)
constituteth two species thereof; where he thus writes: There is likewise
(says he) an Ulcer, that from the likeness it has with a Fig* is by the
Greeks named Sycosis. And here the flesh grows forth; and this is indeed the
general name thereof. But now under it there are two species: the one whereof
is an hard and round Ulcer; but the other moist and unequal. Out of the hard
there flows forth something that is small and glutinous; but out of the moist
there issues forth more, and that of a very ill savor. Now both these are in
those parts that are covered with Hair. But then indeed that which is callous
and round breaks forth more especially in the Beard; whereas (on the other
side) that which is moist appears chiefly in the Hair. It is bred likewise in
the Arse; and then the Latins call it Marisca.

But here we meet with very great variety of names, especially among the
Arabians. And ^e^ her so only, but likewise there is great variety of
difference that occurreth in explaining the cause thereof. For Galen in his
Book of preternatural Tumors, and Chap. 16. asserteth that a salt phlegm; but in
his first Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the places, Chap.
10. he says that a humor mingled of a thin, wheyish, and corroding, and
likewise of a thick, glutinous, and clammy juice, is the cause as well of the
Achores, as of Favi. Paulus Aegineta in his third Book, and Chap. 3. writes
that a nitrous and salt phlegm is the cause of both these Affects. Alexander in
his first Book, and Chap. 8. mentions three Humors, viz. Choler, Phlegm, and
the Melancholy Humor. And indeed the upshot of the whole Controversy is this;
That these Affects do arise from a Salt and nitrous phlegm, with the which there
is mingled one while Choler, another while Blood, and sometimes likewise a
Melancholy Humor.

In special, Psydracia:
as for what concerns Psydracia, the Author of the Book of Medicaments that
are easily provided, unto Solon, thus defines them, viz. That they are small
Efflorescencies made in the Head, like unto those Bladders that rise high in
the superficies. And Alexander Trallianus in his first Book, and Chap. 5. and
Paulus Aegineta in his fourth Book, and Chap. 3. following the aforesaid
Autho^, have reckoned up Psydracia amongst the Affects of the Head; and thus
they define Psydracia; Psydracia are certain small eminencies, like unto little
Bladders or Pustules (those that we call Phlyctanae) spread up and down upon the
surface of the Skin. Yet notwithstanding that Author of the Introduction unto
Galen, ascribes Psydracia likewise unto the whole body, when he says in his
15. Chapter, That Psydracon is commonly so called, because that it is an
Efflorescence all over the Body, and about the white of the Eye, somewhat red in
the top thereof.

The Causes.
The Cause of this Tubercle is a humor mingled together, of Blood, Choler, and
a salt and nitrous humor.

The Signs may easily be gathered out of the descriptions already delivered:
neither do the Psydracia threaten any danger at all.

The Cure.
They are cured by these following Compositions; as Al. Trallianus, in his
first Book, Chap. 5. and Paulus Aegineta in his third Book, Chap. 3. teach us.

Take the Spume or Froth of Silver, and Ceruss, of each half an ounce; Alum,
and the Leaves of Green Rue, of each two drams; these being well bruised and
mingled together with Vinegar and Oil, anoint the part affected therewith. Or,

Take Rue and Alum; bruise them well with Honey, and impose them upon the Head
after it is shaven.

Chap. 33. Of Strumae, and Scrofulae.
THere is moreover another kind of Tumor, which is not excited simply from a
humor poured forth into the external parts of the Body or diffused through
them; but a humor in which the matter that is the cause of the Tumor is (in a
peculiar Membrane) concluded and shut up; and the humor that exciteth this kind
of Tumor is changed into almost another kind of Substance. Among these Tumors,
in the first place we are to account Strumae and Scrofulae: and indeed touching
Strumae in the Neck (or the Kings Evil, as we commonly call it) and
Bronchocele, we have already treated, in the second Book of our Practice, Part
1. Chap. 25. where we have likewise written much of Stumae in general. And yet
notwithstanding, here in this place likewise there is something more in general
to be spoken touching the same; in regard that (as we shall by and by show you)
they do not only seiz upon the Neck, but also upon diverse other parts.

But although this kind of Tumor may not unfitly be referred unto a Scirrhus;
yet notwithsanding they are not called by this common name; but these Tumors
are called Choirades, or Scrofulae; the appellations being taken from Swine,
that are more frequently troubled with this Malady. And yet notwithstanding
Paulus Aegineta in his sixth Book, and Chap. 35. renders another reason of the
name, to wit, from the Rocks Chaerades: For Chaeras is a black Rock in the Sea,
that is rough and somewhat eminent, so that it seems like unto a swimming
Hog: unto which Rock indeed (by reason of the roughness of the Tumor) this
Disease may be resembled. But yet some there are that seem to make a Difference
betwixt Scrofulae and Strumae, when they write that Scrofulae are hardened
Tumors, and such as are included within a certain Membrane in the Glandules or
kernelly parts; the which if they be generated out of the Flesh, then they are
to be called Strumae; but most Physicians reject and approve not of this
difference. For Strumae are a Scirrhous Tumor of the Glandules, What Scrumae
are.
as Galen defines it in his 14th Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 11. and
such as is shut up in a peculiar Membrane. For the Glandules or Kernels are the
Subject of Strumae; and the truth is they arise most commonly in the Neck (both
the fore part and the hinder part thereof) and yet sometimes likewise in the
Arm-holes, and the Groins. Meges a certain Surgeon (of whom Galen also
makes mention in his Book of the Method of Physic, the last Chapter) has
also observed that, these Strumae often arise in the Paps, as Celsus writes in
the fifth Book, Chap. 18. And we have told you before in the third Book of our
Practice, Part 3. and Chap. 5. that Strumae have been likewise sometimes found
in the Mesenterium. If this Affect appear in the Throat then by a peculiar name
they call it Bronchocele, Bocius, and Hernia Gutturalis. This is a great and
round Tumor of the Neck, between the Skin and the rough Artery; in the which
there is included sometimes Flesh, and another while a certain humor like unto
Honey or Fa^. But yet notwithstanding these Scrofulae differ from other
Glandulous Tumors; and that first in the number, because that in Scrofulae
there are very many Kernels that swel up; and one depends upon the other in
the superficies of the Skin, like unto Grapes that hang down from one and the
same Bough; and moreover, because that Scroful^ have deeper Roots then the
other Glandulous Tumors.

The Causes.
But now these Strumae have their original from a flegmy humor, and likewise
(according to others) from a Melancholy, or else from a humor mingled of Phlegm
and Melancholy: whereupon it is that such as are Phlegmatic, Melancholy,
Gluttoinous, that are wont to eat meats that are cold and moist, and to drink
cold waters, are most especially troubled with these Scrofulae. And hence it is
that in certain Regions where the Inhabitants make use of Crude and snowy
waters, they are all of them for the most part afflicted with the said Strumae.
But now these Strumae are generated, not suddenly, and all at once, but by
degrees, one after another; and first of all the matter flows in unto one
Glandule, in the which there is excited a Tumor, soft and loose; and then unto
another, in which there is in like manner excited a soft Tumor, which in a
short time is hardened; until at the length there hang down from the place
affected many Glandules, as it were so many Boughs or Branches.

Aetius in Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 3. Chap. 5. out of Leonidas, tells us of a twofold
manner of the Generation of these Strumae, where he thus writes: These Strumae
(says he) are a Flesh somewhat white, easily increasing and growing, contained
in a Membrane; and in brief, they are Glandules hardened, that arise in the
Neck, under the Arms, and in the Groyns, where the Glandules are situated under
the Vessels, like as also in other Glandules already mentioned. And sometimes
likewise (but this is very rare) they are bred from the Flesh of the self same
places, which by a certain affinity is converted into the nature of Strumae,
and is augmented by the access of Matter. For first of all, the Glandules of
the said parts (in like manner as all other parts, the Phlegm being dried, or
the Melancholy humor, or both of them together mingled) become hard like as a
Scirrhus does. But sometimes the very substance of the Glandulous flesh being
dried waxes hard; which yet notwithstanding being afterward moistened by the
melancholy or Flegmy humor, increases, and becomes preternaturally
augmented. Yet notwitstanding, in regard that both those ways of generation
are coincident, and in a manner one and the same, Galen thereupon seems for
the most part to slight this difference, and in his Book of preternatural
Tumors, Chap. 11. he there says, that such as are affected with hardened
Glandules may properly be said to be affected with Strumae.

But yet notwithstanding touching the Causes, we have before in the place
alleged acquainted you, that Platerus determines, that Phlegm alone, and the
Melancholy humor, are scarcely sufficient to generate Strumae, seeing that if
they were from those alone, they would not then be of long continuance, but
they would rather be obnoxious unto putridness or turned into Pus, like as are
other Tumors; but that these Strumae derive their original from a Juice
nourishing these parts. For whereas Glandules are nourished with a thicker
Juice than other fleshly parts; if this Juice exceed in Quantity, it then
generateth diverse kind of Tumors. But although this be altogether to be
granted; yet notwithstanding this is not altogether impossible, but that some
melancholy and flegmy humor be mingled together with the aliment of the
Glandules.

Now this matter of the Strumae is included in a peculiar Membrane, which the
formative faculty (that is seated and planted in all the parts that have life
in them) produces. For whenas there is some Membrane distended, or even
broken, by the superfluous humor that flows thereto, Nature extends and
dilateth the same; and attempteth) the structure and forming as it were of a
new Membrane.

The Differences.
These Strumae are by some distinguished into Malignant and Benign; and they
will have those to be benign that are without an Inflammation, and without
pain; and those they will have to be malignant that have with them both
Inflammation and pain, and that are the more exasperated by Medicaments. But we
must know, that those Strumae that are termed malignant, are not properly
Strumae, but a Tumor as it were mingled of Strumae and a Cancer; so that this
Tumor does not alone proceed from a flegmy and Melancholy humor, but it has
likewise mingled together with it a black Choler. They are likewise
distinguished in this manner; that some Strumae are free, others of them
infiltrated. Those of them are said to be free, and simple, that are not
complicated with any Vessel, or tied together with it: but such of them as are
knit together either with some notable Vein, or some Nerve, and are as it were
wrapped and folded within them, these we call Strumae infiltrated, or happily (as
by a name more fit and congruous) Strumae implicated.

Those things that should have been further declared touching these Strumae,
have already been propounded in the place alleged, viz. in the second Book of
our Practice, Part 1. Chap. 35. and there they may be seen.

Chap 34. Of Ganglium, and Nodi.
GAnglion, so called by the Greeks, and by the Latins Ganglium, is by some
reckoned up among the Affects of the Head. But by Paulus Aegineta in his fourth
Book, Chap. 16. and Book 6. Chap. 39. and by Aetius in Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 3.
Chap. 9. it is attributed unto many parts, and it is an Affect of the Nervous
parts; and by the Author of the Physical Definitions it is thus defined, viz.
that it is a preternatural rolling together, or knot of a Nerve, which grows
together into one Body. The very same Tumor Guido in his second Tract, Doct. 2.
Chap. 4. seems to call it Lupia; and Tagautius in his Chirurgicall
Institutions, Book 1. Chap. 13. writes, that it appears in Aetius (out of
the Cure Philagrius) that Lupia of the modern Physicians, the Glandula of
Avicen, and Ganglion of the Greeks, is one and the same Affect.

But by what names these Tumors are called by the Germans is not very evident.
For if we well weigh the Descriptions, and Signs, yea and the Cure likewise of
Ganglion, and Lupia of the Greeks, and the latter Physicians, as also of the
Glandules of Avicen, Ganglium is that Affect which by the Germans is called
Vberbein, uberbein.
so called, not that it is indeed a Bone, but because it is a Tumor upon a
Bone, to wit, in that same place where the Bones are only covered with the
Skin, or because it resembles the hardness of a Bone. Notwithstanding Platerus
does not call those Tumors that arise from the Nerves (and which Authors every
where describe under the name of Ganglium) by the name of Vberbeine, but a
peculiar kind of Tumor, when (the Periostium being shaven, or eaten through)
there springs up, and grows unto the former as it were a new Bone. But now
that Tumor which he propounds under the name of Ganglium, viz. which is bred
about the joints, especially the Knees, sometimes comprehending the whole Joint
(and this one while in a more narrow, and other while in a broader limit, and
sometimes also so stopping and hindering the motion thereof that the Member is
altogether either motionless, or else so that it cannot be wholly and entirely
moved) seems to be that Tumor which the Germans call Glied-shevva;
Glied-shevva.
to wit, because (as it were a certain Mushrom) it arises under the Skin, near
about the Joints, and especially the Knee, which is not always round, but
often overspreadeth the whole Knee; when yet notwithstanding Ganglion is always
a round Tumor, as Ambrose Parrey writes in his sixth Book, and Chap. 20.

But (as I told you likewise before) there is a great confusion in the names.
And therefore (as Joh. Tagautius in the first Book of his Physical
Institutions, and Chap. 2. advises us) the thing it self is to be heeded with all care and circumspection; and as for the names, we need not much to regard
them; since that oftentimes one and the same word has in several Authors
various and different appellations. Ganglion arises indeed in all, or the most
parts of the body, (and yet more especially in those parts that are moved) near
about the Joints, to wit, In the Hands and Feet, and in those very places where
the Bones are only covered with Skin, and where there is a concourse of the
Tendons, Ligaments, and Nerves. And yet notwithstanding Aetius adds the Head
and Forehead, as likewise the Elbows and Arms; but it is but seldom that it
happens in these parts.

The Causes.
That it has its original from a blow, or from hard labor, Paulus and Aetius
teach us; which is indeed to be understood of the evident cause. But how these
evident causes come to produce those Tumors, is not so evident and manifest.
Vulgarly, the greater part determine that they arise from a dull, sluggish,
thick phlegm, or else from Melancholy. But others assert (and that more rightly)
that by means of some fall, by reason of extension, or of some extraordinary
hard labor, and over working, (by all or any of which either a Nerve or a Tendon
is too far extended, or likewise, according to the Membrane, even as is were
broken) the nutriment of the Nervous part does as it were sweat forth, and
adhere near about the Fibers and the substance of the same Nervous part, and so
becomes changed into this substance by reason of the formative faculty of the
said parts, and then covered with a peculiar Membrane. After which manner (if
the Periostium be opened) even in the Bones, their nutriment is turned into a
boney knot, as Platerus gives us to understand. For look as it is in Trees, if
their Rind or Bark be wounded, or in any other manner opened, Nature sweating
forth the aliment suffers it not rashly to diffuse it self al abroad, but
changes it into a knot; so in like manner, albeit the Membranes that wrap
about the Bones or Nervous parts may be broken, yet Nature permits not the
aliment rashly to flow abroad through the open passages, but from thence (under
the Skin) forms a Tumor, included and shut up in a peculiar Membrane.

But now that Ganglion that Platerus describes happens not from the default
of one only Nerve or Tendon, but chiefly in those places where there is a
concourse of Tendons, Ligaments, and Nerves; and especially about the knee,
either when those parts by reason of their overgreat motion are very much
exercised, or else while Wounds are in curing. For if the juice of these parts,
to wit, of the Tendons, Nerves, Membranes, and Ligaments, shall chance (upon the
occasion of the aforesaid Causes) to flow forth abroad out of the said parts,
and shall withal begin to be luxuriant, and to abound, and shall likewise adhere
unto the Fibers of the same parts, it is then changed into such a like fungous
or Mushrom-like matter, which oftentimes overspreadeth the whole joint; and is
thereupon by the Germans called Der Gliedshevva.

And yet notwithstanding it may likewise so chance, that a vicious humor
abounding in the body may flow in into such a like weak part, and may be
mingled together with the said thick juice that nourishes these parts, and may
(through that open passage) flow together with it unto the aforesaid parts, and
may there augment the Tumor.

Signs Diagnostick.
This Tumor is bred in those parts that are not covered with much flesh, but
only by the Skin; and therefore it lies not hid very deep: and it is now hard,
now soft; now greater, now less; and sometimes it is in bigness equal unto (and
many times greater than) an Egg; it is void of al pain, and yet notwithstanding
if it be forcibly pressed together, it then manifests a certain kind of dull
and stupid sense; it may be thrust and moved unto the sides, but neither
forward nor backward.

That Ganglium which Platerus describes is a Tumor for the most part arising
in the Knee, soft, without pain, and of a different color; from small beginnings
sometimes increasing to so great a bulk and magnitude, that it comprehends the
whole joint; from whence it chances that the sick person can neither stand
upright, no go straight; neither is he able in going to tread upon the ground,
or at least (as it were) only on tiptoe.

Prognostics.
1. This Disease is of long continuance, and oftentimes lasts for many years;
and accompaninieth the sick parties even unto their dying day.

2. Those of them that are in the very junctures of the joints, impede and
hinder the motion of the whole Member.

3. The Ganglium likewise that is near about the Joint (unless it may be taken
away by Medicaments) is altogether incurable. For it admits not of Section
or cutting, in regard that it may easily happen, that by Section a Nerve,
Tendon, or Ligament may be hurt.

The Cure.
Universal or general Remedies having been first premised, it is requisite that
the Tumor be mollified and discussed; or (if this cannot well be done) that it
be suppurated, or cut out. Therefore if Ganglium or Nodus (the Knot) be recent
and new, and the little Bladder within which it is included be yet tender; we
must then in the first place do our endeavor that the said bladder may be
broken. And therefore the Tumor is to be rubbed with the hand so long until it
wax hot, and become softer, and afterward let it be close pressed together with
some thin plate, or some other solid thing, so long that the bladder may be
broken, and that the matter therein included may be thereby dispersed. And
therefore let a thin plate of Lead be imposed upon the place affected, and
bound close upon it with a Swathe; which is not to be removed until after ten
days. Others there are that first of al anoint the Tumor with Ammoniacum
dissolved, in the form of an Emplaster, and then after they apply a thin plate
of Lead. Oribasius made use of this that follows:

Take Ceruss, Pitchy Rosin, old Oil, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of each one ounce;
Wax four ounces; mingle them, etc. Or,

Take Aloes, and Myrrh, of each six drams; Litharge of Gold one ounce; Ladanum
half an ounce; Ammoniacum, the Fat of a Calf, and of a Fox, of each six drams;
Oil of white Lillies two ounces; Wax as much as will suffice; make an Emplaster.
Or,

Take of unslaked Lime, the Fat of a Goose, of each one ounce; Ammoniacum half
an ounce; Turpentine one ounce; mingle them, etc. Or,

Take of the Emplaster Oxycroceum one ounce; the Mucilage of Marsh-mallow seed,
and Fenugreek seed, of each half an ounce; Galbanum, Sagapenum, and Ammoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar, of each three drams; Rosin six drams; white Wax half an
ounce; Mingle them, and make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Gum Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, of each one
ounce and half; Oil of white Lillies, of Camomile, of Bays, the Spirit of Wine,
of each half an ounce; the powder of the Flowerdeluce Root, and live Sulphur,
of each half a dram; mingle them, and make an Emplaster.

If the Ganglia give not way unto these Medicaments, we must then betake our
selves unto those Remedies that cause suppuration. As for Example:

Take the Roots of white Lillies, and Marsh-mallow Roots, of each an ounce and
half; the Root of Fern one ounce; fat dried Figs, in number ten; the Root of
Squils (or the Sea Onion) one ounce; the Flowers of Melilote, and Elder
flowers, of each one small handful; boil them in the Broth of a Wether-Sheeps
Feet, adding thereto a small quantity of Vinegar. Afterward let them be well
bruised together, and then pass them through a hair sieve, and then add, of
Wheat flour, and the flour of Lupines, of each half an ounce; the fat of an old
Sow, Ducks fat, and Goose fat, of each two ounces; the Dregs or Lees of the Oil
of white Lillies three ounces; and so make a Cataplasm.

Ganglia and Nodi may likewise be taken away by Section; Section.
such alone of them that consist in the Head, the Forehead, and other places
without the Joints. But those of them that consist in the Joints are not safely
to be cut, there being cause to fear lest that the Nervous parts that lie
underneath be hurt thereby, and so consequently the motion of the Member quite
taken away. As (in like manner) it is not fit to cut those Ganglia that are
near about the Jugular Veins, for fear of an Hemorrhage or flux of blood. Now
for the manner of Section, it is this; First of al, there must be made a small
Wound in the Skin, even unto the bladder wherein the matter of the Tumor is
included; through which a Probe of the thickness of a finger, and round at the
end, but hollow in the midst, is to be conveyed in betwixt the Skin and the
bladder, and then to be drawn about even unto the very Root of the Ganglium:
and then after this (upon it) the Skin is to have an Incision made therein deep
enough, in the form of the letter X; and from the corner of the Bladder it is
to be drawn along toward the Root: and if there arise any Hemorrhage from the
thicker Vessels upon their being cut about the Root, it is in a fit and
convenient manner to be stanched and stopped; and then upon this the whole Tumor
(together with the Membrane) is to be extracted and drawn forth, and no part
thereof to be left remaining behind; or if happily there should be any thereof
left behind, it is then to be consumed with Caustic Medicaments.

Callous or Boney Nodi (by Platerus so termed in special) are hardly cured, and
not at al, if they be inve^erate and hardened. Such of them as are curable are
to be cured by those or such like Emollients as were even now propounded. Here
likewise those Cataplasms are very useful that are made of Mandrake Root, the
Leaves of Hemlock, Henbane, the dead Nettle, boiled in Vinegar, and mingled
together with Emollient Greases.

If these Nodi tend toward the Joints, and so hinder their motion, and have
their abode in those places that are naked, and only covered with the Bones,
then the Skin is to be opened; and with a sharp Iron the Nodus (by a continued
stroke) is to be cut away from the Bone; and the Wound is then to be cured in a
fit and convenient manner.

Ganglia in special so called (or those Mushrom-like spungy Tumors that arise
about the Joints, and especially the Knees, sometimes wholly comprehending it,
and hindering its motion) are not to be cured without much difficulty. For
Section (in regard that it cannot be administered without hurting the Tendons,
Ligaments, and Nerves) has here no place. And therefore we ought to assay that
by Emollients and Digestives they may be discussed: but yet notwithstanding we
ought evermore to beware that there follow not any suppuration hereupon, which
in these places is wont to excite incurable Ulcers, by which the Nervous parts
near about the Joints are corrupted.

In this case the Medicaments before propounded are likewise very useful and
profitable. Or else let a Fomentation be provided of the Roots of
Marshmallows, white Lillies, Briony, the wild Cucumber, Sowbread, the Leaves
of Mallows, Marshmallows, dead Nettle, Henbane, Groundpine, Sage, Primrose,
the flowers of Camomile, Elder, Wall-flowers, Melilote, Linseed, Fenugreek
seed, Bayberries. Or,

Take the Kernels of Wallnuts three ounces; the meal or flour of Lupines one
ounce and half; the powder of Flowerdeluce Root, and Earthworms, of each an
ounce; Honey as much as will suffice, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Ship-Pitch two ounces; dissolve it in the Oil of Earthworms, and the Oil
of Flowerdeluce, of each one ounce and half; and then ad thereto of Ladanum and
Mastick, of each two drams; Bdellium, and Styrax Calamite, of each one dram;
the powder of Earthworms half a dram; mingle them, etc.

The Diasulphur Emplaster of Rulandus is likewise here very useful, and of
singular benefit: but especially, and in the first place, Natural Sulphury
Baths.

Chap. 35. Of Meliceris, Atheroma, and Steatoma.
THese kind of Tumors have this one thing proper and peculiar unto them, to
wit, That the matter that is contained in them is shut up in a peculiar
Tunicle, or little Bladder. And they take their name from the matter contained
in them. For if the matter that is shut up within be like unto Honey, it is
then called Meliceris, (and the Latins usually call it Mellifavium;) if it be
like to Frumenty (which the Greeks term Atheria) we then call it Atheroma; and
lastly, if it be like unto Suet, it is then by the most called Steatoma.
Meliceris what it is.
For Meliceris (as it appears out of Galen in his fourteenth Book of the
Method of Physic, and Chap. 6. and out of Aetius, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 3. Chap. 7.
as also out of Paulus Aegineta, in his sixth Book, Chap. 36. and lastly, out of
Celsus in his seventh Book, and Chap. 6.) is a Tumor without pain, containing a
matter like unto Honey that is shut up in a little Nervous Skin. Atheroma what
it is:
But Atheroma is a Tumor without any pain, containing in a Nervous Tunicle a
Humor like unto Prumenty, or a Pultiss. steatoma what it is:
And Steatoma is in like manner a Tumor containing within a peculiar Membrane a
Humor like unto Suet.

But now touching Meliceris, it is here to be noted, That it is a Disease not
one and the same with Meliceria (of which Aetius makes mention in his fifth
Book, and Chap. 28.) but a disease different from it. For Meliceria (as Celsus
himself has it) is a kind of Ulcer, that is so called from the resemblance it
has with a Bee-hive; which said Disease we have already explained in the
secund part, and Chap. 3. of Infants Diseases, and by others it is likewise
called Kerion, Favus or Bee-hive; and it is an Ulcer that is very full of holes,
chiefly peculiar unto the Head, pouring forth at those holes a corrupt matter
like unto Honey; and it has its original from phlegm that is salt or nitrous.
But Meliceris (touching which we are here treating) without any hole at al, in
whatsoever part of the body it happens to be, it contains within under a
Nervous Membrane a substance like unto Honey.

The Causes.
Now all these Tumors are referred unto the Pituitous or Flegmy, and they are
vulgarly said to be excited from a Pituitous or Flegmy humor, which in progress
of time is by degrees and slowly changed into a Matter that is sometimes like
unto Honey, sometimes unto Frumenty, and now and then likewise resembling Suet.

Platerus (as we also before told you, in the second Book of our Practice, Part
1. Chap. 25. where we treated of Strumae) has a peculiar Opinion by himself
touching the Causes of these Tumors. For he thinks that these aforesaid
Tumors are generated from excrementitious humors (for if any such thing should
be generated out of these kind of excrements, he conceives that it could not
be so stable and firm, but that it would rather be obnoxious to putridness and
corruption) but from an alimentary Juice, to wit, such as is by Nature ordained
for the nourishing of the part. For if the humor be thicker than is convenient
for the nourishing of a fl shy part, then (says he) a harder sort of Tumors
then are the Sarcomata are sometimes produced; and again, if this humor be
extraordinary thick, then a Scirrhus is generated. But if the Tumor be not so
hard, then in a short time it ends in an Impostume, in the which there may be
generated a different matter, according to the difference and Variety of this
Juice that has bred this Tumor, and the mingling thereof with other humors;
which yet notwithstanding is not suppurated in like manner as other Impostumes
are that are bred from the Blood; neither is it turned into Pus, but into
another kind of substance that is included in a proper Membrane, or Bladder.
And in this manner (as he writes) are generated Melicerides, Atheromata, and
Steatomata. But he adds likewise that unto the generation of such like Tumors
as these this conduces very much, to wit, if together with this Juice that
ought to nourish the flesh, a portion of that Nutriment of some other part
(that ought to be nourished by an extraordinary thick Juice) departing from it,
and being carried into the fleshy seats together with their Nutriment, there
beget in them such an hardness. And this he likewise endeavoreth to prove even
by this Argument, to wit, that in these kind of Impostumes bred from those
Tumors there is to be found something like unto the substance of other parts
resembling sometimes Hair, sometimes a Nail, sometimes a Bone, and now and then a
Glandule; which (says he) could not well any otherwise be bred, or produced
from any thing else then the juice nourishing these parts, either in the Skin,
or in the flesh near unto it, as being hither brought and conveyed together
with the proper Nutriment of the Flesh. And from the same he conceives that it
comes to pass, if at any time there be found in an Impostume any thing that
resembles a Bee-hive, a Pultise, or Honey; that this proceeds from the
fatter part of the Blood, that causes a fatness; and this indeed he conceives
to be from the fleshy Juice that is not as yet converted into Pus, but by
maturation by means of the heat boiled as it were and hardened into such a
tenacious humor; the which if it be any further torrified, insomuch that this
Juice become more earthy, then it resembles something else, as Coals, small
Stones, or Gravel, and the like. These things if they be in a proper and
peculiar Membrane, then (as he writes) these also are bred from a Membranous
Juice proceeding from hence.

But now, as touching this Opinion, there are certain things to be taken notice
of. For first of al, it does not yet from hence appear, what the cause is why
such like tumors as these are not bred in all bodies, neither yet in all parts,
out of that Juice by wh ch they are nourished. And hereupon, the Cause that is
to be rendered why that humor fl^weth out of the parts, and that thereupon a
Tumor is excited under the Skin, I conceive to be ^his, that the Membrane that
covers any part whatsoever, and encompasseth it, is (either by some external
and violent, or else by some internal Cause) either broken or corroded and
eaten quite through, and exulcerated (which in the Generation of Nodi or knots
in the Bones, Platerus grants that it may so happen in the Periostium) so
that the way and passage being opened, the aliment or nourishing Juice flowing
forth is no longer kept in and shut up in the part affect d, but that it
sweateth forth through this open passage. Which yet notwithstanding Nature that
is never idle permits not rashly to be done; but it begins further to
extend the very Membrane it self, and to shut up the Juice flowing forth; like
as we see it to be done in Trees where (the external B^^k being cut) there is
in the very like manner a Nodus or knot formed. And moreover, that the Juice
which affords matter unto the Tumor is chiefly destined and ordained for the
nourishing of the part, this I will readily grant; but yet Platerus himself
cannot deny but that in progress of time vicious humors may be likewise driven
forth thither. Neither is it requisite that it should be immediately converted
into Pus; in regard that the vicious humors mingled together with the aliment
may for a long while retain their own Nature, without any corruption, and
conversion into Pus; as it evidently appears in the Cachexy, and Scabies or
Scabbiness, and the like affects in the Skin. But I very much doubt and
question, whether that different matter that is found in such Tumors has its
original from the proper aliment of the near adjoining parts, the Hairs, the
Nails, and the Bones, flowing together into some other place, and there
mingling it self with the proper aliment of the part affected. Neither is
Matter sufficient, or all that is required unto the formation of Hairs, Nails,
Bones, and the like, but first of all, and especially there is necessarily
required the formative faculty, which in the fleshy part forms Flesh, and in
the membranous part a Membrane, and not Bones; and there is unto each
particular part a proper and peculiar Membrane, which if it cannot attain unto
its own end by reason of the unaptness of the matter, it then forms something
like unto it; and in a fleshy part it effects something that is like unto
Flesh, and in a membranous part somewhat that resembles a Membrane.

Signs Diagnostick.
All these Tubercles or small Tumors have their rise from a very mean and
inconsiderable beginning, and they are long, and by little and little
increasing; and they are included each one in its own peculiar Tunicle. And
Meliceris is indeed more round in figure, and more extended, and when pressed
down by the Fingers (by reason that the thickness of the humor is not great) it
speedily yields and gives place, and upon the removal of the Fingers it as
speedily returns back again. For although Paulus Aegineta in his sixth Book,
Chap. 36. writes that Meliceris yields unto the touch, even as if it were
some loose body; and that it is slowly diffused, but very soon collected and
gathered together again; yet without doubt, the text is depraved, and something
omitted by the carelessness and overfight of the Writers, which appears even
from this, that he altogether omitteth the Signs of Atheroma. And therefore
without all doubt it is thus to be read, the omissions being supplied out of
Aetius; Steatoma is harder then the other, and resists upon the touch, and
having the bottom thereof more solid. But Atheroma yields when it is touched,
as it were a certain loose body, and returns back but slowly; but Meliceris
gives place speedily unto the touch, and then it is very suddenly again
collected. And although Steatoma be hard,; yet notwithstanding it differs
from Strumae, because it is nothing so hard as Strumae; neither has it an
unequal Tumor, like as Strumae has.

But what these Tumors have within, as it may be guessed at by conjecture, so
true it is that it cannot be certainly known, unless it be when they are cast
forth; as Celsus tells us, in his seventh Book Chap. 6.

Prognostics.
1. The truth is that these Tumors have no danger at all conjoined with them:
and yet notwithstanding they oftentimes continue long, and are (without any
hurt) carried about, and neglected.

2. Yet notwithstanding they often of their own accord end in an Impostume.
Which if they do not, they are not so difficultly cured as Scrofulae and
Scirrhi.

3. Those of them that are elevated, and exposed unto motion, and the touch,
are easily curable. But such of them as are seated and fixed more deeply, and
not exposed to the Touch, are more difficultly cured; and in Chirurgical
attempts they require the greatest care and diligence, by reason of the
imminent eruptions of Blood, and the pricking of the Nerves. For very many
Surgeons there be that (for want of skill) together with these like Tumors
cut away those Nerves that lie under them.

The Cure.
Although these Tumors differ in their names, and each of them contein a
peculiar Matter: yet notwithstanding they have almost one and the same way of
curing. For Universals and generals being premised, and the Body thoroughly
purged from the vicious humor, the matter that is the cause of the Tumor is
together with the Tunicle to be taken away: which is done if the matter be
either discussed; or (if that may not conveniently be done)* suppurated; or
else if the Tumors be cut forth. In Meliceris this threefold kind of Remedy
has its place; Atheroma is Cured by Discussives and Suppuratives, and for the
most part has no need at all of Section. As,

Take Laudanum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Propolis, and Turpentine, equal
parts of them all; and mingle them.

Very useful likewise is the Emplaster made of Ammoniacum, Pellitory, and the
Oil of the Juice thereof; by which I have seen such a Tumor cured in the
Jaw Bone broken, and long white strings like threads (such as are sometimes
found in Cancers) drawn forth.

Unslaked Lime also mixed with Grease or Oil is very useful, and of singular
benefit. Or,

Take Ship-pitch one ounce, Ammoniacum and Sulphur, of each half an ounce,
Mingle, etc.

Take of the Root of Sowbread, and Swines Grease, and a little Sulphur; and of
these make an Empaster.

If the Tumor open not of its own accord, then Section is to be ordained; that
so the little Bladder (whether it contein a Substance like Honey, like a
Pultise, or a fat substance, or any other) may be pulled forth, and taken away.
But the Skin is not to be cut transversly or overthwart, but strait forward, or
else somewhat obliquely, like unto the figure and form of a Myrtle Leaf; and the
Membrane containing the humor is to be freed from the Skin, and the part lying
under it; great care and caution being had, lest that the said Membrane or
Bladder be hurt (which will most certainly be, if the Skin be not dissected and
opened with one touch of the Instrument) and so the humor that is contained
therein flowing forth all abroad hinder the operation, and by this means there
be some of it, or something of the humor left remaining behind. And yet if this
should chance, and somewhat should be left behind, it is to be consumed by these
Remedies that we call Cathaereticks. For if there be any part of that Tunicle
left to remain, the Tumor will again return.

If these kind of Tumors be in the Head (the little Bladder being taken forth)
let the Pericranium be cut, and the Skul shaven, lest that there be any Root
that may be able to generate a new Tumor left remaining behind. But if the sick
person will at no hand admit of this said Section, or if otherwise it may not
conveniently be done by reason of the Veins, then the Skin is to be broken
through by Caustic Medicaments. The little bladder being taken forth, the
Ulcer is to be consolidated; and if the Skin be more loose and extended than it
ought to be, so that it cannot conveniently be drawn together; in this case
whatsoever is superfluous is to be cut away.

Chap. 36. Of Testudo, Talpa or Topinaria, and Natta.
ANd hither likewise belong those Tumors, which (to speak truth) are referred
to Melicerides, Atheromata, and Steatomata. But because they privily happen
unto the head, therefore they have peculiar names imposed on them; which yet
notwithstanding we find no where extant in the more Ancient Greek or Latin
Authors; but they have been invented and hammered out by the more modern and
barbarous Latins; to wit, such as are these; Testudo, Talpa or Topinaria, and
Natta.

Testudo what it is.
To wit, Testudo is a great Tumor, soft, or at least not very hard, in the Head,
of a broader form, like unto, and after the manner of the Tortoise; from the
likeness whereof it has taken its name; growing forth at the first in the form
and fashion of a Chestnut, but afterward in the figure of an Egg; in the which
there is contained a soft kind of matter (a certain Tunicle being drawn over
it; from whence it is by Authors referred to Melicerides) which sticks so
fast in the Skul, that for the most part it vitiateth and defiles it, and
brings upon it a polluting rottenness.

Nearly allied unto this is the Tumor Talpa, Talpa
so called because that look as the Mole (by the Latins called Talpa) runs
under ground, just so this Tumor under the Skin feeds upon the Cranium or
Skul. Some of those aforesaid Latin Barbarous Authors comprehend this Tumor
under the name of Testudo, neither do they make any peculiar mention of Talpa.
But others of them have their peculiar Tracts touching this Tumor Talpa; and
Vigo in his second Book, Tract. 3. and Chap. 1. does expressly distinguish Talpa
from Testudo; and the truth is, they differ in their matter, which in Talpa is
more thick and gross than in Testudo. And therefore like as we have said that
Testudo may be referred unto Meliceris, so may Talpa be referred to Atheroma.
Some call it Topinaria. But others notwithstanding say that Topinaria is a
different Affect, and such as is familiar and common unto Children; and that it
is bred out of sweet phlegm; which is manifestly declared by the viscousness and
clamminess of the rotten filthiness, as also by the whiteness thereof: and
sometimes from a phlegm mingled with Blood; as the color declares, which is not
very red, and it soon comes to a maturity; and sometimes likewise from
Melancholy, or Choler; as Gulielmus Placentius writes of this same Affect in
the first Book of his Surgery, and Chap. 5. Johannes Philippus Ingrassias,
in his Book of Tumors, Tract. 1. Chap. 1. without any the least scruple
conceives that this Tumor is to be referred to Hydrocephalus. But in regard
that Hydrocephalus is bred of Water, and has no blood at al mingled therewith,
neither may be suppurated, this therefore cannot be granted unto the said
Ingrassias, nor by any means allowed of.

And lastly, there is another Tumor which they call Nata, Natta
Natta, and Napta, being great and soft, without any pain and color; growing
forth especially in the back, and sometimes notwithstanding breaking forth in
the shoulders, and other parts; hanging by a small slender Root: but yet so
greatly increasing that it weighs some pounds; and is in bigness equal unto a
Melon, or Gourd; which because it has not always one and the same form and
figure, it has likewise therefore by Authors diverse and several names
conferred upon it. The matter that is therein contained does indeed now and
then seem to be fleshy; but in truth it is no flesh, but like unto fat; and
therefore it may not unfitly be referred unto Steatoma.

The Causes.
They refer the cause of these Tumors unto a salt phlegm, or else a phlegm
mingled with Choler. But in regard that these Tumors may be referred to
Melicerides, Atheromata, and Steatomata, it may therefore most fitly be
determined and asserted, That these Tumors have the very self same cause that
those said Tumors have: only here lies the difference, That in these there is
greater store of matter, and thereupon it is likewise that these Tumors arrive
at a greater bulk and bigness than the former.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Tumors are easily known from the descriptions before declared; for they
are soft Tumors, or at least such as are not very hard; broad and large, and
shut up in their peculiar Membrane.

Prognostics.
1. If these kind of Tumors be in the Head, they then are dangerous, by reason
of the vicinity and neerness of the Skull, in regard that they corrode the
Skul, and corrupt it; especially about the Sutures.

2. If there be present a great corruption of the Skul, it is then far better
to let this Tumor alone, and not meddle with it, than to cure it.

3. Those of them that are without any corruption of the Skul, are cured with
more safety.

4. Like as it was in the Tumors mentioned in the former Chapter, so it is
likewise in these; unless the whole Tunicle be drawn forth together with the
humor, there is no perfect health and soundness to be expected, or hoped for;
since that if there be any thing left behind, there will from it a new Tumor
arise, and break forth.

The Cure.
Universals and generals being first premised, and the body sufficiently
evacuated, the matter constituting the Tumor is to be taken away, which is done
by digestive and resolving Medicaments, or by those that suppurate, or by
Surgery. And therefore if the Tumor be without any Ulcer and corruption of
the bone, then let discussing Medicaments be administered. Now the Discussives
are such as are wont to be used in Scrofulae and Tumors. But it is somewhat rare
that these Tumors are cured by Discussives. If therefore they cannot be so
taken away and removed, to wit, by Discussives alone; then Maturatives and
Suppurating Medicaments are likewise to be administered; such like as have been
already propounded in the foregoing Chapter. Or,

Take Onions roasted under the Embers, the Yelks of Eggs hard boiled, of each
three in number; Swines Grease, or unsalted Butter half a pound; the Root of
Marshmallows boiled to a softness, and bruised very small one pound; and make a
Cataplasm.

And yet notwithstanding we are not to expect and wait for a perfect Concoction
and generation of Pus, in regard that Pus easily and soon gets a sharp and
malignant quality, and so corrodeth the Skul. And therefore so soon as any
signs of Suppuration shall appear, the Tumor is maturely to be opened. The
Incision is to be either simple and downright, or else it is to be made in the
form and figure of a Cross, according to the bigness of the Tumor. The Pus
being wholly evacuated, the Ulcer is to be thoroughly cleansed by convenient
Medicaments; as for example, with such as this,

Take Barley Meal two ounces; Myrrh half an ounce; Sarcocol one ounce; Honey as
much as will suffice; mingle, etc.

The Ulcer when it is thoroughly cleansed is to be filled up with Flesh, and
consolidated.

If the bone be corrupted, it is then to be shaven, and to be cured in like
manner as it is wont to be in the rottenness of the bones.

But as for the Cure by Surgery, it is to be ordained and instituted in like
manner as was declared in the Chapter foregoing.

Chap. 37. Of Verrucae or Warts.
THere are moreover other Tumors likewise that are said to have their original,
not from humors, but from a solid substance. But since that these same humors
take their original either from a vicious and luxuriant juice nourishing the
parts, or else from excrementitious humors mingled together with them, we will
therefore subjoyn this kind of Tumors unto those that were but even now
explained, and treated of.

And first of al, there are indeed certain small Tumors that arise in the Skin,
like unto little hillocks, Verrucae.
which are called Verrucae or Porri. For with the Latins Verruca is properly
the higher and more eminent part of a Mountain or Hill, and according to Gellius
(in his third Book, and Chap. 7.) the rough part thereof; whereupon it is that
those places are termed Verrucosa that are unequal, and have diverse eminent
parts. But now these Verrucae from their several forms have gotten diverse and
several appellations. For one is called Sessilis (by the Greeks Myrmecion,
Verruca sessilis
and by the Latins Formica) which is fixed and fastened with deeper roots;
broad beneath, and slender above; and this thrusts forth it self in the Skin
less than the other kinds of them; and it is likewise stable and permanent, and
not altogether so movable as the rest. Now they conceive that it is so named
either from their blackish color (such as there is in Ants or Pismires) or else
because that when it is hard pressed, it exhibiteth a sense of pain like unto
the bitings of those aforesaid Pismires; and it is for the most part bred in
the Hands, or likewise in the Feet; neither is it altogether without pain; and
in this there appears sometimes a hair or two, and that especially in the
face. Another fort of them is called Pensilis, Verruca Pensilis
because that it hangs down by a little foot, or as it were by a Harp-string;
from whence it is by the Greeks called Acrochordon; it has but a very small
Basis, but a long and great Head.

This Tumor if it be not of the same color, but that it resembles the flower
of Thyme, and be less, and more unequal, and small, they rhen call it Thymum. But
now if these Verrucae be greater, they are then (from the resemblance they have
with a Fig) called Ficus. And hither likewise may Condylomata be referred, as
also Cristae any; touching which we have already spoken in the third Book of
our Practice, Part 2. Sect. 1. and Chap. 10. where we treated of the Diseases
of Intestinum rectum, or the straight Gut.

There is also another kind of Verruca like unto the Sessilis, Clavus what it is
which they call Clavus, but the Greeks call i^ Helon, and we in English a Corn
o^ Quern. Those Verrucae are white, round, like unto the heads of Nails; and
for the most part they arise in the Toes, and the soles of the Feet* so that
they excite and cause great trouble and pain in going. This kind of Tumor
Verruca, in regard that it has a dusky or black spot in the midst of the
circumference of that Skin, which is likewise of the same color, like unto the
Pupilla of the Eye, and by means of it resembles the eye of the Pie, is by the
Germans termed Egsterauge, which with us is as much as the Eye of that Bird we
call the Magpye.

Now these Verrucae are bred in diverse parts of the body; but more frequently
in the hands and feet; and for the most part they appear many of them together.

The Causes.
All these Tumors, according unto the vulgar opinion, arise from a matter,
thick, melancholic, and phlegmatic; the which Nature (when she is no ways
able to discuss it) forms out of it this kind of Tumors.

But Platerus (as he did by the former Tumors that were nearly allied unto
these) asserteth that the Verrucae likewise are bred of a juice that is by
Nature destined for the nourishing of the Skin, and the Scarf-skin, after the
same manner. As the hardness that ye^ consists in their substance generateth
a Callousness, and Cicatrices; even so a part and portion thereof breaking
forth into one or more parts of the Skin, adhering unto the Skin, and growing
unto the roots, and issuing forth it generateth a very small portion, filling up
the pore, hard, and callous; which one while is carried forth without the pore,
as in Verruca Pensilis; other while it remains still therein, as in Verruca
Sessilis, and also in Clavus in the feet. But now, that this juice should
thrust it self into the pores, the dilatation and wideness of them may very well
be the cause thereof: which as it proceeds from diverse causes, so in the feet
(the skin being in one place hard pressed down, and by this means the pore
being widened) the Tumor Clavus is easily generated. In the hands likewise,
whereas they there also often appear and expose themselves unto the view,
Platerus conjectureth and conceives it to be very credible that these Verrucae
proceed from external injuries.

There are some also who determine that these arise likewise from contagion; as
if the blood fall out of a Verruca (when it is cut) upon some other part, there
may then a Verruca be generated in that part; and if any one shall use that
linen with which the blood that came forth of these Verrucae was taken up and
cleansed away, even upon the use and wearing of the said linen Verrucae (that
is to say, Warts, and Corns) may succeed and follow thereupon.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Verrucae are easily known from the descriptions already given; and so
may also their differences; so that it will be altogether needless here to
deliver any peculiar signs; for indeed these Tumors are vulgarly and
sufficiently known.

Prognostics.
1. Verrucae oftentimes vanish of their own accord, without the help and
assistance of any Medicament.

2. Myrmecia and Clavi notwithstanding, unless they be cu ed, are scarcely ever
known to disappear and vanish.

3 Acrochordones are not so hard to be cured, when they have roots that are but
small and slender: but now the rest of them when they are fixed and fastened
with a broader root require more forcible and efficacious Medicaments.

4. Acrochordon if it be cut out, it then leaves no little root, and therefore
indeed it cannot well return, and arise anew. Thymium and Clavus being cut out,
there arises underneath a round small root, that descends very deeply unto
the flesh; and so (the root being left behind) it again arises. Myrmecia stick
fast with the most broad roots; and thereupon they cannot indeed be cut forth
without some great and dangerous exulceration. Thus Celsus in his fifth Book,
and Chap. 28.

The Cure.
Now these Verrucae are taken away either by Medicaments, or by Surgery. The
Medicaments are such as effect this, either by an occult and secret propriety;
or else such as dry up the aliment of them; so that the Verrucae do afterward
wither and vanish away.

Fallopius commends the Leaves of the Willow or Sallow Tree, or the juice of
them. But if the green Leaves may not be had, he then makes use of the powder
of the Willow Leaves, mingled with Vinegar either simple, or Scillitick. They
likewise use Figwort, the Roots of Water Dragons, of Cuckoo pint, and of
Sowbread. They commend also the new and fresh gathered Roots of Celandine, with
the juice whereof they anoint the Verrucae or Warts. Others first of al burn
them (once and again) with the young tender sprigs of the aforesaid Celandine,
and then afterward they apply Watercresses and Mustard. There are some
likewise who think that these Verrucae may be taken away by a certain
specifical propriety that is in Purslain. The Verrucae are likewise taken away,
if they be (...) with Nightshade and Urine, if they be washed with the liquor
that is gathered out of the Leaves of Mullein, and laid thereto with the
Flowers of the same, with the Decoction that is made of Mustard, Sulphur, and
Salt, with Vinegar; if the Leaves of Savine after they have been for three
days together macerated in Wine be imposed upon them; if Herb Robert, Rue, and
Millfoyl, bruised together, be applied. That Cichory likewise which they call
Verrucarium (the name being given it from Verrucae) is of singular use and
benefit; as also the milky Juice of the stalks of the Herb Lions-Tooth, as
likewise of all other Endive and Succory-like Plants; the Water that sweateth
out of Vine Branches while they are in burning; the Meal or Flour of Chicheling
Pease, as they vulgarly call them.

And for the Verrucae or Warts, and Clavi or Corns, in the Feet, this following
Emplaster is like wise very efficacious.

Take Ship-pitch one ounce, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar half an ounce, Sal.
Ammoniac. one scruple, the great Diachylon Plaster one ounce and half, mingle
and make an Emplaster.

But if these and such like avail not, we must then betake our selves to those
Remedies that are stronger, and such like as have in them a Caustic virtue,
yea even unto the actual fire it self; and yet notwithstanding Caustic
Remedies are not to be administered without a great deal of caution (especially
in the Nervous or sinewy places) and so, that they may only touch upon the
Verrucae; and therefore the part that lies round about is first of all to be
well guarded with Wax, or some kind of Emplaster.

For this end and purpose there is usually administered the Milk of Figs, and
Spurge or Milkwort; and that indeed the Milk of the aforesaid Tithymal or
Spurge is in it self alone very efficacious, Valescus de Taranta writes that
it is so found to be by experience. Unslaked Lime mingled with Soap is also
profitable; which said Medicament will be the more effectual, if there be added
a little calcined Vitriol, or Verdigrease, or a Cautery prepared of Soap Lie.
Or,

Take the white of an Egg hardened in boiling, Verdigrease and Alum, of each
one dram; mingle etc. Or,

Take Green Garlic, and when it is newly bruised let it be applied to the
Verruca, and let there be a little Cap of Wax imposed thereon, and wrapped about
with a Swath, to keep it fast on. Or,

Take Orpiment, and let it be mingled with Oxymel, or the Milk of the aforesaid
Milkwort or Spurge, and let it be put upon the Verrucae. Very useful likewise
is the Oil of Vitriol and Sulphur. And Johannes Andreas a Cruce does here
indeed in a wonderful manner commend the Oil of Vitriol; and in this manner he
applies it. He provideth a little Knife of Lign-aloes, or the like, and this
he dippeth in the Oil of Vitriol, and by this means he freeth the Verruca; with
which otherwise it is freed by an Iron Penknife.

The Surgery by which Verucccae are taken away is described by Galen, in his
fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 17. by Paulus Aegineta in his
sixth Book, Chap. 87. and by Rhases, in his Book of Divisions, Chap. 124. And
it is performed either by extraction, or excision, or else by adustion. They
are extracted and plucked forth with a Quill; the Circle whereof let it be equal
unto the Verrucae; with this Quil let the Verrucae be on all sides streightened
and hard bound; and then afterward let the Verruca be loosned and drawn round
about, and so by this means it may together with its root be pulled forth. The
same is likewise performed by the Silver Pipe. There was one at Rome that
usually plucked them forth by sucking, and his Teeth together, as Galen in the
place alleged informs us.

They are cut off, either by something tied about them (to wit, the Verrucae
Pensiles) is for instance, by a silken Thread, or some other Thread that is
strong, or else by a Horse Hair, still by degrees streightning and drawing
close together the bond, until the Verrucae fall off. And if there remain
behind any of its Root, it is to be wasted and consumed by a Cautery. Or else
it is to be performed by an Iron, or fitting Penknife, so that the Verrucae
must first of all be scarified round about; and afterward let it be cut off
with a sharp Penknife, and with the Phlebotomy Instrument quite grub'd up by
the Roots.

They are actually burnt, either by a little stick of the Beech Tree, lighted
at one end; or else by a long sharp Iron Bodkin, heated red hot, and applied to
the Verruca through a small Cane, that so the near adjacent parts may not be
hurt or offended. Or if a thin Iron plate having a hole bored through it
according to the bigness of the Verruca, be so applied unto the said Verruca,
that the Verruca alone appear through the hole, and then afterward it may be
burnt with a red hot Iron, or with the flame of Fire. The burning being
performed and ended, the Escar is then to be taken away, and the Ulcer to be
healed in a fit and convenient manner. Fallopius (if other Remedies be not
sufficiently prevalent) burns the Verruca with Sulphur, after this manner. He
takes the middle shel of a Walnut, and boreth it through according to the
bigness of the Verruca or Wart, and so applies the unequal part thereof unto
the place in which the Wart appears, so that it may strictly and closely
comprehend the Verruca or Wart, and that the Verruca may appear forth through
the hole into the Cavity or hollow part of the shel. After this he puts in
Sulphur into the hollow of the shel, and kindles it; which being melted, and
kindled, the Verruca is so long to be burnt as the Patient can well endure it;
and if it cannot at once doing this be wholly extirpated, the adustion is to be
repeated three or four times, in the manner aforesaid. When the place shall be
healed, it is then for some days to be rubbed with the Leaves of Sallow, and
so covered therewith that the Verruca may no more return, and arise anew.

Touching Thymia, and Cristae any, we have already spoken in the third Book of
our Practice, Part 2. Sect. 1. Chap. 10.

Chap. 38. Of Cornua.
VEry many there are that refer Cornua unto the aforesaid Verrucae: and they
determine that they are a certain longer kind of Verrucae, and somewhat crooked
like unto a Horn. But this name is both by the Arabian Physicians, and those of
these latter times likewise extended far wider. Avicen in the seventh of his
fourth Book, Tract. 3. Chap. 14. writes thus touching these Cornua. Cornua
(says he) are thick additions, crooked, arising above upon the Junctures, in
the extremities, by reason of the vehemence of their operation; and the cure of
them is Incision, that so that which is altogether insensible and without pain
may be removed out of them; moreover let there be administered upon the residue
thereof Medicaments that are vehemently sharp and acute (out of those
Medicaments that are made use of in the Verrucae) until it sal; and then let
Butter boiled be administered and applied thereunto.

Avenzoar in his second Book, and Chap. 5. has something to this purpose: I
have heard (says he) my Father say, that he once saw a certain man that had
bred in his back a bone like unto the Unicorns Horn, but it was less hard than
a Natural bone. And my Father purged away the gross humors that were in this
man, and afterward he put exsiccative Medicines upon the bone; upon which the
said bone fell forth like as the Hearts Horns shed and fall off in the Spring.
And I my self likewise had once a bone growing upon my back, which brought upon
me much grief and pain: I then purged my self from gross humors, and I put upon
the aforesaid bone Resolutives; so that it was for the greatest part resolved;
and that little remainder thereof was no hinderance at all unto me in the
exercise of my natural operations. Therefore whenever thou find the like, do
as I have said. And when thou purgest them, do not purge them only with the
virtues of Medicines, but even with the very proper Medicines themselves. And
in the number of the better Minerals (for the purging of these) the Lapis
Lazuli is one; but without all doubt there is great help to be had from the
Lodestone, in this case: but for my own part I make little or no use of the
Lodestone in my practice, in regard that the Lapis Lazuli suffices me; and I
commend unto you the operation thereof.

But yet some there be of the latter Writers that reckon up these Cornua among
the Affects of the Head; touching which Lanfracus (in his Tract. 3. Doct. 2.
and Chap. 3.) thus writes: I have likewise seen (says he) manifest eminencies
of the Skul, like unto Horns. For I once saw a man that came unto me for advice
that had in his Head seven eminencies, one greater than the other, and they
were in diverse places. Of which one was as big and acute as the Horn of a Kid,
a finger long, or as long as ones thumb, and it much hurt and annoyed the Skin:
and I admired that the Skin was not exulcerated. When therefore I saw that it
had its original and root from the head, I would by no means be persuaded to
undertake the Cure, but rather persuaded the sick person that he should put
himself into no man's hands, in hope of Cure, for that it seemed unto me
altogether impossible. But Johannes Philippus Ingrassias, in his first Tract of
Tumors, and Chap. 1. relates that he saw at Panormus a certain Noble Virgin (a
Girl) that was afflicted with very many of these crooked excrescencies, that
were withal sharpened in the top of them, like unto Calves Horns, almost in all
the Limbs, and especially in the Joints of the Hands, the Arms, and the Knees,
as also in the Head, and the Forehead. But yet notwithstanding (says he) those
Tumors were not bred in the Skin, but upon it, and that indeed in a certain new
order of generation. For like as the generation of the stone happens in the
bladder, to wit, that one Tunicle as it were coming upon another, it increases
unto a greatness; so in like manner we beheld in them very many (as it were)
boney crusts sticking the one to the other, just in such a fashion also as if
we should put the half rinds of Filberds one upon another, the less still upon
the greater, that so they may be joined together in an acute and sharp form,
and the shape of a Pyramid. But these when they were touched about the basis
and bottom of them, were extremely painful; and they stuck so fast in, and were
of such an extraordinary hardness that no Physician being able by any kind of
Remedies whatsoever to yield the Patient any help or relief, her kindred at the
length (after that the Disease, and the growth of these Cornua had for many
years continued) came unto me. For they were continually augmented both in
their bigness, and (diverse other new ones budding forth) in their number also:
whom (by the gracious assistance of Almighty God) we recovered unto her former
health and soundness, and also unto her former beauty, and comely feature. Who
notwithstanding was become so deformed and mis shapen, that she was now become
more like an ugly Monster, and frightful Devil, than to any Woman kind;
insomuch that her Parents much rather desired her death than her life.

Julius Caesar Scaliger in his 199. Exercitat. Sect. 5. writes, That for the
growing of these Cornua upon men and women (making them like unto Monsters
rather than unto what indeed they are) although he was told thereof by Prince
Aboalis, and by that person of note Abumeron; yet notwithstanding their great
Authority and credit, he could not believe a thing so strange, until he himself
saw one of them on the back of a certain Rower, that had been for a long time
in the Triremis (a long Boat with three Oars so called) of the Ligurians.

Alexander Benedictus in the first Book of his Anatomy, and 14. Chap. tells
us, that in Crete he saw a black horn most like unto the head of a wild G^ar
growing forth in a man's Knee that was wounded by an Arrow; and that the matter
that ought to have been converted into the substance of a bone was easily (by
the blowing in of the Air) turned into an horney Nature, and soon got unto it
self an hardness, after the manner of Gums.

And Fallopius in his Book of the similar parts, Chap. 7. writes, That
sometimes likewise in whole bones as well as in fractures there may be something
bred like unto a horn; and that this same horn may grow forth without the flesh
and the skin; and that he himself saw this at Padua in the thigh of a certain
noble man; out of whose thigh there grew forth as it were a little long stake
or post.

Zacutus in his second Book of the Administration of Practical Physic, Zacutus
his observation touching Cornu bred in the heel.
Observe. 188. relates that a certain poor man naturally melancholic, long
complained of a pain he had in the heel of his right foot; and that he there
felt a certain hardness, that afterward grew forth into a Tumor of the bigness
of a small Chestnut, hard, rough, and leaden colored; which in eight months time
so increased that it was become an hand breadth long, and resembled a true
horn. Which after it had been cut off (by the advice of Physicians) no symptoms
following thereupon, and the body purged twice every year, he lived for two
years in sound and perfect health. But after this he suddenly grew sensible of
extreme and intolerable pain in the very same place, and in six months the
Cornu grew forth again, hard, and encompassed about with most sharp pricks, and
was in length at least one hand breadth and an half. The which being again cut,
in the very bottom thereof there was left a little hollow place, out of which
there flowed forth great store of a black stinking humor, of so corroding a
nature, that it soon eat through the flesh near unto it. We then indeed purged
his body with Medicaments that were fit and proper for the evacuation of the
melancholy humor; and there were likewise Sudorificks of the China Root
administered; but al to no purpose. And therefore to intercept the flux there
were several Issues made, one in the Leg that was sound, four fingers below the
Knee in the external part; another in the Leg affected eight fingers above the
Knee, or else in the Thigh in the inside thereof. He was every month purged;
and so by this means the Cornu was hindered from growing again any more; and
the Ulcer was healed of its own accord, and covered over with a Cicatrice.

Nodi.
And hither (without al question) belong and are to be referred the Nodi of
Platerus, (touching which we spoke above in the thirty fourth Chap^er:) which
are the hardest sort of Tumors, sticking firm and fast in the bones that lie
under them, and which cannot be made to remove their place from the said bones;
as if some new bone were now grown unto the former; which kind of Tumors are
bred about the Temples, and the Forehead, and also about the length of the
Ankles, in those naked Regions. And these Tumors either begin of themselves, or
else they accompany other Diseases, as the French Pox, and one certain kind of
the Cephalaea Affect.

The Cure.
These Cornua and Nodi are very hard to cure; and they often continue all the
whole life time. And yet notwithstanding if they be near unto the Joints, so
that they hinder the motion of them, or if they cause continual pain by
pressing upon them, they are then to be amputated and cut off; which may be
done the more safely in regard that they consist in the naked bones that are
only covered with the skin. The skin is first of al to be opened, and the Cornu
or Nodus to be made naked and bare; and after that it is to be cut away from
the bone with a sharp Iron Knife, and the Wound to be cured in a fit and
convenient manner.

Chap. 39. Of Fungi.
THat Aff^ct which the Latins call Fungus, the Arabians call Fater and Fatera,
and they refer them unto the Tumors of the Brain. Galen by the way and
cursorily makes mention hereof, when in his first Book of the place affected,
Chap. 1. he thus writes: And now (says he) even likewise of those things that
spring up and grow unto other things, the notes and marks of the place or seat
affected are to be sought for. For why, such things as adhere and cleave unto
others obtain the propriety of Essence, like as do Fungi (which the Greeks call
Mycete) if upon the breaking of the Head the Meninx or Membrane chance to be
broken. Avicen likewise make^h mention hereof, in the fifth of his fourth Book,
Tract. 3. Chap. 2. where he says thus: And when the Cramum or Skull is broken,
and the Vail or covering goes forth, there is then also caused an Impostume
that is named Fatera. And we treated of this Tumor in the first Book of our
Practice, Part 1. Chap. 25. But (as sometimes we wrote unto that eminent and
worthy man Gulielmus Fabricius, as is to be seen in the second Century of his
Observations, Observat. 25.) this kind of Tumor as indeed it may arise very
frequently from the Membranes of the Brain, so it may also be bred in other
parts; as you may there find two Histories by me produced, for the further
confirmation thereof. The former whereof is this. A History
A certain Youth there was about ten years old, that in leaping hit his left
foot hard against the ground, and by this vehement stroke he hurt the sole
thereof over against the little toe. Upon this a Tumor began by little and
little to increase, insomuch that it had soon gotten over all the foot, and
exceedingly distended the skin; so that the toes (^y reason of the tumor or
swelling coming betwix^) stood at too great a distance the one from the other.
And yet notwithstanding the skin in color was like unto the found part. There
were by diverse Physicians (as the manner is) diverse means a^tempted, and
different Remedies put in practice, but al in vain. At length his Friends went
unto a Surgeon for his assistance, who when he saw the place very soft, and
found that the pain increased, conceived that there was now already a
suppuration made, and thereupon without any more ado he opened the place, out
of which there issued forth a little blood, but no Pus at al. And in a short
time after there ran forth as it were a certain kind of fatness, by the which
the Wound was quite shut up. Within a few days following there began to break
forth these Fungi in great abundance, full of black wheyish blood. And in the
sole of the foot near unto the little toe one night there happened as it were a
benummedness and deadness as large and broad as half a Rix Doller. This being
opened, yet notwithstanding there fell forth no putrid and corrupt matter;
neither could any of the dead flesh be separated, but the flesh was in
appearance like unto a burnt sponge, al bloody, swelling and strutting with
blood, and destilling it. They began likewise to show themselves in other
places, to wit, at the sides of the foot, and above the ankles; most loathsome
and frightful to look upon; insomuch that that part of the foot did equal (or
indeed exceed) in bigness a child's head. At length he proceeded to Section, and
the middle part of the foot, even to the Navicular bone, and the heel bone, was
cut off. That which was thus cut off was wholly a hollow spungy flesh, partly
putrid and corrupt, and partly curdled, thick, and like unto a clammy porous
fatness, and weighing well near four pound. But on the following days a Spungy
flesh brake forth again with great violence; and look how much there was taken
away in the day time, there grew again as much in the night. And lastly, there
arose a great swelling in the Thigh (nigh unto the left Groyn, in the place
where the Glandules are) in shape much resembling that which at first was seen
to appear in the midst of the foot; which afterward brake of its own accord;
out of which there grew forth great store of spungy flesh. And so not long
after the Boy died.

The other History is this. A Boy twelve years old was greatly troubled with
the pain of his teeth. Another History.
At length it came to this, That they must be drawn. One of the upper teeth is
accordingly drawn forth. Upon which there afterward arose a Tubercle in the
Palate near unto that Tooth, as big as a Prune stone. This being soft, and not
opening of its own accord, it was conceived that there lay some Pus or purulent
matter under it; whereupon it was opened, and at first there flowed forth
nothing but some few drops of blood: but then afterward there brake forth a
spungy and blackish flesh, which so far increased, that it did not alone hang
forth at the mouth, but grew forth likewise by the Nostrils, and at length
brought death upon the Child.

And Gulielmus Fabricius in his second Century, Observe. 199. relates likewise
an History of a Fungus that had its original from Gurgulio, that wholly filled
up the Palate, and reached welnigh unto the fore teeth. And another he
mentions in the following Observation, that arising from Gurgulio was
altogether as big as an Hen Egg, and it so stopped up the little holes of the
Nostrils that end in the Palate, that the sick party could hardly breathe;
neither could he speak distinctly, and so as to be understood.

This Gulielmus Fabricius in his third Century, and Observat. 1. tells us yet
likewise of another Fungus that he had seen growing out of the Ear, and that he
cured the same. And in his fifth Century, and Observat. 62. he mentions yet
another Fungus that sprung and was bred out of the very Center of the Navel.
This kind of Tumor Gulielmus Fabricius in his third Century, Observat. 36.
conceives that it is to be referred unto those that we call Nattae or Naptae.
But what these Naptae are, we have before declared in the thirty sixth Chapter.
And although there be something of Fungus contained in the aforesaid Tumor
Natta; and albeit these Tumors may in the general be said to be Fungus: yet
notwithstanding that is covered over with the skin; but Fungi properly so
called (and of which we are now ^reating) hang forth al naked and bare without
the skin, and there they grow and increase. And therefore likewise they breed
not in the whole and sound Membranes of the brain, but they are bred in them
when they are wounded, bruised together, and hurt.

The subject of these Tumors is a Membrane, that is any ways hurt, or wounded,
or bruised.

The Causes.
Johannes Philippus Ingrassias (touching the Cause, and the manner of
generation of these Fungi) writes that this Fungus is wont to be bred in like
manner as in Candles lighted or Lamps we see the Fungus (in the Winter time
especially) that is wont to arise and appear in the top of the Wick of the one,
and the match of the other; and which is with weak and simple Women a notable
presage of Rain suddenly to follow; even as Virgil (in the first of his
Georgicks) and Pliny likewise in his eighteenth Book about the end thereof, do
both of them attest. For when the Air begins to be moist, the sparkles that
were wont to pass forth with the smoke, being now prohibited and hindered, by
reason of the thickness of the Air, do there reside in the Lights, and there
they represent as it were certain resemblances and Images of Fungi. And just so
it is in the Membrane of the Brain, when it is discovered and laid open, at the
first there is a certain substance that represents the likeness of that soft
and Cotton-like tender Hair that is found upon the heads of new born Infants.
But then afterward the vapors being discussed by exhaling, and the Fumes being
made to assume a round form in that substance by the coldness of the Air, they
are by little and little burnt and extremely dried by the more inward heat,
until at length there appear also a substance like unto the said Fungus,
signifying that the Membrane is altered by the Air.

But in very truth, it is indeed to be granted, that these kind of Fungi are
generated from a superfluous humor, as it were sweating forth through the hurt
Membranes; but that this matter may be even detained there by the coldness of
the Air, and that it may likewise be there exsiccated merely and only by the
heat, is altogether false, and therefore not to be granted. For these Fungi
cannot possibly be so suddenly generated after this manner, and get such a
growth. But it is most agreeable unto truth, that the humor destilling forth
into the soft Flesh (that is spungy like to the Mushrom in Trees) is changed by
the formative faculty of the part; and that Nature which is never idle does
change and form into this substance the humors flowing thereunto, which by
reason of their abundance (as likewise their unfi^ness for motion) and the
debility of the part, it can by no means possibly convert into the aliment and
substance of the said part.

Signs Diagnostick.
This kind of Tumor is very easily known. For out of a Membrane hurt and
bruised, or wounded, there shoots forth a soft Flesh, spungy, and pale, and not
covered with the Skin; and suddenly it attaineth unto a great and exraordinary
growth.

Prognostic.
This Malady is very dangerous, and hard to be cured; and if it be not handled
aright, it easily turns into the Nature of a Cancer.

The Cure.
Universals having been first premised (the which it is not our purpose here to
mention) the Fungus it self is to be taken away, which is done either by
Medicaments that exsiccate, and corrode, or else by excision and cutting it out.

Medicaments that exsiccate and dry are far more safe then those that corrode
and eat through: in regard that by Corrosives the matter is easily exasperated,
and so obtains the nature of a Cancer. Now such are made of round
Aristolochy, the roots of it, and of the Florentine Flower-de-luce, Angelica,
the true and right Acoruss, the Leaves of Savine, of Card. Benedict. of
Rosemary, of Plantane, Horstail, Storks-bil, the Flowers of Red Roses, Mastick,
Frankincense, Myrrh, prepared Tutty, burnt Lead, Sugar of Saturn, Lapis
Calaminaris, the Ashes of Froggs and Sea-Crabs.

But they are to be cut out either by a Silken Thread (tying it about
therewith) or else any other strong Thread; otherwise it is done by an Iron. So
soon as the Fungus is taken away either by the aforesaid Ligature, or Iron,
then there ought to be strewed and sprinkled thereupon Powders of the before
mentioned Medicaments. As touching these operations, see further in Gulielm.
Fabricius in the place alleged; to wit, Century 3. Observat. 1. and Century
5. Observat. 62.

Chap. 40. Of Tumors Malignant and Poisonous, and in special of Elephantiasis.
WE are at length come to treat of a certain kind of Tumors arising from the
humors, that have joined with them a Malignity. Among the which the first we
meet withal are the small Pox and Measils. But because we have already handled
them in the fourth Book of Fevers, Chap. 12. we shall here add no more as
touching them; but rather refer the Reader thither, for his further
information. And then the next we meet withal are those we call Bubones and
pestilent Carbuncles; touching which we shall likewise here in this place spare
our pains in the further treating thereof, in regard that we have also spoken
of them in the place alleged, to wit, the sixth Chapter. There likewise
belong hither (in the third place) those Tumors that we term Venereal, of which
we shall hereafter treat further in its proper place, among the malignant
Tumors. And lastly, there is this Elephantiasis, touching which alone we intend
here to discourse.

That Affect which the Arabians call Lepra, we have told you above (in Chap.
28.) that it is by the Greeks called Elephantiasis. Elephantiasis.
Now it is called Elephas, Elephantiasis, and Elephantia from the Elephant; by
reason of the likeness and resemblance that this Disease has with that
Creature (the Elephant) to wit, as some conceive, because such as are affected
with this Disease become great as the Elephants; but this is but a weak and
simple conjecture of theirs, since that those who are affected with the
Elephantiasis are not made hereby ever a whit the greater (unless happily we have
respect not so much unto the greatness of the body in such as are thus
affected, as unto the greatness of the danger of death thereby threatened; to
wit, that look as the Elephant is the greatest of all the four-footed Creatures;
even so among diseases this appears to be the grea^est, and an Affect almost
remediless and incurable) touching which thing Macer in his Book of the virtues
of Herbs, and Chap. 15. speaks unto the same purpose.

Or else this Malady is so called, because that creeping along upon the Thighs
it causes them to become (as are those of an Elephant) rough and unequal: or
else because that among other Diseases this is exceeding vehement, strong and
violent, like as is the Elephant; or otherwise it is so called (and this indeed
seems to be the most true and genuine reason thereof) because the members and
the skin of those that are affected with this Disease are rendered tumid and
swollen, scaly, rough and rugged, full of swellings, and unequal, like unto the
skin of Elephants. Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 14. writes that this
Malady when it first begins, is likewise called Satyriasmus, in regard that
the face of those that are afflicted with this Disease is rendered like unto
the face of the said Satyrs. For the lips of such as are troubled with
Elephantiasis are thereby made thick, and the Nose swells; and thereupon it
seems as if it were pressed down; the Ears become flaggy and much wasted, the
Jaw bones are colored, as it were, and overspread with a certain kind of
redness, and in the Forehead there appear here and there Tumors or Swellings,
like as if they were certain Horns: although there be others indeed that think
the Satyriasmus to be so called, even for this very cause, that in the
beginning of this Malady the sick parties are extremely libidinous and lustful,
like as are the said Satyrs. And yet notwithstanding Aetius in Tetrab. 4.
Sermon. 1. Chap. 120. out of Archigenes, rendereth another kind of reason of this
resemblance (and that indeed different from the former) to wit, because the
Cheeks and face in such as are thus affected are lifted up, together with a
certain redness, and the Chin it self is dilated, upon the Convulsion as it
were of the Muscles of the Jaws; even as we see it likewise to befall those that
laugh, in a certain kind of likeness and resemblance unto the Pictures of
Satyrs; which Coelius Rhodiginus in his 19. Book of the reading of
Antiqu^ties, and Chap. 25. conceives to be ^o called from the Greek word
Seserenai, because that these Satyrs sing and sport themselves with their
mouths wide open and gaping, and their lip^ drawn forth like unto those that
laugh. A d there are some that give us a th^^^ reason and ground of this
appellation, to wit, b cause th^^ those who are affected wi^h thi^
Elephantiasis are like unto Satyrs in their propension unto Venery, and
lustfulness.

It is likewise termed Leontiasis, either in regard that this Malady is
invi^^ible, like as the Lion; or else because (as Aetius has it in Tetrab. 4.
Sermon. 1. Chap. 30.) the forehead of the sick person is with a certain swelling
rendered and made more loose, after the resemblance of the flexile skin of the
Lions Eyebrows; or else, because the breath and the very spiri^s of such as
are affected with this Malady do even stink like unto the breathing of Lions,
and their very excrements also; or else because those that are affected with
this Disease have a most filthy and terrible face, insomuch that (like as do
Lions) they strike a terror into those that come suddenly and unawares to
behold it. This Malady is by our Physicians called the Malady of St. Lazarus;
because that such as are Elephantiack do so abound and are full of Ulcers, like
as was that Lazarus the beggar, of whom there is mention made in the
Evangelical History, Luke, Chap. 16.

Now this is a very sad and grie^ous Malady, and as it were an Universal, o^
Cancer of the whole body; whereupon it comprehends under it many more sorts
and kinds o^ Diseases. For fi st of al, there is present magnitude augmented,
and a ^^^lling up and down in the body, especially in the external parts, whose
beauty, fea^ure, and (...) likewise is hereupon corrupted: there is likewise
present a hot and dry distemper, by which the parts are so exulcerated and
corrupted that as length they fall off. Celsus in his third Book, and Chap. 25.
thus describes the whole Idea of this Malady: The whole Body (says he) is
affected, so that the very Bones likewise may in a manner be said to be
vitiated and corrupted. The highest and utmost parts of the body have in them
both spots and swellings that stand thick and close one by the other. The
redness of these parts is by little and little converted into a black color.
The top of the skin is unequally both thick and thin, hard and soft, and is
exasperated by certain scales; the body waxes lean; the mouth, the calves of
the legs, and the feet swel, and are puffed up. When the disease comes once to
be old, the fingers and toes are quite hidden under the swelling; there arises
also a light and gentle Fever, that easily consumes and wastes the sick
person, that is already overwhelmed with the aforesaid evils and mischiefs.

The Causes.
The containing cause is black Choler (and this not without malignity) diffused
and spread abroad throughout the whole body. Now we find touching the generating
of this humor. viz. black choler, a long and tedious dispute among Authors; and
we find them holding diverse and different Opinions. In this (the truth is) they
al agree, that this humor is generated from the adustion and burning of other
humors; but then in this they differ, viz. from the adustion of what humors
this proceeds. Avicen in the third Section of his fourth Book, Tract. 3.
Chap. 1. seems to have comprehended them all; whiles he mentions five
Species or kinds of this humor. The first is that which proceeds from the
Blood; the second that from the melancholy humor; the third that which is from
the adustion of bitter Choler; the fourth that which arises from Phlegm burnt;
the fifth and last, that that proceeds from the thick, and hot part (as being
very apt to be burnt) of the Chyle, as to Instance, from all salt Flesh, Fish,
and the like. But although it cannot be denied, that there is here in this case
an adustion of humors present, and that salt humors are the cause of this
Malady; yet notwithstanding, since that there are very many other Tumors and
Ulcers that have their original from adust humors, here therefore the very
specifical cause is altogether to be sought for, which notwithstanding cannot
easily be explained; but it consists in an occult i. e. an hidden and secret
Malignity. But now this humor is diffused thorowout all the Veins; and an
inductive Fever is dispersed (without any putridness at all) thorowout the
whole body, and is mingled together with the aliment.

But now there are many things that conduce and make to the generation of this
humor. There are some that contract the original seeds of this Malady from
their very birth; to wit, such as either are born of Elephantiack Parents, or
else conceived during the Flux of the monthly Courses, vicious, and corrupt,
and declining unto black Choler. And moreover also the hot and dry distemper of
the Members destined by Nature for Nutrition (as for example, the Liver, and
the Spleen; from whence it is that the Blood and the humors are burnt) is
deservedly reckoned up and accounted among the Causes of this Malady. And
furthermore, the frequent and common use of salt meats makes likewise very
much hereunto, as also the eating of sharp and sour meats, and food that is
overgross and thick: the Air also being overhot and dry; or else thick and
Cloudy: from whence it is that this Malady is in some Countries more frequent
and usual, and in other Regions scarcely known; as the Poet Lucretius tells us
in his sixth Book: Elephas (says he) is a Disease that (by reason of the
overflowings of the River Nilus) is bred in the midst of Egypt, and no where
else.

But although it be true that the Disease is more frequently found there; as
Galen likewise testifies in his second Book to Glauco, and Chap. 10. (where he
acknowledges that in Alexandria by reason of the fervent heat of that Region,
and the unfitting Diet of the Inhabitants, who eat Meal boiled, Lentiles, and
Cockles, many salt meats, and the flesh of Asses, with diverse other sorts of
food that generate and breed a thick melancholy humor, there are more that are
troubled with this Elephantiack Disease) yet notwithstanding it is also to be
found in other Regions. In Germany (especially in some parts thereof) these
Elephantiack Persons are very common and ordinary; but in Spain and Africa they
are far more frequently found; and in Gallia Narbonensis, and Aquitain, there
are more of them to be found then in all France besides. Pliny in his twenty
seventh Book, and Chap. 1. writes, that before the time of Pompey the
Elephantiasis was never known to happen in Italy. Living and Conversing
likewise with the Elephantiack Persons much conduces to the causing of the
Disease. For the Air (that in breathing is attracted and drawn in) is infected
by the stench of the Members, and the vitiated exhalation of the Breath. From
whence it is that men deservedly shun the company of those that are thus
affected; and for such as are domestic, and therefore necessarily constrained
to abide under the same Roof, do yet (as there is good reason for it) shun
their company, and all near Converse with the sick Persons; and therefore even
for this cause it is that these Elephantiack Persons are separated from the
society and company of others; and are sent away, and disposed of in some open
places, in the which they live with most benefit unto themselves, and less
endangering others. But especially carnal copulation with the Leprous man or
Woman is undoubtedly dangerous and infectious; and so is likewise that carnal
society that any one has with her that before has had to do with a Leprous
man. Unto these same Causes there belongs also the retention of the
Melancholy Excretions; as the suppression of the monthly Courses, and the
Haemorrhoids, and the sudden stanching and drying up of long continued Ulcers.
For such a like humor as this (if it be detained long in the Body) becomes
worse and worse daily, and at length acquireth this malignity, and being
retained in the Body it seateth and setleth it self in the Veins, and infecteth
the whole mass of Blood. Moreover this Malady does more frequently invade and
seiz upon men then women; and among men, those especially that have in them
Blood that is thick and viscous, tending to black Choler; and such as use a
thick and inordinate kind of Diet.

Signs Diagnostick.
Although (as for what belongs to the signs of this Malady) we have given you
some few of them out of Celsus, as they are by him recounted and reckoned up;
yet notwithstanding it will not be time and pains ill spent to enumerate and
declare the whole entire History of the Signs and Symptoms. And therefore in the
first place, whenever this Malady is nigh at hand, there immediately goes
before it, and is present, a sluggishness or slothfulness, and slow and
difficult breathing, unfitness for motion, a daily and continual costiveness of
the Belly, Urines like unto the stalings and waters that come from Beasts and
the greater Cattle, a Breath slow and stinking, and an extreme propension to
Venery. When the Malady has once gotten forward into the Skin, then the Native
and fl^urishing fresh color of the Face is changed, there arise red bluish
and wan Pustules, the Cheeks and the Chin become thicker, the Veins under the
Tongue are swollen up, and wax black, the Hairs fall off, there is present an
extraordinary Thirst, and a dryness in the mouth both by Day and by Night.

But now as it is in other Diseases, so it is here, that there are likewise
certain times of this Malady. The beginning is, when the vicious humor and the
malignity is yet but as it were laying siege and beleaguering the Bowels. The
increment or increase, when the Malady now shows it self abroad and openly, and
that the Symptoms are daily augmented. The state, when the Members are
exasperated, and the whole concourse of the symptoms appears publicly, the
which we shall immediately subjoyn. First of all the Eyes appear exactly round,
and the looks thereof are fixed and immovable; which happens by reason of the
consumption of the fat, and the extenuation of the Muscles; the Eyelids and
the Ears are contracted and drawn together; the Eyebrows fall down, the Nose
swells outwardly, and is made flat, by reason of the afflux of the humor, and
it is streightened within; from whence it is that the passage is obstructed,
and the breathing hindered, so that they seem to speak as it were through their
Noses; the color of the Face is wan and Leaden colored; the aspect and looks
frightful; there appear Tubercles and red Pustules under the Eyebrows, about
the Ears, and in ^ivers places of the Face, and knots hard and round, like unto
Grains; the Lips are made thick, the Bones near unto the Ears stick forth; the
Hairs of the Head shed and fall away; and if the Hair be pulled forth, a part
likewise of the white Skin is pulled away together with it; which is a most
certain and infallible sign of the Leprosy. This Malady discovers it self
likewise in other parts: the Veins under the Tongue swel, and become blackish;
and the Glandules that lie near unto the Tongue (and round about it) have in
them round Tumors, like unto the Scrofulae that are in Swine, which we call the
Swine pox. The Breath stinketh, the Voice is hoarse, shril, and obscure, by
reason that the Lungs and the parts serving for Respiration are filled and
beset about with thick and adust humors, and by reason also of the dryness and
roughness of the Trachaea Arteria, or the great rough Artery. In the Hands the
Muscles are extenuated, especially between the Thumb and the fore Finger; for
whereas those Muscles are naturally lifted up into an hilly and manifest
swelling, the depression of them and their being emaciated (happening by reason
of the defect of aliment) becomes the more manifest and remarkable in them; the
Nails are cleft; there is present a stupidity, and want of feeling in the
Ankles, and the Calves of the Legs, and in the Feet also; so that although the
sick Persons shall be pricked with Pins or Needles in those places yet they
feel it not, in regard of the vicious matter filling up and obstructing the
part and hindering the access of the spirits. The same likewise sometimes
befalls the Fingers and Toes, in the which there is also perceived a coldness
and a certain privation of al sense and feeling; and sometimes likewise that
stupidity and sleeping (as they call it) chances unto the whole Skin between
those Fingers, and extends it self even unto the Arm; and from the Foot it
extends it self even unto the Knees, the Thighs, and the Hips; yea moreover
the sense of feeling is diminished throughout the whole body in Elephantiack
Persons. For all the Nerves and Pores being obstructed and in a manner shut up
by the thickness of the humors will not allow and afford any passage unto the
Animal Spirits. In some certain places under the Skin there is perceived and
felt a kind of stinging (such as is caused by Emmets or Pismires) as if Nettles
were rubbed thereupon; and likewise a certain kind of itching and tickling, as
if there were Worms creeping there, and this is by reason of the adust fumes
and burnt vapors ascending up under the Skin. The Skin it self is wholly
Unctuous and Oily (so that Water poured upon it will hardly stick and abide) by
reason of the melting of the fat under the Skin, and the effusion of fat
excrements thereinto. Others there are that unto these signs add other signs
also. They advise us to take some few grains of Salt, and to cast it upon the
Blood; because that if the Blood be infected the Salt is presently resolved and
melted; but on the contrary, if the Blood be not infected. They command us
likewise to cast this Blood into the purest and clearest Water; and if it swim
at top, it is corrupted; but the contrary if it sink to the bottom. Others
there be that take the Blood and putting it in a clean Linen Cloth they wash
it; for if there then appear in it certain blackish, rough, and as it were
sandy bodies, it argues a leprosy. But there are other signs also of this
Malady; and indeed there is scarcely any evil, mischief, or inconvenience, that
is not annexed thereunto; and in the which there is hardly any thing within or
without that is sound. But yet notwithstanding the Face is especially to be
considered; neither is any one rashly to be accounted Leprous, unless the
figure of the Face be corrupted. And therefore since that in some
Commonwealths there is instituted and appointed an Annual Examination and
Search in and about these Elephantiack persons, and that this is the chief, if
not the whole business of the Physician; he ought therefore to use the utmost of
his endeavor, and to be very cautious, that through imprudence, or by a rash
and precipitate Judgment he do not cause such to be exiled and banished from al
society that are not infected with this Disease; and on the other hand, for
those that are infected therewith, that he do not permit them to live and
converse with such as are sound, to the great endangering of them. And this he
may easily do, if he have in his eye all the signs before recounted and
mentioned; and if he will likewise but duly weigh and consider, which of them
are proper unto them, and inseparable from them; and what they have common with
other Diseases. In the serious examination of al which Franciscus Valeriola
has taken extraordinary pains, in the sixth Book of his Enarrations, Enarrat.
5. the Reader may do well to consult the place alleged. We must not here also
pass by in silence that which Marcellus Donatus has in his first Book of the
History of things wonderful in Physic, Chap. 4. by which we have occasion
given us to think and conjecture, how great the corruption of the blood may
possibly be in those that are Leprous. Annibal Pedemontanus (says he) having
been for two years vexed and afflicted with an incurable Lepra, he was at the
end thereof taken and surprised with a Pleurisy; and having a Vein opened,
this strange thing befell him; the hot Urine that came from him (being in
quantity more than the pot could well hold, and upon which there swam a blood at
least six ounces in weight) so soon as it was cooled was by the said blood
thickened in such a manner, just as if the water had been Milk, and the blood
the Curd thereof; so that in its consistency it seemed to be very like unto
curdled Milk; yet still retaining its own proper color; of the which there was
not one drop indeed to be found that was severed from the rest, and not
curdled. The cause hereof is given by the Author before cited, who conceived it
to be, and imputes it unto the thickness and clamminess of the blood, which
being thoroughly mingled with the Water, (the actual heat of both of them
assisting and furthering the distribution in their mingling together) when it
had abated of its great heat, and was now become cool, gave the occasion of the
said coagulation or curdling. And he conceives likewise that here the very
same thing happened that comes to pass, when the small parts and pieces that
are cut from Hides and Skins are boiled in Water for the making of Glue. For so
soon as ever that Water is cooled, it instantly is thrust and forced close
together, by reason of the clamminess and sliminess of the juice; and the like
also happens in some kind of meats that we eat, that are made of Calves feet,
and the feet of other living Creatures.

Prognostics.
1. By all which i^ appears, That this Malady is most grievous and dangerous,
hard to be cured, and (the truth is) not at al curable unless it be taken in
hand in the very beginning and first rise thereof; neither then without much
ado and difficulty. For an Elephantiasis inveterate and confirmed will at no
hand admit of any Cure. For if a Cancer (being but a particular disease only)
will allow of no cure; how much less will the Elephantiasis that is an universal
Cancer of the whole body, admit and receive any? And indeed there is hardly to
be found any Remedy that can subdue and conquer the greatness of this Malady.

2. This Disease is exceeding great and grievous, to wit, from the great store
of corrupt humors; and there is in the body an extreme and intense heat, to
wit, so great that if any one thus affected (but for a short space) hold in his
hand a new and green Apple, it will become wrinkled and withered, even as if it
had been for some long time dried by the heat of the Sun and the Air. And this
same very malignity has now of a long time taken deep root. For this Malady
discovers it self but very slowly; neither does it at al appear before that
the malignity of the humors have besieged (as I may so say) and shall have
corrupted the bowels. On the contrary, the strength of Nature is but very weak;
as it may sufficiently appear from the actions of all the faculties that are
generally hurt and weakened.

3. Wherefore like as we do but in vain, and to no purpose at al, take in hand
those that are altogether overmastered by this malady, and the long continuance
thereof; so on the other hand, it argues an overgreat despondency and despair
in those Physicians, that deny their help and assistance for the cure and
recovery of those that but only seem to be affected with this disease, but in
very truth are not so. For as Aetius writes, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. Chap. 120. It
is a sign of humanity, and an argument of brotherly kindness, in the most
extreme and worst of Maladies, to condescend likewise unto those Experiments
that in all likelihood and probability may tend to the quelling and keeping
under the rage and violence of the Affect.

The Cure.
As for what concerns the Cure of this Disease; in the curing of an
Elephantiasis that is but new begun, it is above all other things necessary and
requisite that the vicious humors be wholly removed out of the body; which to
attempt will yet notwithstanding be but in vain, unless there be withal such a
like Diet first ordained and appointed, as by the which there may be no more of
the vicious and bad humors gathered and heaped up together; but that thereby
rather the fault and whatever is amiss in the humors and the body may be
rectified and amended. And this is done by such things as cool and moisten, to
wit, as they are contrary unto the preternatural distemper, being hot and dry.
Broths and suppings are in this case therefore very fit and proper; which may
be qualified with Sorrel, Bugloss, and Borrage; unto which likewise (as unto al
other food the Patient eats) Hartshorn may be added and mingled therewith; as
having in it an especial and peculiar virtue of oppugning and subduing that
aforesaid malignity. Let his Meats be such as afford a good and commendable
juice, and withal easy of digestion; his flesh rather boiled than roasted; or
if at any time it be roasted, then among other Condiments, Sauces, or Sallades,
let there be appointed him these that follow, viz. Sorrel, Lettice, the juice
of Citrons, Vinegar of Roses, and C^pars. But chiefly we commend the cream of
Barley, with the Milk of sweet Almonds. And on the contrary, let the Patient
carefully aavoid al salt meats, and such as being salted are then smoke^dried,
and so hardened; al fried and adust food, al spiced meats; as also Pease,
Beans, Onions, Garlic, Mustard, Hares flesh, Hearts flesh, Beef, Swines flesh,
Fish (that have a viscous and clammy juice) and generally al other meats that
breed a thick, melancholic, and adust humor. And when the sick person is at
his meals thirsty, mere and undiluted Wine is very hurtful for him, in regard
that the heat and dryness of the Patients body is thereby augmented: and as for
Beer, thick humors are for the most part thereby generated; and therefore it
will be requisite to find out for him another kind of Drink that he may daily
make use of without any the least inconvenience. Of which sort, the chief and
principal is that drink that is made of the juice of sweet ripe Apples, and
then thoroughly cleansed from its Lees and Dregs. For this Drink is of singular
use and benefit, not only for those that are Elephantiack, but likewise for all
Melancholy and Hypochondriacal persons, as also for all others, whose Liver and
Mesentery or Midrif afford matter and cause of a disease. For it tempereth and
qual^^ieth the melancholy humor, discusseth the vapors thereof, recreateth the
Heart, begets cheerfulness, tempereth and moisteneth the dryness of the
Bowels, and yields a good aliment. Another Drink there is that is useful and
fit for all hot Natures, and hot Diseases (provided that the stomach will but
bear it) and it is made after this manner:

Take of the purest Water three quarts; Sugar six ounces; the juice of Lemmons,
or of the Citron, three ounces; (according to what the stomach of the sick
person, the strength of the heat, and the taste require) of Citrine Sanders two
drams; let them boil a little; and afterward add, of Cinnamom one dram; and
strain them.

Those that are of mean estate and condition may make use of the Prisan, or
Barley boiled with Fenel seeds. Bur this following will serve them for a more
efficacious Drink.

Take Sorrel, Marigolds, Meadow-sweet, of each one handful; Pimpernel two
drams; Shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each one dram; Raisons stoned and
well washed two ounces; Liquor is rasped and cut into thin slices one ounce;
Barley one pound. Boil them in a gallon of Water until one quart thereof be
wasted away. And what is strained forth let it be sweetened with the Syrup or
Julep of Violets. Or,

Take the Root of Succory one ounce; Raisons three ounces; Liquoris cut thin
half an ounce; Hartshorn, Fenel seed, of each one dram; boil them in a gallon
of Water, almost unto a third part. And what is strained forth, sweeten it with
the Syrup of Violets.

Furthermore, as there shall be occasion, let a vein be opened, and the body be
purged, according to what the variety of circumstances shall require; as for
example:

Take Cassia one ounce; Elect. Diacatholic. two drams; Fenel seed half a
scruple; and with Sugar make a Bole. Or,

Take Elect. Diacatholic. half an ounce; Confect. Hamech one dram or two;
Conserve of Borrage half a dram; Sugar a sufficient quantity, and make a Bole.
Or,

Take the Roots of Succory, and Scorzonera or Vipers Grass of each three drams;
Sorrel, Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Hart's-tongue, of each one pugil or small
handful; of all the Cordial flowers two pugils; of the four greater cold seeds,
and Fenel seed, of each half a dram; the Leaves of choice Seen half an ounce;
Polypody of the Oak, and Mother of Thyme, of each two drams; Raisons cleansed
half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of clear running Water; and
in four ounces and half of the straining infuse one dram and half of Rheubarb,
and half a dram of Cinnamom; unto the straining when it is pressed forth, add
of the Syrup of Fumitory, and Borrage, of each half an ounce; and mingle them
well together. Or,

Take the root of Succory, Monks Rheubarb, Elecampane, of each half an ounce,
Sorrel, Fumitory, Scabious, Bugloss, Maidenhair, of each one handful; Flowers
of Borrage and Bugloss, of each half a handful; Liquorish thin sliced, and
Raisins cleansed, of each six drams; boil them in a sufficient quantity of
spring Water; then take of the straining one quart, and infuse therein the
Leaves of Seen, Polypody of the Oak, of each one ounce; the rind of black
Hellebor half an ounce, Fenel seed and Anise seed, of each two drams; Citron
one dram, Mother of Thyme (commonly known by the name of Epithymum) five drams,
Cinnamom one dram; afterward let them boil gently, then strain them, and
sweeten all with Sugar, and of this let the Patient take (every or every other
day) two or three ounces with the Broth of a Chicken. Or else there are other
preparations and Purgations to be appointed, Of the Whey of Milk, Fumitory,
Hearts tongue, Maidenhair, Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, Succory, Endive, Sorrel,
Scabious, Thyme, Scordium or Water Germander, Liquorice, sharp Dock, called by
some sour Sorrel, etc. Of Epithymum otherwise called wild Time, or Mother of
Time, Polypody, the Leaves of Seen, black Hellebor, etc.

Now the Purgers and Preparers are often to be repeated; for so great and
contumacious a Malady as this cannot be taken away by a Digestive or two,
neither without frequent Purgations.

But there are likewise in the mean time Cordial Medicaments to be made use
of, and such as extinguish and abolish malignity; As,

Take Conserve of Bugloss, Borrage, Violets, Water Lillies, Roses, of each two
drams; Leaves of Gold three or four (or more if there be occasion) Hartshorn
prepared, the best Treacle four scruples, Syrup of Apples, or Borrage, as much
as is sufficient; make an Electuary. Or,

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, and Roses, of each one dram
and half; the Species Diarrhodon Abbatis, and the best Venice Treacle, of each
two drams; and with the Syrup of Apples make an Electuary; of which let the
Patient take every day in the morning the quantity of a Walnut, and twice or
thrice besides every week.

So soon as the Patient has taken his Electuary, let him presently be put into
a Cestern filled with sweet Water; and let him fit herein for the space of one
hour. But let the Bath be so temperate that there be no sweat caused, either in
the Bath, or after his going out of it. For if any Sweat be excited, it is a
sign that the Bath is hotter then it ought to be. There are many Physicians
that forthwith send away the Patients unto the Natural and Mineral Waters. But
in regard that they dry exceedingly, there oftentimes arises thence more hurt
then good; especially in the beginning of the Disease, while the heat and
dryness are at the highest. And there a Bath of sweet Water is far more
commodious and safe, which tempereth the dryness, discusseth the excrements,
and loosneth the Skin. After Bathing, the body may be anointed over with this
Medicament following, or such like;

Take the Juice of Nighshade, and of Scabious, of each one ounce; the Root of
the sharp Dock six drams, Vinegar of Roses one ounce, Elecampane root and
Pimpernel, of each half an ounce; Oil of Roses four ounces; the Rinds of black
Hellebor tied up in a piece of skin, three drams; boil them them until the
Juyces be boiled away, and after this cast away the black Hellebor; and then,

Take fresh Butter one ounce and half, Vipers fat, or if that cannot be had,
the best Treacle one ounce, burnt Lead half an ounce, Litharge and Ceruss, of
each two drams; Frankincense a dram and half, Styrax Calamite and Nitre, of
each two scruples; Mingle and stir them well about together with the Juice of
Lemmons, in a Leaden Mortar with a Leaden Pestle, until it has gotten the
form of a Liniment.

After bathing let him likewise use this Remedy, which some hold for a great
secret: They burn in a new Pot the Head of a Kite, which after it is pulled and
made bare of its Feathers, they cut off, as also the Feet and the Bowels being
taken out; and of the Powder hereof they administer what they think requisite
in a fit, and convenient Liquor; and they prescribe likewise the eating of the
rest of the Flesh at thrice, that is to say, a third part each day, for three
days together.

Solenander writes that he himself made use of this following Remedy, and that
with very good success. He takes two or three Vipers or (if they cannot
readily be gotten) other Snakes, and dissecteth them alive, and then together
with good store of Barley he puts them into Water, and boyleth them until the
Barley become soft. With this Barley, as also with the very Flesh it self of
these Snakes he feeds many Pullets or Chickens, and gives them no other food;
with the which after they have been for some few days nourished they lose
their Feathers, and within a short time they again get new ones; and afterward
with this Flesh and Broths made of them he nourishes the sick Person by little
and little. And indeed this Remedy out of Vipers we find to be much used by the
Ancients. For the body being first purged, in the spring time especially, they
took Vipers and cutting off the Head and Tail (casting away the Skin) they gave
the Flesh of these Vipers to be eaten by their Patients thus affected. But
Julius Palmarius assures us that Fernelius (although he made it a good part of
his Study) yet he could not once in all his life time effect what he so much
wished and so diligently studied for, to wit, the recovery and restoring of any
by the use of Vipers. And by his advice likewise Palmarius himself administered
these Vipers, and not only the flesh of them prepared diverse ways (thus and
thus) but the very Treacle it self also that is made of them; and yet
notwithstanding without any the least success. For although at the first in the
beginning of this Disease, this kind of Remedy may seem to benefit much; yet
notwithstanding at the length by it the Elephantiack poison and virulency is
thrust forth into the Skin, and all the symptoms so exasperated (as he writes)
that in the end the putridness being augmented, they are as it were torn in
sunder Limb after Limb. But however in regard that the Ancients have so much
commended the use of Vipers, and some likewise of our latter Physicians have
extolled the use of them, we therefore in this particular advise you to consult
experience.

The Ancients likewise for a Remedy used Castration or Gelding; and they tell
us in their writings, that many have been recovered by this means: Which (as
Valescus de Taranta conjectureth) therefore comes to pass, because that the
Leprosy proceeding from an overdriness, the body by the taking away the Stones
becomes much moystened, being hereby much effeminated; and so by this means
the humidity thereof is in great measure retained.

And that we may conclude this Discourse, the Elephantiasis alone (as Palmarius
writes) more than any other of those Diseases that are of long continuance
seems to rejoice it self as it were in the variety and interchange of
Remedies. And there are in this affect (if in any other) certain cessations and
intermissions (almost from all Remedies) oftentimes to be allowed unto the sick
Person; and then the same Remedies are anew to be repaired, and new ones to be
added; since that scarcely ever did any recover of this Disease, that placed
the hope of his safety in one only Remedy, though it were never so generous and
prevalent.

Julius Palmarius puts much confidence in Hydrarge, which as he writes does
every whit as much in this case as the flesh of Vipers, or the Viperine
Treacle, or the Iron Instrument, or the Fire. But in regard that it will take up
too much of our time, and cost much pains here to acquaint you with all that we
might touching this subject; And in regard also that the same Palmarius in his
Book of the Elephantiasis has taken notice of many other such like
Observations as touching this Disease; and that Aetius likewise, Tetrab. 4
Sermon. 1. Chap. 121. etc. has collected very many things concerning it; and
that much also may be found in Forestus his Rosa Anglica, and in other Authors
that have written upon this Subject; and lastly, in regard that Schenkius
likewise in the sixth Book of his Observations has collected many strange and
rare things touching this Elephantiasis; in all these respects, I think it not
amiss to refer the Reader unto those aforesaid Authors, for his more still
satisfaction. And Petrus Palmarius likewise in his Lapis Philosoph. Dogmatic.
Chap. 24. recites an History of a certain Leprous Woman, whom he Cured with
Aurum Potabile, exuberated, and exalted upon a Sphere, as Chemists speak, and
with the Antimony of Alexander Suchtenius.

Chap. 41. Of a flatulent or windy Tumor.
ANd thus have we now at length dispatched and finished the Explication of al
those Tumors that have their original from the Humors; it now remains that in
the next place we treat of those Tumors that arise from winds. For there are
peculiar Tumors that have their original from flatulency, or a flatulent and
windy spirit; which the Greeks call Pneumatoseis, and Empneumatoseis, and
Emphysemata; but the Latins call them Inflationes. Now this flatulent Tumor
(as Galen tells us, in his Book touching the course of Diet in acute Diseases,
Comment. 4. Text. 21.) is generated after a twofold manner; to wit, By a
flatulent Spirit collected in certain Cavities these Cavities being either
exposed to the sense, or else such as are Contemplable by Reason. Now by
Cavities contemplable by reason (as he explains himself in his second Book to
Glauco, and Chap. 5.) he understands those very Pores of the similary parts,
and those little spaces that are interposed betwixt the said similary parts.

The Causes.
The Proxime, i. e. the nearest and conjunct Cause of his Tumor is a Wind, or
flatulent Spirit. Now this is generated (as Galen writes in his third Book of
the Causes of Symptoms, and Chap. 4.) from a heat weak and languishing. For as
absolute Cold cannot possibly excite any Vapor, so on the other side, vehement
heat discusseth the Vapor. That which supplieth matter unto these flatulencies,
is a humor, thick, phlegmatic, or melancholic. The same do both flatulent
Meats and Drinks afford, as also a cold, moist, and cloudy Air, an idle and
sedentary life, and the suppression of accustomed Evacuations. The thickness of
the part likewise that will not permit the Vapors to breath forth makes much
for the accumulation and heaping up of Winds.

The Differences.
Now there are of these flatulent Tumors many Differences; and this especially
in regard of the parts affected; whiles that sometimes these Winds are collected
under Skin, and about the Membranes of the Muscles; sometimes in the Membranes
of the Bowels; sometimes in the very Cavities of the Bowels, viz. the Stomach,
Womb, Abdomen, and Scrotum, or Cods.

Signs Diagnostick.
The flatulent Tumor is known by this; That the part is sometimes lifted up into
a greater, and sometimes into a less height; and oftentimes likewise there is
from the distension a pain excited; but yet notwithstanding there is no kind of
heaviness felt and perceived in the parts; and unless the wind be shut up in
some cavity, it does very seldom continue long in one place, but wandereth up
and down. If the Tumor may be pressed with the finger it leaves no pit; but
the Tumor either resists the touch of the finger, or else the wind passes
unto some other part; and if it he smote with the hand, it then sends forth a
noise like hat of a D^um; and by how much the cavity in the which the wind is
contained is the greater, so much the greater is the noise or found.

The Emphysema differs from Oedema; because that the cause of Oedema does
always stick in the pores, and the spaces of the parts that are contemplable
be Reason; now what those parts are, you may understand by what we have said in
the beginning of this Chapter. But the cause of Emphysema is often collected in
some one certain Cavity. And albeit that same flatulent spirit be likewise
sometimes disper^ed through the streghtest passages of the parts; yet
notwithstanding (as we have told you) these Oedema's being pressed no leaves
hole or pit behind them; but as for the Emphysemata, ^hey are not hollowed into
a pit; and for Oedemata likewise if they be touches by the ^^nd make no noise
at al, as do the Emphysemata.

Prognostics.
1. Flatulent Tumors if they be small, and be not cherished by some pertinacious
cause, they are then without danger.

2. It the flatulent Tumor be great, it then argues a great debility of the
hear, and an abundance of matter; and therefore it is more dangegerous, because
more contumacious and stubborn.

3. If the flatulent matter be detained in the Muscles, it is then hardly
cured; in regard that the spirit is dispersed from the ambient Membranes into
almost all the parts of the Muscle, as Aetius writes, Tetrah. 4. Sermon. 3. Chap.
2.

The Cure.
The wind that distendeth the part is to be taken away, and means used that it
may not breed again, and flow unto the part; and the pain (if any there be) is
to be mitigated and moderated. And therefore such a kind of Diet is to be
ordained that makes not for the generation of winds; and the matter out of
which the wind is bred is to be evacuated; and the heat of the part that
generateth the windiness is to be corroborated, and corrected, touching which
we have already spoken in the places that shall be presently alleged.

Such things as are hot and dry discuss windiness; and of this sort are the
seeds of Caraway, of Cummin, Annis, Fennel, Carrot, Millet or Hirse, Juniper
Berries, and Bay Berries, Camomil, Dill, Rue, Calaminth, Marjoram; as for
example;

Take Seeds of Caraway, Fennel, and Cummin, of each one ounce; Rue, Calamint,
and Camomile flowers, of each one handful and half; Millet seed three ounces;
then make a little bag or two, which thoroughly moisten in warm Wine, and apply
them by turns one after the other. Or,

Take of Rue, and Betony, of each one handful; Parietary half a handful; boil
them in Ley until they be soft, and bruise them; then add powder of Camomile
flowers, and Bean Meal, of each two ounces; boil them and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Oil of Rue, and Camomile, of each one ounce; the destilled waters of
Caraway, Fennel, Cinnamom, of each half a scruple; a little Wax; and make an
Unguent.

Chap. 42. Of Tumors proceeding from the solid parts falling down into, or
resting upon some other parts, in general.
THere remains now to be spoken of the last kind of Tumors, which the solid
and living parts excite. For these if out of their own proper place they fall
down into another place, or else rest and lie thereon, they then elevate the
parts incumbent, and more especially the skin; and so by this means they excite
a Tumor or Swelling. But now, the Bones are those that principally do this. For
these if in either their disjoyntings they fall out of their proper places or
seats, or if being broken they change their situation, they then lift up the
part incumbent into a Tumor. But there is no need that we speak any thing in
special, and particularly, touching these kind of Tumors. For like as they
proceed from, and depend upon disjoyntings, dislocations, and fractures, so
they are by them well known; and these being cured, they vanish.

And hither likewise belongs Gibbosity, touching which we have already spoken
in our second Book of the Practice of Physic, Part 2. Chap. 21.

There is likewise mention made by Galen (in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 14, and
15. and 14. of the Method of Physic, Chap. 17.) of a peculiar sort of Tumors
arising from the Bones, and this he calls Exostosis, you may call it
Exossatio, to wit, Emmencies and standings out of the Bones, and especially
those of the Temples, and in other parts also: but as touching these. (in (...)
referred unto Nodi and Cornua, Tumors above propounded, Chap. 38.) there is no
need at all that we speak any thing further here in this place.

Furthermore, there are Tumors oftentimes excited by the soft parts moved out
of their places, and falling down. And hither belongs that kind of Tumors
that the falling forth of the Wea causes, of which we have already treated in
our first Book, Part 3. Sect. 1. Chap. 25 Hernia or Rupture of the Intestines,
of which likewise above, in the third Book, Part 2. Sect. 1. Chap. 6. and the
Umbilical or Navel Hernia, touching which also we h ve spoken sufficiently in
the same place, Part 10 Chap. 2. And lastly, the Ute^ine protidency, and
Hernia; and of this we have spoken likewise before, in the fourth Book, Part 2.
Sect. 2. Chap. 16, and 17.

There remain yet only two sorts of Tumors, having their original from the
living parts; the one from the Arteries, the other from the Veins; of which the
former is termed by the appellation of Aneurysma and the latter by the name of
Varices; which Tumors we shall speak unto and explain in the two following
Chapters, and with them we will conclude and shut up this Tract of Tumors.

Chap. 43. Of Aneurysma.
ANeurysma, which is so called, not from the Greek word Neuron, but from
Anaeureumein, which is as much as to dilate above; which word the Latins
likewise retain, being not provided of a better and more proper; (for as for
those that the Arabian Interpreters make use of, such as these, Hyporisma,
Emborisima, Emborismus, Aporisma, they al of them have their original from the
Greek word corrupted) that this Aneurysma (I say) is a Tumor arising from an
Artery preternaturally affected, is a thing our of al doubt and controversy.
For although the Author of the Medicin. Definitions says that Aneurysma is a
relaxation of a veiny little Vessel; yet notwithstanding, without al doubt the
word Venosum is there taken for Arteriosum (that is to say, Veiny for Arterial)
since that it is a thing generally well known, that the Ancients did oftentimes
call the Arteries by the name of Veins.

But now what this Aneurysma is, and from what cause it arises, is a thing not
altogether so manifest and evident. Galen indeed in his Book of Tumors, Chap.
11. writes thus touching this Aneurysma: But now (says he) a mouth being made
in an Artery, the Affect is called Aneurysma. Now this happens when the
Artery being wounded, the skin that lies near unto it comes unto a Cicatrice;
but yet the Ulcer of the Artery still remains, the said skin being neither
conglutinated, neither together brought unto a Cicatrice; neither filled up
with flesh. And the same Galen in his fifth. Book of the Method of Physic,
Chap. 7. has left this written: Unless (says he) flesh produced do first fill
up the place that is near about the Artery cut asunder, but that there still
remains some void and vacant place, then verily there follows that Tumor we
call Aneurysma. Other Greek Physicians there are that are of the same Judgment
and Opinion with Galen. For thus Aetius writes touching this Anourysma,
Tettab. 4. Sermon. 3. Chap. 10. Anecurysma happens in every part of the Body,
but more frequently in the Throat; where it produces that Tumor we call
Bronchocele. It befalls oftentimes unto Women in Childbed, by reason of the
violent detention and holding of their breath: but it happens likewise in the
Head, nigh unto the places of the Arteries; and in the rest of the body also,
where ever the Arteries are wounded: like as when ignorant and unexpert
Physicians intending and attempting to open a Vein in the Arm, do withal prick,
and oftentimes cut asunder the Artery lying underneath it. The very same is
told us by Paulus Aegineta, in his fourth Book, and Chap. 53.

The same Opinion is borrowed from the Greeks by Avicen the Arabian, as
appears by what he writes in Quart. quarti, Tract. 2. Chap. 16. And when the
place of the Artery (says he) is not from above coarctated and conjoined close
together, after the solution of its continuity, and that it finds a voidness
or vacuity, then the thing comes even to an Emborismus, which is named the
Mother of Blood. And a little after, thus he writes: And very many times
(says he) the Artery is not indeed covered over with flesh, but that which
contains the Artery is incarnated and covered with flesh and is coarctated
and closely conjoined upon it. Wherefore the blood cannot have nor make any
superfluous course; yea something goes out of it even unto the ends of the
skin, which it receives and takes in the quantity; and whenever it is
easily and gently pressed together, it returns, and it is altogether hidden,
like as we see it to happen in Ruptures.

And this Opinion very many, and indeed most of the latter Physicians do
follow. Yea, and Platerus himself likewise, who is otherwise wont to take
liberty enough in examining the Opinions of the Ancients, writes, That
Aneurysma does not only arise from the dilatation of the Artery (it yet
remaining shut and entire) but also that more frequently (it not always, if it
be in the exterior parts) it proceeds from a certain manifest and apparent
opening thereof. For then the thin and sprightful blood breaking forth of the
Artery under the skin lifts it up into a Tumor or Swelling, and there forms
and frames unto it self a hollow nook, and there in the Artery causes this
pullation in this Tumor; even almost in the same manner as the Arteries are
wont to empty themselves naturally into the hollow nooks of the thick Membrane
of the Brain; so here they do it preternaturally, by pouring forth the blood
(with and in breathing) in its Diastole, and in its Systole receiving it in
again.

But this is an Opinion that I could never approve of; and therefore in the
year 1606.(when I interpreted Galen's little Book of Tumors) I altogether
rejected it; and I then likewise propounded another, which out of those
Lectures of mine, that noted and famous man Dr. Bernhard of Sweden made use of
and Inserted likewise in his Treatise of the Inspection of Wounds. For if
Aneurysma should proceed from the Effusion of the Arterial blood under the
Skin; then certainly the said blood would diffuse and disperse it self, in
length, and breadth, and round about; and would dye and color the Skin of
another Hieu; like as we see it to happen in Contusions, and in the opening of
a Vein, when it is not exactly and rightly performed; to wit, when either the
Vein is wholly cut through, or else when the Wound thereof by reason of the
impetuousness and violence of the Blood is not rightly closed. For then the
blood is very often poured forth under the Skin, even unto the extreme and
utmost part of the Hand; and the Skin is dyed with a Red, Green, and Yellow
color. Which must necessarily happen so much the more, if an Artery be opened;
in regard that the Arterial blood is thinner, and flows forth with a greater
force and violence: which yet notwithstanding never happens in Aneurysma, in
the which that Tumor is contained within its own Limits, and as it were in a
Bladder: neither is the Skin dyed with any other color. And moreover if
Aneurysma proceeded from a Blood poured forth under the Skin, in progress of
time it would so happen that this Blood consisting and abiding in a strange and
unfit place would putrefie like as we see it usually does in Ecchymoma, as we
told you before in the seventeenth Chapter.

Antonius Saporta indeed in his first Book of Preternatural Tumors, and Chap.
43. does his endeavor to salve and answer these objections, whiles he thus
writes; The Blood (says he) if it altogether leaves its own proper Vessels,
and cast it self forth into a greater Venture or Cavity, being left destitute of
the influx of the heat that should flow in unto it, will necessarily putrefie:
but in Aneurysma (which proceeds from the opening of an Artery) it is not so
far forth left destitute by the heat thereof, and by the rest of the Blood that
is contained therein, that its native heat and color should perish; neither is
it expelled forth into any great space or Venture, that it should corrupt and
putrefie. For it is cherished by the vital spirits contained in the Artery,
since that its matter remains yet entire and continued. For albeit the Artery
be divided, and the Blood causing the Tumor does pass forth; yet
notwithstanding the Flesh and the Skin that cover the Artery, continuing still
whole and entire it does not always so insinuate it self into any large and
ample space, that it should be made thereby to putrefie, and rendered destitute
of the help and assistance of Nature. But the truth is, he does not here by all
that he alleges acquit and free the Ancients from the aforesaid Objections.
For if the Blood that is flown forth may be cherished by the vital Spirits and
the heat of the Artery; why then is not the same done likewise when a Vein is
smitten and pierced through, and when the Blood (the Vein being not as yet
consolidated and exactly closed) issues and flows forth? Neither does the
Blood only then putrefie when it is poured forth into a large and sensible
Cavity, but likewise whenever it is shed forth under the Skin. Furthermore
(as we have said) that Blood which we call Arterial is not poured forth round
about, as the Vein Blood is; which yet notwithstanding it ought much rather to
do, in regard that it is thinner, and more spiritful. For it is not sufficient
(what Platerus writes) that the Blood poured forth under the Skin does there
form and frame for it self a Sinus or hollow nook, not unlike the hollow spaces
into which the Arteries in the thick Membrane of the Brain do insinuate
themselves; and that the Skin is instead of an Artery unto that Blood that is
poured forth out of the Artery; and that the Blood may from thence
uninterruptedly repass, and flow back again into the Artery, without any
Corruption. For the Sinus's are framed by Nature, and so exactly shut up with
Membranes, that nothing at all can possibly flow forth of them. But now the
Arterial blood can no manner of way frame for it self any such Sinus, but
whenever it falls forth without the Artery it diffuseth it self every where
round about; and in regard that under the Skin all things are confluid,
therefore the Blood easily makes an irruption into the adjacent parts by that
way and passage that is opened; the which we may likewise see the Veiny Blood
to do (which is much thicker) and then the said Blood being out of its own, and
in a strange place, soon putrefieth. Which appears even from that very
History that Antonius Saporta writes, as conceiving it to make much for the
confirmation of what he had written touching Aneurysma, in his first Book of
preternatural Tumors, and Chap. 43. Neither in truth was that Disease which he
there describes an Aneurysma, but only an effusion of the Arterial Blood, upon
the rupture of the Artery, into the places lying near about it, and there
corrupting. But this is the Story that he tells us. Whenas Johannes Fabri
that most acute and sedulous Scribe of the Palace at Montpelier had spent the
chiefest part of his youth in riotous and inordinate Revellings and Feastings,
and in a frequent and unseasonable Drinking of the strongest sort of Wines,
without any diluting, or qualifying the heat thereof, he began about the
fiftieth year of his age to draw his breath with much difficulty, and to be
affected with an extreme troublesome palpitation and beating of his Heart. For
the removal of this great Distemper there were many Remedies prescribed and
administered, not only by my self, but likewise by the most expert Physicians of
our University there. All which when they could not in the least prevail over
this contumacious and headstrong Disease, by reason of the Patients continuing
and persevering in his accustomed ill course of Diet, he grew the worse
thereby; and after some few months were passed, in the which by the advice of
the Physicians he took no Physic at all (for they were willing to commit unto
Nature a part of the Cure of this Chronical Affect) he began to complain of
that part that lies under his left Shoulder Blade. The place of his grief
being looked upon, and thoroughly considered, there appeared unto me a notable
Tumor, soft unto the touch, and attended with a beating; and when pressed down
with the Fingers, it was then seemingly wholly hid and non-apparent; but these
were no sooner taken off, but forthwith it returns as before. In short, the
Disease having gotten deep rooting, and being now become incurable, our Patient
within a very short time after departed this life. But now that we might get
the truth and certainty both of the nature and constitution of this Disease, as
also of the Cause thereof, we dissected that part that was affected with the
Tumor; out of which there issued forth great store of Blood, unsavory and
stinking as it was; all which Blood being wholly evacuated and thoroughly
cleansed, there appeared the prime and principle Artery under the Heart (having
its original from the great Vein in its ascending up into the Head) exceedingly
dilated, and extremely torn. This Vein descending downward creeps along
through the Region of the Intercostal Muscles; the Blood that flowed forth of
it being heaped up in the spaces of the Muscles, and in tract of time
putrefying and corrupting, had so vitiated and marred the Vertebra and Rib of
that place, that it seemed unto us altogether rotten and putrefied.

And therefore (say we) some other way and means of the generating of this
Tumor is to be sought and found out.

The Author of the Book of the Medicin. Definitions defines Aneurysma by the
relaxation of an Artery. And so likewise Fernelius in the seventh Book of his
Patholog, and Chap. 3. asserteth that Aneurysma is a dilatation of an Artery
full of spiritful blood: but all this while they do not express the manner how
this is done. Neither is it ever a whit credible that Aneurisma is caused by
the dilating of both the Tunicles of the Artery, but only by the widening of
one of them. For the Atteries have indeed a double Membrane, one external,
which is slender, thin, and soft, having of straight Fibers very many, but of
oblique ones very few, and of transverse ones none at all: the other internal,
which is close, thick, and hard, having transverse Fibers, but wanting straight
and oblique ones. And therefore if the Internal Tunicle be either broken by
extension (as easily it may be in regard of its hardness) or else if it be
opened by Section, it does not easily Cement and close together again, because
it is hard; but now the external Tunicle in regard of its softness does easily
and soon grow together again; and because it is so soft, and wants both
oblique and transverse Fibers, it is thereupon extended by the Blood and the
vital Spirit, seeking their passage forth in an imperious and violent manner;
and so this kind of Tumor comes to be excited; in the which the force and the
impetuous violence of the blood and the vital spirit may be discovered by the
very touch. Neither is that which Platerus objecteth of any weight or moment;
to wi^, when he tells us, that upon the alone bare Section that he saw made in
the skin that covered over the Tumor, the blood forthwith at first hid it self,
but then instantly sprang forth amain; and this oftentimes, says he, is in so
great abundance, that it cannot by any one (use he what means he will) be any
more stanched; but that it issues forth in greater abundance, insomuch that
the whole stock of Blood being almost spent it has oftentimes brought a sudden
Death upon the sick Person. But indeed if we should determine that the
Aneurisma proceeds from the dilatation of these Tunicles of the Artery, this
Objection would then carry some weight along with it. But in regard that
(according to the truth of the matter) we have already asserted and determined
that an Aneurysma arises from the dilatation of the exterior Tunicle alone of
the Artery (the internal being opened either by Section, or by Rupture) we
cannot therefore by any means grant, that the Arterial blood lies hid under
the whole Skin: but because the external Tunicle is extraordinarily extended,
it cohereth and sticks so close unto the Skin, that it is extended together
with it, and is in a manner so become one therewith, that it is almost
impossible to cut the Skin without cutting the external Tunicle of the Artery.

And so then the result of all that has been said will be this, to wit, The
nighest cause of Aneurisma.
That the proxime and nighest cause of Aneurysma is, the opening of the
interior Tunicle of the Artery, and the dilatation of the external. Now it is
very frequently opened by Section, when unexpert Surgeons instead of a Vein
open an Artery; or when at least together with the Vein they cut through the
Artery that lies under it. Now if this at any time happen, the external
Tunicle in regard of its softness and near alliance with the Tunicles of the
Veins very easily and soon closes together again; but the interior (by reason
of its hardness) remains open; from whence through the patent and open place
the Blood and vital Spirit endeavoreth to break forth, and by this means
distendeth the external Tunicle, and causes this kind of Tumor. The same may
likewise happen if the internal Tunicle of the Artery be broken either by the
violent and impetuous motion of the Arterial blood, or by any violent external
cause, and the overgreat distension of the Artery; the external Tunicle (that
is more apt for extension) being all this while safe and sound.

But now, Whether or no that pulsation of the Arteries, of which Platerus
makes mention in his Tract touching the palpitation of the Heart, (and
touching which out of Fernelius, and Ludovicus Mercatus, we have already
treated in the fourth Book of our Practice, Part 2. Sect. 3. Chap. 9.) may or
ought properly to be referred unto Aneurysma, I very much doubt. For whenas the
Membrane of either Artery is then whole and entire, it seems rather to be an
Affect in the Veins, of kin to the swollen and distorted Veins that we call
Varices, than this Tumor Aneurysma, of which we are now treating.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Aneurysma is easily known and discerned from Ecchymosis, because that in
Aneurysma the color is like unto the rest of the skin, and the Tumor is soft
and loose, and for the most part gives way and yields unto the compression
of the fingers, the blood running back into the Artery, from whence it
instantly again flows forth. There is likewise a Pulse to be felt in an
Aneurysma. Although that Paraeus has observed, that sometimes in the Aneurysma
(if it be great) there is neither any pulse to be perceived, not any return of
the blood (upon the compression) unto the more internal parts; and this I also
observed my self in a certain Woman: but then notwithstanding there is to be
perceived a motion, and as it were the loud noise of boiling water; and that
not only when it is pressed down with the fingers, but likewise at other times;
and this hissing or singing noise is not only to be perceived upon the touch of
the fingers, but also upon the putting of the Ear close thereto; which
proceeds from the motion of the vital spirit in its passage through straight
and narrow places. All which signs proceed not from the effusion of the blood
under the skin, but from the dilatation of the Artery.

Prognostics.
1. Al Aneurysma's are very hard to cure.

2. Yet notwithstanding those of them that are less, and newly arisen, will
admit of a Cure. But such of them as are old, and greater (in regard that that
blood cannot be driven back by Astringents, neither may the Artery be
consolidated; and so they are no ways to be cured but by Section) will hardly
admit of any cure at al. For the Tumor being opened, and the Artery (as it is
necessary) being cut, the Arterial blood flows forth (together with the vital
spirit) abundantly, al as it were at once, and with great violence; so that the
sick person is oftentimes precipitated into extreme hazard and danger of death.
And there are many remarkable instances that might be given of such sick
persons as in the opening of the Aneurysma have died under the hands of
unskilful Surgeons.

3. Neither has the Tumor that is joined with an Aneurysma any great danger in
it; but that the life may together with it be lengthened out for a long time. I
knew a certain near Neighbor of mine, in whom an unskilful Surgeon when he
should have opened a Vein, cut an Artery; and it is now already above thirty
years that she has had an Aneurysma as big as a Walnut in the inward bending
of the Arm, and all this while hitherunto she has enjoyed (and still even at
present does) perfect health, as if she ailed nothing at al. And therefore we
conclude that better it is sometimes for the Patient to bear and undergo this
slight inconvenience, than to submit himself unto a dangerous Cure.

The Cure.
And therefore forthwith (even in the very first rise of it) so soon as ever we
perceive that there is an Aneurysma excited, (for it is not suddenly done, but
that dilatation of the exterior Tunicle of the Artery is caused sensibly and by
degrees) let Astringents and Repellers be imposed upon the place affected, that
so the force of the blood may be abated and qualified, and the open hole of the
Artery may be shut up. For which end and purpose there may likewise very fitly
be administered a thin Leaden plate, which does repel, thicken, and bind close
together the loosened Artery. There may also be administered astringent
Cataplasms, and the Emplaster against a Rupture. And because that the Aneurysma
sometimes also arises from the cutting of an Artery, we must do out endeavor,
that if an Artery be cut (whether it be purposely done, or whether it happens
by any ill accident) that it may immediately shut and close up again, and that
may right manner: which in regard that it is not here so easily effected
(because of the violent and impetuous motion of the Artereal blood) as it is in
the Veins, therefore we prescribe the following Medicament as very fit and
proper for the Consolidating of the Wound of the Artery.

Take of Frankincense two parts, of Aloes one part and an half; Mingle them;
and having shaken them well together with the white of an Egg, tie up all with
the Fl^x of a Hare as much as will suffice, and let them be laid upon the Wound
of the Artery.

And of this kind there are diverse other Medicaments to be prepared, of the
Roots of the greater Comfry, Mustick, Frankincense, Pomegranate Rinds, Acacia,
or binding Bean-tree, Hypocistis or the hardened juice of Cystus, Myrtle, Gals,
Aloes, sealed Earth of Lemnos, Bole-armenick, Lapis Hemarites or the
Boodstone, and the Emplaster Diachalcitis.

If in this manner and by these means the growth and increase of the Aneurysma
cannot be hindered; there are indeed some that advise and persuade us unto
Section; and the Tumor being opened, the Artery that is to be cut must be
intercepted by binding it about with two bands; and then it must be dissected
between the two bonds; and these bonds (as they teach us) are not to be
loosened, until that Nature has covered over the wound with flesh^ and that
now all the fear of the bloods issuing forth, and all the danger of an Hemorrhage
be past and gone. Now as for the manner of cutting the Aneurysma, Aegineta
acquaints us with it in his sixth Book of Physic, Chap. 37. in these words: If
the Tumor (says he) be caused by opening, then we use to inflict upon the skin
a straight Section made longwaies; and then after this the lips of the skin
being parted and far sundred by little hooks, we make bare the Artery, severing
it from its Membranes by Instruments very fit for this purpose; and then after
the transmission of a Needle under it, we tie it with two threads; and then so
soon as we have pricked with a Penknife the middle part of the Artery, and
have evacuated what was therein contained, we then betake our self unto the
suppurative cure, until at length the ties of the threads fall off. But now if
the dilatation be caused from the rupture of an Artery, then it behooves us (as
far forth as possibly we can) to lay hold upon the whole with our fingers,
together with the skin: then to cast through it (beneath that we have laid hold
on with the fingers) a Needle, that may (if you please) have in it two threads
or rather one thread doubled: and after the casting through of the Needle and
thread, we are then to cut in two the every bandle (as I may so call it) of the
double thread, and so to bind about the Tumor (on this side, and on that) with
the two threads. But if there be any cause to fear lest these threads should slip
and fail, then in this case there is likewise another Needle to be cast
through, that may throughout lie and press upon the former, and this Needle may
likewise draw after it two threads, or a double thread; and the handle thereof
being cut in sunder we then bind about the Tumor with four threads, or else the
Tumor being opened about the midst of it, after the emptying forth of what is
therein contained, we cut off the skin, that being left remaining that was tied
about; and then a long spleen-like Plaster well moistened in Wine and Oil being
laid thereon, we conclude and perfect the Cure by Liniments. But who is he that
sees not, that this kind of Cure is not only cruel, and so cruel that few or
none will submit unto it; but that it has likewise much danger in it, and yet
for all that does not heal the sick person? For although the Artery be bound
about; yet notwithstanding after the threads are loosened there is cause to
fear, lest that either an Haemorrhage follow, or else that a new Aneurysma be
caused. And therefore the more secure and safe course is, only to bind hard and
press together the Tumor with Bands and Medicaments, that so it may not gain
any further augmentation.

Chap. 44. Of the swollen Veins, caled Varices.
VArix, with the Greeks Kirsos (this being the name given unto it by the Greek
Physians only, for we find Aristotle in the third Book of his History of living
Creatures, Chap. 11. and 19. and Plutarch in the Life of Caius, calling it
Ixia; as Galen in his tenth Book of the Method of Physic, and last Chap.
defines it; and as out of him Paulus Aegineta has transcribed it in his sixth
Book, Chap. 82. and Aetius, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 2. Chap. 48) is the dilatation of
a Vein; this said dilatation of a Vein being called Varix, as that before
mentioned dilatation of an Artery was termed by the Greek Physicians Aneurysma;
of which in the foregoing Chapter.

But now these Varices happen in diverse parts of the body, but most frequently
in the Thighs, and yet notwithstanding sometimes likewise in the Temples; as
Paulus tells us in the place before alleged; and sometimes in the lowest
part of the Belly, under the Navel; and oftentimes also about the Testicles,
and the Cods; which said Tumor is (in special) called Kirsocele.

The Causes.
They are generated from great store of Melancholy blood, which (as Galen
writes in his Book of black Choler, Chap. 4.) Nature oftentimes transmitteth
unto those Veins that are in the Thighs, by the which being distended and
dilated they are rendered Varicose or swollen up; and the skin that touches upon
these kind of Veins in process of time becomes of a blackish color. But now as
for such in whom there is only great store of blood flowing in that is not
Melancholy; it resting indeed, and wholly relying upon those Veins which there
in that place are naturally more weak than elsewhere, does dilate them, but
scarcely even dye them of such a like color, as it happens when Melancholy
blood shall produce these Varices. For such are in very great danger (if any one
assay to cut forth the Veins affected) of being surprised with Melancholy. For
this is frequently seen to happen, not only in Varices, but even in the
Haemorrhoids also that consist of the same kind of humor, even as the coming of
them upon those that are mad is wont to be a freeing and discharging of them
from their madness; as Hippocrat. in the sixth of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 21. And
yet notwithstanding, scarcely ever does good blood (though it abound never so
much) by its great plenty alone produce and cause Varices, as it does if it be
both plentiful, and withal if it be thick; which by its weight tends
downward unto the Thight. Whereupon it is also that the Varices have not their
being until the ripeness of age; as Hippocrates in Coac. praenot. toward the
end teaches us; in regard that a thick and melancholy blood is not generated
sooner in the Body. And likewise Pliny in his eleventh Book and Chap. 45.
writes that the Varices happen in the Thighs of Men only, and very rarely in
Women. Such likewise as are bald, in these the Varices become not great: but
for such as (while their baldness is upon them) are afflicted with these
Varices, these come again to receive their Hair; Hippocrat. in the sixth of his
Aphorisms, Aphor. 34. Which yet notwithstanding Galen asserteth to be a
falsehood (in his Comment) unless happily any one will understand this of that
affect that Physicians call Madarosis, that is, the shedding or falling off of
the Hair. For this Affect since that it has its original from vicious humors
(as likewise the Alopecia has, and also that we call Ophiasis) if those very
depraved humors being translated into the Thighs do cause the Varices, the sick
Persons may then possibly recover and receive their Hair again. For if at the
first the loss of the Hair proceeded from vicious humors their corrupting and
corroding the very roots of the Hair; then (questionless) these said humors
taking now their course into some other place, the Hairs will again return unto
their natural State.

The more remote Causes all those that make for then generating and breeding of
thick and melancholy blood; and especially the Spleen when it is distempered
makes much unto, and helps forward the generation of these Varices. And that
likewise which much furthereth the flowing of the aforesaid humors unto this
part, may be comprised under on of these Heads, to wit, either a blow, or
streining overmuch, long and tedious foot journeys, extreme hard labor, and the
like.

Signs Diagostick.
These Varices are easily known, whenas swelling Veins is the very superficies
of the Members (and especially of the Thighs) appear unto the very sight it
self; and the part affected appears either Leaden colored or black; and the
Tumor being pressed down seemingly retreateth back, but forthwith returns
again.

Prognostics.
1. These Varices of themselves carry little or no danger in them; neither
bring they any unto the Party thus affected; but they rather preserve and free
such as have them from other Diseases, especially Melancholy Diseases;
touching which Hippoc. in the sixth of his Aphorisms Aphor. 21. thus writes;
If Varices, or the Haemorrhoids happen unto such as are mad, they are thereby
freed of their madness; and the whole Body is by them thoroughly purged from all
flatulent Blood.

2. But if they be unseasonably taken away (as Galen in his Book of Venesection
against Erisistratus, and Chap. 6. and in his Book of black Choler, and Chap.
4. teaches us) Madness, the Pleurisy, the pain of the Reins, the Haemorrhoid
Flux, the Cough, and spitting of Blood, the Apoplexy, Cachexy, Dropsy, and
other Diseases arise.

3. Sometimes these Varices do pass into the Elephantia of the Arabians,
touching which we shall speak further in the next following Chapter.

The Cure.
Unless therefore the Varices be of the biggest size, and that the Veins and
the Skin by reason of their extension be so extenuated that there be great
cause to fear a Rupture, a profusion of blood, and Death it self; and again
unless they be inflamed, and extremely painful; or that there be present some
great and malignant Ulcer; they are by no means to be healed, lest that these
being removed, some more grievous Evils befall: Since that those things only
may be said to heal that do altogether free the Party; and not those things
that generate another Affect more dangerous then the former; as Galen teaches
us, in the sixth of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 26.

And therefore if it like you to Cure these Varices, this ought to be done with
great Caution; there must be some of the blood let forth; the Body must then be
purged, and that not only once, but twice or thrice; and whatsoever is amiss in
the Liver and the Spleen (if they be ill affected, and administer cause unto
the Varices) is first of al to be corrected. And afterward we are to make use
of Astringent, Drying, and Digestive Medicaments; as also of Swath-bands, and
Ligatures, that may thrust forth the blood from the inferior parts unto the
superior.

These things if they profit not, but prove successless, the Ancients were then
wont to betake themselves unto Section or Cutting. Oppius is our Author (as
Pliny relates it in his eleventh Book, and Chap. 45,) that Caius Marius (who
had been seven times Consul) was the one man that standing suffered these
Varices to be taken out of him; the one man (says he) I call him, because that
as he was the first, so he was the only man in those times. But after him there
were others also that suffered the same to be done unto them standing, and even
without any bonds. For so Cicero tells us in the second Book of his Tusculane
Questions, toward the end thereof. But in good truth (says he) Caius Marius,
a Countryman (but yet a man every inch of him) when he was cut of the
Varices, at the very first forbid them to bind him: Neither before Marius was
there ever any heard of that was cut without being bound. Why therefore were
others afterward? His Authority and Example caused it so to be. See thou not
therefore that the Evil of this Affect was more in Opinion, then it was really,
and in Nature. And yet notwithstanding that this Affect was not without its
sharp biteing pain, the same Marius shows: for he yielded up only one Thigh
(whereas they were both of them affected) to be cut, and not his other Thigh
that ailed altogether as much; so that he as a resolved man was contented to
suffer pain, but then as a Rational Man he refused to undergo a greater pain
then there was necessary Cause for: the whole of what thou art taught by his
Example consists in this, viz. that thou carry a Commanding power over thy
self. And of the same thing Plutarch writes in the life of Caius Marius: He
may be for an example unto us ( says Plutarch) in that when he was diseased in
both his Thighs, and having them bothful of these Varices, and bearing the
deformity of them with a very ill will, he took unto him a Physician for the
curing of one Thigh only; in the cutting whereof he did not so much as blinch,
or once stir his body, neither was he heard so much as once to sigh; but when
in silence, and with fixed Eyes he had rendered himself to be cut, he was not at
all afraid (during the time this cutting took up) to suffer and undergo
certain intervals of pains caused by pauses and delays. But yet he would not
in the least consent unto the Physician requiring him to render and yield up
his other thigh to be cured; but thus he said, I know well that the Remedy can
no ways countervail these so great pains. And happily these are those things, of
which Seneca in his eleventh Book, Epist. 79. says; He, that whilst he was
suffering those Varices to be cut forth continued all the while reading of a
Book. But yet at this day there is hardly any one that will admit of this
Remedy, for the removal of that deformity that is caused by these Varices. As
for the manner of cutting them out, Paulus Aegineta, in his Book 6. Chap. 82.
teaches us how it ought to be performed. The man being washed (says he) and a
string tied about on the upper part of his Thigh, we command him then to walk;
and then when the Vein is filled full, with writing ink or with a Colliry we
mark it, according to its situation, the length of three fingers, or somewhat
more; the man being then laid upon his back with his Thighs extended, we then
bind about another String above the Knee, and by this means the Vein being
elevated into a considerable height, we cut with a Panknife in that very place
which we marked, no deeper then only through the Skin, that so we may by no
means divide the Vein; and then the Lips of the Section being distended with
little hooks, and the Membranes being excoriated and fleyed off by those
crooked Penknives that are provided in Watery Ruptures, and the Vein being
altogether made bare and naked, and laid open to the view on all sides, we then
loosen the Thighbands; and the Vessel being elevated by a little hook, we cast
under it a Needle drawing along in it a double Thread, and cut in two the nook
of the Thread; and then (the Vein being divided in the midst by a Venesectory
Penknife) we evacuate and let forth as much of the blood as is needful: then
after this, with one of the threads we tie close together the upper part of the
Vessel, and the Thigh being extended straight forth, by the expression or hard
pressing of the Hands we empty forth that blood that is in the Thigh: and
afterward we again beneath tie the vessel close together; or we cut off and
take quite away that part of the Vein that lies between the bonds, or
otherwise we permit it to remain, until that at length together with the bonds
it fall out of its own accord: and then putting in dry Liniments, and a long
spleen-like Emplaster after it has been thoroughly moystened in Wine and Oil
being laid thereupon, we bind it down close, and so we cure it by the continued
course of suppurating Medicaments, that are to be administered and applied in
the nature, and after the manner of Liniments. Neither am I ignorant, that some
of the Ancients used none of these bonds and Ligatures; for some of them
presently cut forth the Vessel so soon as ever they had made it naked and bare;
and certain others of them with violence draw forth and break off the said
Vessel, so soon as they have extended it from the bottom. But the truth is,
that before mentioned way of Manual operation is absolutely the best, and of
all other the most secure. Moreover, as for the Varices that consist in the
bottom of the Belly, we handle them in like manner; as likewise those that
consist in the Temples. Thus far Aegineta.

Cornel. Celsus in his seventh Book and Chap. 31. tells us of a twofold
manner and Method of curing these Varices by Surgery, when he thus writes;
Every Vein (says he) that is hurtful either withers and wastes away upon
its being burnt, or else it is cut forth with the hand. If it be straight, or
if though it be transverse, yet notwithstanding if it be simple; or else
thirdly, if it be not overgreat, it is the better burnt. If it be crooked, and
be as it were implicated into certain Orbs, so that many of them are as it were
involved, and folded one within the other, it is then more convenient to take
them forth. The manner of burning is this. The Skin having first an incision
made upon it, then the discovered Vein is to be a little pressed with a thin
and blunt piece of Iron heated red hot; and great care must be had lest that
the sides of the orifice it self be burnt, which to draw back again with small
hooks will be no very hard matter. This is to be done by interposing welnigh
four fingers in a rank throughout the whole Varix; and then there is to be
imposed thereon such a Medicament whereby those things that are burnt may be
healed. But then it is to be cut forth after this manner. The Skin (like as
before) having an incision made in it upon the Vein, the orifice is to be kept
open with a little hook, and with a penknife the Vein is to be drawn a little
and loosened from the body; and here great care must be taken lest that in the
doing of what went before the Vein it self receive any hurt: and under it a
blunted hook is to be cast, and there being interposed almost the same distance
as we showed you above, in the same Vein there is the very same thing to be
done as abovesaid; which said Vein whither it tends, is easily known by the
extended hook. And so soon as the same has been done wheresoever the Varices
are, the Vein being brought unto some one place by the hook is there to be cut
off; and then after this, in that place where the little hook is next unto it,
it is there to be drawn forth, and there again it is to be cut off. And so the
Thigh being on al sides freed from the Varices, then the mouths and orifices of
the incisions are to be united, and strictly closed together, and upon the same
there is to be imposed a conglutinating Emplaster.

Avicen (Book 3. Fen. 17. Tr. 1. Chap. 18.) cutteth the Skin until the Varix
appears, and this he does indeed longwaies, and not ei her obliquely or
transversly: and then he extracteth and draws forth all the blood that is in
it; and then he cleanses it by cutting it in length. But sometimes (as he
writes) it is to be drawn forth with a Needle, and so to be cut. He adds
moreover, that a drawing of it out with a Cautery is better than the cutting of
it forth.

But in regard that the Cure of Varices by excision or cutting forth is not
only rough and very difficult, but also because that for the most part it is
not attended with an happy success, by reason of the flux and effusion of blood
that hinders the operation; therefore Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente,
in his Treatise of Chirurgical Operations, teaches us how we may cure these
Varices in another manner, that is far better, to wit, without the extraction
and drawing them out; on this wise. Since that there are (says he) three
things to be considered that concur unto the constituting of Varices, viz. The
Blood that flows, The Flux thereof, And the Dilatation of the Vein; therefore
there are three things likewise that are shown and pointed out hereby; to wit,
That the flowing Blood is to be intercepted, That which is already flown in to
be evacuated, And the widened Vein to be streightened and made narrower. For
the intercepting of the course of the blood, in the beginning and the end of
the Varix, we ought to cast a bond and tie upon it; which is done either by
that we call Sella recurvata, or by a Hook, or by laying hold upon the vein with
the top of two fingers, and lifting it up thereby, and then transmitting a
needle drawing a thread along with it through the lower part of the vein, and
there tied together: upon which part the skin is to be cut, that so the vein
may appear, and may be tied; and it is not to be cut when it hangs forth unto
the external parts. We might likewise administer the same means, and use the
very same way to intercept the blood, that Farriers use in intercepting the
blood in Horses, that is, to press the Vein close together with a little thin
Iron Plate fastened unto the Vein with a pair of Tongs. But then for the
Evacuation of the blood that has already flown in, Hippocrates in his Book of
Ulcers, about the end thereof, teaches us how and in what manner this is to be
done. In the place alleged he gives in charge, that the Varicose or swollen
vein be not cut with any great and wide g^sh lest that thereby a great Ulcer be
caused, by reason of the influx of the Varix; but rather (as Hippocrates says)
the Varix it self is again and again to be pricked whenever we have any
opportunity, and shall find is to be fit; from which said prickings the blood
that has already flown in, and fills the swollen Vein, is evacuated and
emptied forth; and this is done by degrees, and by little and little; and not
al at once, and on a huddle as it were, and with much danger unto the Patient.
But however, it is evacuated, if not wholly, yet at least so much thereof (even
to the greater part of it) that the vein may withal likewise sink and fall down
in some one part or other. This being accomplished, we come then unto the third
and last scope, that is, the astriction and streightening of the dilated and
over widened vein. For my own part I am wont to make up a Medicament of
Tragacanths macerated in the Wine of Pomegranates, or the juice of unripe
Grapes; and then after this, I add the Powder of Bole-armenick, Mastick, and
Dragons blood, in equal portions, until the Tragacanths being melted or
softened become as thick as Wax, so that in the hollow of the Hand they may be
reduced unto the shape and form of a Candle: which being done, I put the
Medicament longwaies upon the Varices, and above upon it the rind of a Reed,
that by its Cavity may answer unto the Convexity of the Medicament, and that
may the better keep down the Medicament: it is to be laid on in the length of
it, and to be tied about the Thigh with bonds, or else with a narrow Swathband:
for so both by this compression of the Swathband, as also by the astriction of
the Reed, and the Medicament, the Varices have been oftentimes so streightened
and close bound, that they have seemed even to consume and wither away. I have
now and then likewise made use of the condensed Juice of Hypocistis or the
excrescence of the Plant Cystus. And lastly, I have sometimes made use of a more
mild and yet more gentle kind of Surgery, and especially when the Varix has
been but small and inconsiderable. For laying aside the Ligaments, and the
compunctions or prickings of Hippocrates, I made use only of the Medicament
before mentioned, according to the length of the Varix, and binding it down
with a part of the Reed tied fast thereupon; or else a Sponge somewhat long and
writhed, and of the thickness of the Varix* bound about with a thread, and
moistened in the juice of Pomegranates, or of Hypocistis, and then rightly tied
and bound on with a narrow Swathband: and for this purpose very beneficial
likewise are the unripe fruits of the Wood Guajacum well bruised, and imposed;
all which by their astriction do intercept the blood, and bind the veins
together, and by their much dying they likewise evacuate. And lastly, for
preservation of the part, I made use of a hose or buskin made of a dogs skin,
which was to be put on, and exactly fastened on about the Thigh. Thus Fabricius.

Gulielmus Fabricius, in his fourth Cent. Observe. 85. relates a History; as
also the Cure of a monstrous Varix. The story is this: There was (says he) a
certain extraordinary strong man who had in his left Leg a malignant and
inveterate great Ulcer, together with a Varix of a vast magnitude. For in
thickness it was equal unto that part of the Arm that is next unto the Wrist;
and it was welnigh a span long. Now it began in the very Ham, and descending
toward the Foot it made a Ring, and two Circumvolutions. But that which was
here worthy of observation, was this, That so soon as ever the man lift up his
Leg any thing high, forthwith the blood drew back; and no sooner did he put it
again upon the ground, but it again descended, and that in an instant and
moment. And (in short) the blood did ebb and flow no otherwise than as if it
had out of some narrow pipe been cast forth sometimes into this, and sometimes
into that part. As for the Cure, he thus proceeded in it: Having appointed unto
the Patient a fit course of Diet, and several times likewise purged his body,
and having also opened a Vein in the Arm of the same side, he placed the sick
person upon a Bench, and then in the very Ham he gently separated the Skin from
the Vein it self. Then with a thread twice doubled, and put into the Eye of a
crooked Needle, he woond about the Varix; and in the lower part of the Varix he
proceeded in the very same manner. But before he tied the thread, and made fast
the knot, he caused his Leg to be taken off the Bench and set upon the ground;
and this he did, to the end that the blood (according to its custom) might flow
downward. At length he first of al tied the thread hard in the upper part of the
Varix, and then he fastened it with a knot; thus he did afterward likewise in
the lower part. This being done, with a Penknife he makes an incision in the
almost uppermost part of the Varix, that so the blood that was contained in the
Varix, as in a long and little bag, might the better flow unto it. But when the
flux of blood proved to be greater than what was proportionable unto the
greatness of the Varix, and that he attentively and exactly viewed the place,
there was found a blind passage, which from out of the lower part of the
Ligature entered into the Varix. This passage whenas it could not be tied with
a thread, he first applied unto the entrance thereof some of the Escharotick
Unguent; and after that he applied in great abundance his own Powder together
with the white of an Egg, for the stanching of the blood flowing from it; and
al these things he bound fast on with a Swathband thoroughly moistened and wet
in Oxycrate; and thus he left it even until the day following. At length he
cured the Wounds that himself had made, after the manner of others. And so this
man (by Gods gracious assistance) became perfectly whole and sound.

Chap. 45. Of the Elephantiasis of the Arabians.
WHat kind of Affect Elephantiasis and Elephantia of the Greeks is, as likewise
Lepra of the Arabians, we have told you before in the 40. Chapter; to wit, that
it is a malignant Tumor of the whole body, and as it were an universal Cancer.
And of that Tumor Avicen, in his third Book, Fen. 3. Tract. 3. Chap. 1. And
Rhases, in his sixth Book to Almansor, and Chap. 35. have discoursed at large.

But as for the Elephantia (of which the Greeks speak not one word) the Arabian
Physicians make frequent mention thereof, Elephantia of the Arabians.
as being nearly allied unto the aforesaid Varices, and having its original
from them, and being only a Tumor of the Feet. Of this Elephantia Avicen
treats in his third Book, Fen. 22. Tract. 1. Chap. 18. where he likewise
handles Varices; Rhases in his ninth Book to Almansor, Chap. 93. Yet
notwithstanding Haly Abbas dissenteth from these, and follows the Greek
Physicians, in the eighth Book of his Theoric. Chap. 15. and in the fourth Book
of his Practice, Chap. 3. Which last says that Elephas is a disease corrupting
all the Members of the Body, and as it were an universal Cancer. But neither do
we find this Author always in one and the same opinion; for in the eighth of
his Theoric. Chap. 18. we have him writing thus: Those Ulcers (says he) that
arise in the Feet, and in the Thigh, are called Elephas. And the Elephantiack
Disease is a melancholy Apostem, that appears in the Thighs, and in the Feet;
and the sign thereof is this, that the shape and figure of the Foot is like
unto, and much resembles the figure of an Elephants foot. All the rest of them
treat of Lepra and Elephantia apart and severally; and they say that Elephantia
is a Tumor of the Feet, arising from melancholy and flegmy blood, and from
Varices; by reason of which blood the feet of the sick person are in their
figure and thickness very like unto the Feet of an Elephant. And this kind of
Tumor is oftentimes to be seen in the highway Beggars, that get their
livelihood by asking relief in those public and common places.

Signs.
The Affect it self is manifest enough; whenas the Thighs of the sick persons
are tumid and much swollen, very red, and sometimes wan and leaden colored, and
oftentimes black, and for the most part full and abounding with Ulcers.

Prognostics.
But it is very rarely cured, not only because such as are herewith affected
are for the most part of the meaner sort and condition, and therefore are not
able to allow themselves Physic; but also because that from al parts of the
body there are abundance of Humors thrust forth thither, viz. unto the Feet.

The Cure.
And therefore there is no Cure at al to be hoped for, unless those vicious
humors be oftentimes evacuated and emptied forth of the body; and the vicious
dispositions of the Bowels (from whence there is a continual supply of those
naughty and corrupt humors) be corrected; and as Avicen in the place alleged
writes, The whole sum and substance of the Cure consists in the continuing
and perpetuating of the cure, until it be perfected. Which, how and by what
means it may and ought to be accomplished, we have hitherto oftentimes declared
unto you.

And now when this is done, the growth and increase of the Tumor is to be
prevented by astringent and drying Medicaments; and that which is already in
being ought to be discussed by strong Resolvers.

But if the Malady has been of long continuance, and be now confirmed, there
is scarcely any the least hope of recovery left; of which see further in Rhases
his ninth Book to Almansor, Chap. 93.

Antonius Saporta in his fourth Book of Preternatural Tumors, The tumor of the
Hands.
and Chap. 25. applies al whatsoever the Mauritanians assert touching this
Elephantia, unto a certain Tumor of the Hands; but this he does much besides
their minds. For when the Mauritanians speak of this Elephantia, they do not so
much as make any the least mention of the Hands, but only of the Feet. And yet
in the mean time it is not to be denied (which I have sometimes observed, and in
the second Book of our Practice, Part 1. Chap. 25. given the Reader notice
thereof; although I have not as yet met with any Author that makes any mention
in special of this Tumor) that oftentimes also the Hands (the rest of the body
being sound and well) do so swel up; and that being pressed down by the fingers,
in the manner of the Oedema, they leave a pit or dent behind them. Which M^lady
without al doubt has its or original from humors cold and thick. And unless it
be timely and in the very first rise of it met withal, and presently cured, it
is very rare that it afterward admits of any Cure; in regard that the sick
persons refuse for the most part universal evacuations of the body, without
which this Malady is not to be removed, and will not away with the tediousness
of a long Cure.

Universal Evacuations of the body having gone before, and the Bowels in which
the vicious humors are generated having been first strengthened; then
afterward the stronger sort of discussers are to be administered, viz. Such as
are made of Camomile, Flowerdeluce Root, round Aristolochy or Birthwort,
Walflowers, Ammoniack, Bdellium, Opopanax, and the like.

Chap. 46. of Particular Tumors.
THere is likewise by Physicians frequent mention made of other Tumors; but
they are such as either may be referred unto those Tumors that have been
already hitherunto treated of by us; or else they have been spoken of and
explained among the particular Affects of Man's body; so that it will be
altogether needless here to add any thing more in special unto what has
already been said of them in general. We treated of the Tumors of the Brain, in
the first Book of our Practice, Part 1. Chap. 28. Of the Fungi of the Brain,
ibid. chap. 26. Of Hydrocephalus, ibid. chap. 29. Of the Tumors of the Eyelids,
ibid. Part 3. sect. 2. chap. 2, 3, 4, 5. Of the Ophthalmy, ibid. chap. 12. and
13. of Vnguis Oculi, i. e. the Nail or web of the Eye, ibid. chap. 14. of the
adnate Tunicle, ibid. chap. 17. of the Cancer of the Cornea Tunicle, ibid.
chap. 19. of Suggillatio of The Eyes, ibid. chap. 22. of Encanthis, ibid. chap.
31. of the Inflammation of the Ears, ibid. part 3. sect. 3. chap. 2. of the
Cancer of the Nostrils, ibid. sect. 4. chap. 2. of Polypus, ibid. chap. 3. of
the Tumors of the Lips, in the second Book of our Practice, part 1. chap. 1,
and 2. of the Tumors of the Gums, ibid. chap. 10. of the Inflammation of the
Mouth, ibid. chap. 18. of the Inflammation of the Wesand, ibid. chap. 21. of
the Iaflammation of the Tonsils, ibid. chap. 22. of Angina, i. e. the Quinsie,
ibid. chap. 24. of Strumae in the Neck, and the Dropsy in the Throat, ibid.
chap. 25. of the Inflammation of the Lungs, ibid. Part 2. chap. 3. of the
Tubercles of the Lungs, ibid. chap. 9. of the Inflammation of the Midtif, ibid.
chap. 13. of the Tumors of the Diaphragm, ibid. chap. 14. of the Pleuresie,
ibid. chap. 16. of Gibbosity, ibid. chap. 12. of the Inflammation of the
Stomach, Book 3. Part 1. chap. 12. of the cold Tumors of the Stomach, ibid.
chap. 13. of the Inflammation of the Intestines, ibid. Part 2. Sect. 1. chap.
2. of the Tumors of the straight Gut, and in special of the Haemorrhoids,
Condylomata (swellings in the Fundament so called) Thymi and Ficus, ibid. chap.
10. of the Inflammation of the Mesentery, ibid. Part 3. chap. 4. of the Tumors
of the Cawl or Kel, ibid. chap. 7. and 8. of the Inflammation of the Spleen,
ibid. chap. 5. of the of the Spleen, ibid. chap. 6. of the of the Inflammation
of the Liver, Book 3. Sect. 1. chap. 4. Scirrhus of the Scirrhus of the Liver,
ib. chap. 5. of the Dropsy Ascires, ibid. Part 6. Sect. 2. chap. 3. of the
Inflammation and Tumors of the Reins, ibid. Part 7. Sect. 1. chap. 8. and 9. of
the Inflammation of the Bladder, ibid. Part 8. Sect. 1. chap. 4. of the
Tubercles in the Urinary passage, ibid. chap. 9. of the Tumors of the
Testicles, ibid. Part 3. Sect. 1. chap. 3. of the Rupture and Tumors in the
Scrotum or Cods, ibid. chap. 7. of the Tubercles and Warts of the Yard, ibid.
chap. 9. of the Inflammation of the Navel, ibid. Part. 10. chap. 3. of the
Inflammation of the Muscles of the Abdomen, ib. chap. 9. of the Pustules of
Women^ Privities, Book 4. Part 1. Sect. 1. chap. 4. of the Condylomata of the
Womb, ibid. chap. 5. of the Warts of Women's Privities, ibid. chap. 6. of the
Cancer of the Womb, ibid. chap. 11. of the Dropsy of the Womb, ibid. Sect. 2.
chap. 11. of the Tumor of the Womb from Blood, ibid. chap. 12. of the
Inflammation of the Womb, ibid. chap. 13. of the Scirrhus and Cancer of the
Womb, ibid. chap. 14. of the Tumors of the Testicles in Women, ibid. chap. 20.
of Crusta Lactea, Achores, and Favi, Tract. of the Diseases of Infants, Part 2.
chap. 3. of Tinea, ibid. chap. 5. of Hydrocephalus, ibid. chap. 6. of Siriasis,
ibid. chap. 7. of Aphae, ibid. chap. 13.

Touching the flatulent Tumors, we have likewise (in special) treated of them
in our former Books: to wit, of the Inflation of the Eyelids, in the first
Book of our Pract. Part 3. Sect. 2. chap. 2. of the Inflation of the Stomach,
Book 3. Part 1. Sect. 1. chap. 11. of the Colic pain, ibid. Part 2. Sect. 2.
chap. 4. of the Inflation of the Spleen, ibid. Part 4. chap. 4. of the
Inflation of the Liver, ibid. Part 6. Sect. 1. chap. 3. of the Tympany, ibid.
Part 6. Sect. 2. chap. 4. of the windy Rupture. ibid. Part 9. Sect. 1. chap. 7.
of Satyriasis and Priapismus. ibid. Sect. 2. chap. 3. of the Inflation of the
Womb, Book 4. chap. 10. of the Inflation of the Head, Tract of Infants
Diseases, Part 2. chap. 6.

Touching those Tumors that arise from the soft parts when they are removed out
of their own proper places, we have likewise spoken of them, in special; and
first of all, of the falling down of the Wea, in the first Book, Part 3. Sect.
2. Chap. 25. of the Hernia of the Intestines, Book 3. Part 2. Sect. 1. Chapter 6.
of the Umbilical Hernia, ibid. p. 10. Chapter 2. of the falling forth of the Womb,
and the Uterine Hernia, B. 4. Part 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 16. and 17.

And moreover as touching the Scorbutic Atrophy, Of the Atrophy in general.
we have written sufficiently thereof in its proper place. But now whereas we
have in the general spoken of the augmentation of magnitude in the whole body,
and in general (above Chap. 4.) those things therefore which may in general be
further spoken of the Atrophy, we think it, nor amiss to subjoyn them here in
this place.

When the Body is not nourished so much as it ought to be, Certain peculiar
Species of an Atrophy.
but is diminished and lessened by reason of the denying of food unto it, this
may indeed in the general be called an Atrophy. But yet notwithstanding the
peculiar Species of an Atrophy have likewise their peculiar names. That which
proceeds from the Ulcer of the Lungs is properly called Phthisis and Tabes*
that is from an Hectic Fever is named Marasmus, and Marcor. And that which
happens without these causes, is called in general, an extenuation of the
Body. We here in this place use the word Atrophy in a general signification;
and under it we will comprehend all and every preternatural Extenuation of the
Body, by reason of the defect of Nutriment.

But now an Atrophy is twofold; Atrophy in general what it is.
the first is of the whole Body; the other of some one particular part, as of
the Arm, the Foot, etc. The Atrophy of the whole (in general so taken) is a
preternatural extenuation of the whole Body, by reason of its being frustrated
of its food, and its being denied its due and requisite Nutrition.

The Causes.
As touching the Causes of an Atrophy, this in the first place is to be taken
notice of, viz. that the Cause that invadeth the whole body is either in its
own quality and disposition according to Nature, or else it is preternatural.
And then likewise that which is Natural, or according to Nature, is the
Marasmus (as we call it) in old age, and in aged Persons. For there was never
yet that living Creature born, or brought forth, than was not obnoxious to old
age, and which in old age did not wither and consume away. But since that this
Atrophy cannot by any Art whatsoever be prevented; we will therefore in this
place speak only of that Atrophy which happens preternaturally unto some
Bodies alone, and not unto all in general.

But now, whereas there are two things that concur and are necessary unto
Nutrition, 1. By reason of the Nutriment.
to wit, Nutriment, and the nourishing faculty; in both these likewise the
Cause of Nutrition diminished (and consequently of an Atrophy) is to be sought
after. In regard of the Aliment, the body consumes and wastes away, by reason
of its either defect, or vicious quality, which we may call its pravity. For if
there be not daily as much of this Aliment again taken into the body, as is
every day insensibly discussed, then the body wastes. But if there be indeed a
sufficient store and stock of blood treasured up in the Veins; yet
notwithstanding this is vicious and naught: and either it is not at all
attracted by the parts; or if it be attracted, yet can it not be assimilated.
The body is extenuated and pineth away, in the defect and want of Food and
Nutriment, when in place of that Substance that is daily wasted and diffused by
an insensible transpiration, and exhalation, there is no other Nutriment, or at
least not a sufficient store thereof, substituted and supplied. Now whereas the
blood is the proxime and nighest Nutriment of the whole body; there the
Nutrition is especially hurt through the defect and failing of the blood. Now
the blood fails (first of all) in regard of some default and error in the
first Concoction; when there is not a sufficient quantity of Chyle (from whence
the blood ought to have its original) generated and bred in the Stomach: and
this may happen unto such as are sound and in perfect health, by reason of a
daily and continued scarceness of Food, and their frequent spare Diet; but it
happens in such as are sick and unhealthy, when by reason of the want of
appetite (it being now much dejected and weakened) they are averse from all kind
of Food, and refuse to make any; or else when by reason of their Disease they
are fed with but little Food, and that likewise not much nourishing. Which may
also happen, if the Food that is taken in be presently sent and driven down
into the Guts (either Crude or Raw, or else turned into Chyle) and so is by the
Belly ejected, without its ever coming unto the Liver. The same may likewise
happen if (by reason of any Disease whatsoever in the Stomach, its Concoction
being thereby much weakened) the Chyle that is generated be either but little in
quantity, or (that which is as bad or worse) imperfect and not sufficiently
elaborated. Moreover Nutrition may be hindered because of the hurt of the
sanguifying faculty, to wit, when by reason of something amiss in the Liver or
Spleen, the blood that is generated is impure, and not good: and this comes to
pass in the Cachexy, Leucophlegmatia, Tympany, the Dropsy Ascites, the
Scorbutic atrophy, and the long lasting Scabbiness. Now as for the Causes of
Sanguification, they have been already (in the third Book of our Pract.)
mentioned and explained. From whence it happens, that albeit there be a
sufficient quantity of Food taken into the body, yet notwithstanding there
follows no Nutrition; and this again happens for two Causes, to wit,
because either there is no aliment appointed by Nature for the nourishing of
the parts; or if there be any appointed for this purpose, yet notwithstanding
it cannot be rightly assimilated. There is no aliment appointed unto the parts,
either because the Chyle is not so exactly elaborated in the Stomach that it
may be converted into good blood; or else, because although the Chyle be
sufficiently and rightly elaborated in the Stomach, yet by reason of some fault
in the Liver it is not converted into good blood; or else because, that
although there be Chyle generated in the Stomach, and that accordingly blood be
bred in the Liver; yet it is oftentimes discussed and wasted by some certain
Causes; such as are overmuch exercise, Watchings, Cares, Griefs, and Diseases,
which melt away, dissolve, and discuss the aliment; so that there is too great
an evacuation hereof by the Belly, by Sweats, and by the flux of Blood; and
such likewise are, immoderate Rest, Meats and Medicamens that dry excessively,
Fevers, especially such of them as are acute and Malignant. But the Nutriment
is not rightly assimilated by the parts, in regard of some vicious quality it
has in it, by reason of which it cannot be assimilated by the parts; and so
likewise the Nutrition may be frustrated by some external error; or else by
reason of the Object, to wit, because the Blood is such that it cannot by the
nourishing faculty be perfectly overcome and assimilated.

But now in regard of the faculty, there is not a sufficient Nutrition, ^. In
regard of the nourishing faculty.
by reason of some defect and want of native heat, and radical moisture. For
Nature makes great use of this Native heat, as of the next instrument in
nourishing. And this especially happens by reason of the preternatural
affects of the Heart, and principally its heat and dryness; whether it be that
the Heart be primarily affected (as it is in the Hectic Fever) or else that it
suffer through some default of the neighboring parts, as it happens in the
Ulcer of the Lungs. For whereas the nourishing faculty (as we said erewhile)
makes great use of the innate and Native heat (as its principal Instrument) in
reteining, Concocting, agglutinating, and assimilating, and it being so that
the innate heat is cherished by the heat that flows in; if the temper of the
Heart be not right, and as it ought to be, then the heat that flows in, and
consequently the innate heat likewise will be much amiss, and not rightly
tempered; and so it can be no fit Instrument of the nourishing Faculty. And
that that Hectic Fevers do but slowly and sensibly bring to pass, this the
burning and melting Fevers accomplish in a very short time; by the heat
whereof not only the aliment and substance of the body is consumed and melted
away, but likewise the temperament both of the Heart, and also of the whole body
is converted into that which is more hot and dry. The same happens by reason
of over hard labors, cares, long continued diseases* and in general, al causes
that are able to consume the Radical moisture, and weaken the Native heat.

Now this Atrophy happens especially in the softer parts, The subject:
the fat and the flesh; and indeed the fat is first of al wasted; and then
afterward the flesh is likewise extenuated. But now as for the harder parts
(such as are the Membranes, Cartilages, and especially the Bones) although
these may also in the like manner be dried; yet notwithstanding they cannot
possibly be so extenuated and diminished, that thence the whole body should
decrease. And hence it is likewise that the said extenuation and Atrophy of the
body does appear especially in those parts in which there is much fatness, and
where there are more or greater Muscles, as in the Eyes and Temples.

The particular Atrophy
The Atrophy that happens in the parts is various; It happens oftentimes
privately in the Limbs, the Arms, and the Thighs. And hither belongs the
Atrophy of the Eye.

The causes thereof, which are the same
As for the Cause of the particular Atrophy, like as the Causes of the Atrophy
of the whole body consist in some one principal Bowel, whose action is necessary
for the nutrition of the whole Body, or is indeed universal, and such as may
exsiccate and dry the whole body: so in like manner the particular Atrophy of
any one part has a private cause, or at least such a one as belongs unto
that particular part. Yet notwithstanding the Causes are the same as of the
universal Atrophy, to wit, the weakness of the Nutritive Faculty, The weakness
of the Nutritive Faculty.
and the defect of Aliment. The Faculty is hurt when the part is over cooled,
and left destitute of its proper heat. For if this happen, the part can neither
attract, nor retain, not alter, nor assimilate the Aliment. Now the part is
refrigerated, and the heat decayed, and rendered dull, and unfit for action, not
only from the external Air, as also from cold water; but likewise it may
proceed from overmuch rest, in the Palsy, or else from the streightness of the
passages through which the Spirits flow in. The defect of nutriment
The Nutriment fails especially by reason of the narrowness of the passages
through which it flows unto the part that needs it. And this happens for
the most part from external causes, when the Veins that carry the blood unto
the part for its Nutriment, are pressed together by the bones when they are
loosened and out of joint, or else from some certain Tumor that is nigh unto
it, or by the brawniness and hardness of the flesh; or else lastly, when the
Veins that convey the Nutriment are cut in sunder. See likewise Galen's Book of
Marcor, a Species hereof, arising from an Hectic Fever.

Signs Diagnostick.
The extenuation of the whole body, as likewise of some one particular part
thereof, is visibly apparent to the sight, so that there will be no need of many
signs. For if the whole body be greatly wasted by an Atrophy, then the Face falls
away, and becomes lean, the Temples fall down, the seat of the Eyes is rendered
hollow and deep, the Nostrils become sharp; and such kind of Face (because that
Hippocrates describes it in his Prognostics) they commonly call an
Hippocratical Face. All the Ribs are conspicuous, the shoulder blades and the
Chanel bones stick out, the Neck is extenuated, and the Larynx (or the top of
the cough Attery) buncheth forth; the Belly falls down, the Buttocks become
withered and weak, the Thighs, Arms, Hands, and Feet, are emaciated and grow
lean. But in regard that the Atrophy has its dependence upon many and several
causes, they are therefore al of them to be inquired into, that so the Cure of
them may the more rightly be proceeded in. And therefore enquiry must be made
whether external Causes, to wit, tasting, cares, grief, over hard labor, and
the like, went before. If we find no such thing, we are then to make enquity
into the internal Causes; to wit, whether there be present a Hectic or any
putrid Fever, or whether there had not been one a little while before; and
likewise a discovery must be made touching the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver; in
what state and condition they are: for by the Diseases of the Bowels it may
easily be known what the Cause of the Atrophy is.

Prognostics.
1. By how much the more the Atrophy is but recent and newly begun, by so much
the more easily it is cured; but by how much the longer it has continued, by
so much the more difficult it is to be cured.

2. When only the Alimentary humor is consumed, there is then hopes of an easy
and speedy Cure: but that Atrophy is more difficu^^ly cured, in which the
substance of the flesh is already wasted; and most difficult of al, when the
Membranous and fibrous parts are already exsiccated and extremely dried. Yea,
such an Atrophy can no more be cured than that Atrophy that befalls all
persons whatsoever that live unto an old age.

3. If the Native heat be not as yet so far forth weakened but that it my
possibly be repaired, there is then some hopes of recovery; since that the
Cause being removed, and the heat restored, there may be nutrition again
procured unto the body.

4. And therefore we altogether conclude, that from the Causes especially we
are to conjecture what we are to hope for as touching the Cure. For if those
causes may be taken away and removed, there is then some hopes of the recovery
of health; but if they may not, there is likewise then no hopes of safety.

The Cure.
As for what concerns the Cure of an Atrophy; when the Body is over dried,
and that the Atrophy depends upon the defect and failing of Nutrition, it
shows that then humectation or moistening of the body is first of al to be
procured. Now the body is moistened, if we do our endeavor that the Aliment may
be drawn forth out of the Veins unto all the parts of the body; In those that
are sound.
and that being attracted it may be retained and assimilated by the parts of
the body. But first of al, all the Causes, whether they be evident and
external, or internal, they are to be removed. And therefore if fasting and
hunger went before, let fitting food be again administered; if over much labor,
sollicitous cares and troubles of the mind, and the like, these al of them are
to be removed. For these Causes being taken away, and convenient food being
exhibited, the body is easily restored.

But in those that are sick, if by reason of the dejected appetite, and some
disease, either the Aliment be consumed, or the Faculty weakened; that disease
being removed, and the sick person taking food again, the restoration of the
body follows. But now for the curing of the diseases of the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Lungs, and in what manner these and the like Diseases are to be
removed, we have abundantly taught you in our Practical Physic. From whence
this likewise appears very plainly, that it is but in vain for us to use our
utmost endeavor for the nourishing of the body, whiles the body is replenished
with vicious humors; For the more we nourish impure bodies, the more we hurt
them, as Hippocrates tells us in the second Book of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 10.
For even the good juyces and meats are likewise corrupted by the said vicious
humors, and so the Cacochymy is augmented. And therefore these bad and offensive
humors are first of al to be prepared and evacuated. And this is altogether
true in the Cure of al and every Atrophy, that our main care and regard must be
in reference unto the cause upon which it depends; and that our first and
chief pains must be bestowed in the removal thereof: and afterward we are to
bethink our selves how the extenuated body may again be fetched up and restored
by Aliment. There ought also to be great care taken, that this very
restoration of the body be rightly accomplished. And therefore first of al
there ought to be given Aliments that are soon and easily concocted; and next
of al, such as do a little nourish, although they be more difficultly and
slowly concocted. Unto such as are free from Fevers and Obstructions, and that
are not troubled with any pain in the Head, neither have their Hypochondria
d^stended, Milk may very fitly be allowed; Women's Breast Milk especially, then
Sheeps Milk, thirdly Cows Milk, adding thereto a little Sugar; as also the
juyces and Broths of Flesh, as of Partriges, Hens, and Pullets, Capons, Wether
Mutton, Veal, together with Bread; and especially these Broths that they call
consummate and restoring Broths. Those Emulsions likewise are singularly good
that are made of Almonds. Barley, with Wheaten flour. But this is especially
useful (and here in this ^^^e much approved of) that is made of the bruised
pulpy flesh of a Capon, Almonds, Sugar, Milk, and the flour of Rice. They
likewise here very much commend the Indian Nut; and they write, That by the
alone use hereof extenuated bodies have been fatned. In a cold Marcor Wine is
allowable, and may benefit; but in a hot and torrid Marcor it is altogether to
be avoided.

But now in the manner of Refection and Nutrition, A note touching the manner
of refection.
Hippocrates his seventh Aphorism of the second S^ction is to be observed.
Those Bodies (says he) that have been a long time extenuating, are slowly and
by degrees to be repaired again; but those that have had but a short time for
their wasting, must in as short a space he restored to their wonted fleshiness.
For (as Galen explains it) those bodies that are in a short time extenuated,
they suffer this, not from the colliquation and melting of the solid parts, but
from the evacuation of the humors and the spirits: but those bodies that have
been long extenuating, in those the very flesh melts away; and the other
parts likewise (by which the concoction and distribution, and sanguification is
perfected in the whole body) are rendered and made lean: wherefore there cannot
be so much aliment concocted as the body stands in need of. And because of this
we are to take the longer time in the refection and repairing of such like
decayed bodies, and their Nutriment must be but thin and spare; this spateness
of Nutriment being by Hippocrates termed slowness in nourishing. But as for
such as have only their humors and spirits evacuated, in these we may safely
and without any the least danger cause a speedy and full refection and
restoration; in regard that the strength of the solid parts serves here for a
firm foundation.

After sleep, gentle Frictions may be instituted, The frictions and baths that
are to be administered
the hands being first anointed over with the Oil of sweet Almonds. A Bath of
Waters is likewise very useful: for it evidently moisteneth those that are over
dried; as we may easily perceive in such as have traveled long in the hot and
scorching Sun, or else have been over exercising themselves any other way, and
thereby are made over hot; as also in such as have their moisture overmuch
dried up by watchings, cares, or by any other ways and means. And Galen is
very frequent in the mentioning of Baths; which here and there he largely
treats of; insomuch that unto us (who have no such great regard unto baths)
he may seem something too curious. But at this very day many in Asia do imitate
the Care and Custom of the Romans in their bathings; and these Asiaticks place
almost al their whole delight in their Baths; imitating the magnificence of the
Ancients in their stately structures for this very purpose, and with emulation
endeavoring to exceed them in this their luxury and prodigality. For there in
their Baths are al things to be had that may possibly be desired either for
health or pleasure; touching which see further in Prosper Alpinus his third
Book of the Egyptian Medicam. Chap. 15* 16. and so the following, even unto the
end of that Book.

But now as for the Cure of a particular Atrophy, The Cure of a particular
Atrophy
Galen (in his Book of the Office of a Physician, Chap. 3. Text 32. and in his
fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 16.) has taken great pains to
show us in what manner it is to be performed. For whenas the private parts do
wither away, and are extenuated by reason of the hinderance of the afflux of
the Aliment, and the languishing heat of the part; the Physician ought then to
use his utmost endeavor, that so strength and heat may again be restored unto
the part, and that the afflux of blood unto the part may again be procured.
Those means that restore strength and heat unto the part, are, a gentle and
moderate rubbing of the Member, Motion, and the suppling of it with warm water:
the same means do likewise draw and allure the blood unto the part. Now this
friction, and suppling with warm water ought so long (and no longer) to be
continued until the part be made somewhat red, and be as it were a little swollen,
but not so long, until it be again assuaged and fallen. The parts may likewise
be fomented; or (if their condition will bear it) even soaked and bathed in
baths made of Sage, the tops of Juniper, Lovage, Lavender, Mallows, and
Marshmallows; with which when the part is sufficiently fomented, it may
afterward he anointed with Oils or convenient Unguents.

Unguents.
There are many such like Unguents and Emplasters to be had: as for instance,

Take Unguent Dialthaea, Aragon, and Martiatum, of each one ounce and half; Oil
of Laurel, of Spike, and of Castoreum, of each two drams; Mingle them and make
an Unguent. Or,

Take Man's Fat, the Yew Tree, of each as much as you will, the Powder of Savine
as much as will suffice, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Bdellium, Opopanax, of each one ounce; Dissolve them in Wine, and strain
them. Then add of Hogs fat three ounces; Goose fat and Hens fat, of each one
ounce; Oil of old Olives four ounces; Turpentine and Wax, of each one ounce;
mingle them over the fire, and boil them until the Wine be consumed: and at
length add of the Powder of Mastick, Frankincense, and Fenugreek, of each one
ounce, and make an Unguent.

Emplasters.
There may likewise such a like Emplaster be imposed: Viz.

Take Wax, Rosin, Turpentine, of each one pound; mingle them upon the fire; and
afterward add, of Mastick, Frankincense, Galbanum, Saffron, long Pepper,
Cinnamom, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves, Zedoary, Galangal, Ginger, Grains of Paradise,
and Nettle seed, of each half an ounce; and make an Emplaster. Or,

Take the Leaves of Lovage fresh and new, the tops of Savine, and Juniper, of
each two handfuls; Camomile flowers half a handful; Juniper Berries half an
ounce; when you have sliced and bruised them well, then pour upon them the Oil
of Bays, and Lillies, as much as will serve to cover them all; of Hogs Grease
three ounces; of Wine two ounces; boil them until all the moisture be wasted;
and then add Oil of Spike, and Juniper Berries, of each one dram; Mustard seed
poudered one ounce; the Root of Pellitory three drams; Mustard two drams; Wax
as much as will suffice, and so make a Liniment.

A Fomentation.
For those that are offended by Remedies that are fat, they may have a
Fomentation made of the Water following, wherewith the Member may be bathed;
Viz.

Take Castoreum one dram; long Pepper, Pellitory, Grains of Paradise, of each
two drams; the Berries of Spurge-Olive, (by the Greeks called Coccognidia) or
of Nettle half an ounce; Rocket one dram and half; Juniper Berries one handful;
Sage, Mint, Organy, Mother of Thyme, St. John's wort, of each one handful;
Spirit of Wine three pints, destil them; or at least let them stand infusing a
long while, to wit, for some certain days time; and afterward let them be
strained.

Dropax.
After this, the Ancients did also on the fourth day administer those Remedies
that were vulgarly called Pications. Now a Dropax or Pication was a Medicament
that they made of Pitch dissolved in Oil, with which blood-warm they made a
Liniment for the extenuated part, and there they kept it on until it was cold;
then they removed it, and applied a fresh one; and this was often repeated,
until at length the part became red, and turgid or puffed up. Then after this,
the Pication being removed, they anointed the Member with the Oil of sweet
Almonds, or some kind of fat; and in the Evening the same was repeated as
before; and in this manner they handled the part so long, until it again waxed
thicker.

Epicrusis, and Catacrusis:
Which if they could not effect by the said pication,the Ancient Greek
Physicians then made use of a Remedy, that was by them termed Epicrusis and
Catacrusis, i. e. a Percussion. For they smote the lean part with certain
Fetula's (provided purposely for this use) until such time as the part became
turgid, swollen and red; and then immediately thereupon they anointed it with
some fat Medicament or other: but our Physicians for these Percussions do make
use of those Nettles that are Green and Stinging.

THE FIFTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of Ulcers.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature and Differences of an Ulcer.
ALthough the word Helcas, Vlcus (an Ulcer) be in general taken for every
solution of Continuity in a soft part, as we may see in Galen his thirteenth
Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. ult. where he under the same signification
comprehends likewise a Wound that is properly so called, in which manner
Celsus in his fifth Book, and Chap. 6. does oftentimes without any difference
at all take both a Wound and an Ulcer: yet notwithstanding properly and in
special, the solution of Continuity with magnitude diminished, in a soft part,
having its original from a corroding matter, is called an Ulcer. To wit, a
Wound and an Ulcer differ in this, An Ulcer what it is properly.
that in a Wound there is only a solution of Unity, but there is not any thing
of the part necessarily lost; but in an Ulcer there is something diminished and
lost from the part affected; and if nothing else, yet at least the Scarf-skin.
For seeing that an Ulcer is always from a corroding Cause, it cannot possibly
be but that something must be taken away from the part. For although in an
Ulcer there be sometimes some kind of superfluous flesh growing forth; yet
notwithstanding there is nevertheless the Skin, yea and the very natural flesh
it self wanting: and that Ulcer is no simple and single Disease, but a Compound
one, and such as is conjoined with magnitude augmented. There may likewise
together with an Ulcer be conjoined diverse other Diseases, a Distemper, an
Inflammation, an Erysipelas, an Excrescent Flesh, and other Diseases, which yet
notwithstanding belong not unto the Essence of an Ulcer, but may be taken away
the Ulcer still remaining; the essence whereof does consist only in the solution
of Continuity, together with some kind of diminution of the part affected.

The Subject of an Ulcer is a part soft or fleshy, The Subject:
the word Flesh being here taken in a large acceptance; viz. not only for the
Musculous flesh, but for that likewise that comprehends the flesh, of which
the Intestines, the Bladder, and other of the Bowels consist; and herein lies
the difference between it and the rottenness that is in the Bones.

The Causes.
The nearest Cause is any matter whatsoever it be that has in it any corroding
quality; which comprehends under it not only the sharp humors that are bred
in the body, but likewise all those external Causes that have in them a
corroding power, such as are corroding Medicadicaments and poisons: for it is
false (that which some assert) that the very same Ulcers arise only from
internal Causes; since that experience teaches us, that the very same Ulcers
may be excited also from external Causes. And so ( Galen himself being witness
in his fourth Book of the Method of Physic, and Chap. 9.) it is most
apparently known even by experience it self, that by the Fire, scalding hot
water, Oil, and other the like fervent juyces, in burnings and scaldings, they
are not Wounds that are excited, but Ulcers; like as also Medicaments, and
Poisons that cause putrefaction and burning, excite Ulcers. And so poisonous
and contagious vapors breed Ulcers; like as Scabbiness by contagion and
infection breeds Scabbiness; to wit, whilst the Contagion that is imparted
and communicated unto the Skin, corrodeth it. And in the very same manner the
vapors that are drawn in (by breathing) from the Lungs of Phthisical Persons do
exulcerate the Lungs, and by contagion do breed a Phthisis or Consumption. And
in the like manner, upon the very same ground, Venom and Venereal Poison being
rubbed and chafed into any body, or by any means communicated thereunto,
infecteth and exulcerateth the same. Neither is it of any weight or moment,
that Eustachius Rudius endeavoreth to reduce such like Ulcers as these rather
unto Wounds then unto Ulcers. For by this means he confounds altogether the
Difference that is betwixt Ulcers and Wounds; in regard that Ulcers and Wounds
do not differ only in this, that Ulcers are evermore with a loss of some of the
substance, whereas Wounds may be without any such loss; but likewise, in that
Wounds arise from some Cause that either cutteth into the part, or pricketh it;
or breaks, or bruiseth it; but these, to wit, the Ulcers, proceed from a
Corroding Cause, whether it be external, o^ whether it be internal. And this is
also manifest in Medicaments that putrefie (for who can deny that to be an
Ulcer that is excited from the Juice of Spurge?) from the which said
Medicaments that Contagion that is in Scabies, the French Pox, and the Phthisis
or Consumption, differs but very little. For although (as Rudius there
Objecteth) we do not deny that such like Poisons have likewise in them a power
of infecting the humors, which being corrupted may afterward also promote these
Ulcers: yet notwithstanding we say, that all power whatsoever of corroding is
not to be denied unto this very Contagion it self, although afterward (when the
corruption of the humors happens in the body) the increase of the Ulcer be
thereby much promoted and furthered.

The Differences.
The Differences of Ulcers, some of them are Essential, others of them only
Accidental. The Essential are those that are taken from the very form of the
Ulcer, from the Subject, and from the efficient Cause thereof. Those that are
taken from the form of the Ulcer are drawn from its figure, its magnitude, and
the like. For some Ulcers are great, others but small; some of them long, others
short; some of them broad, others but narrow: some straight, others again
oblique, wreathed in, and fistulous; some of them equal, in which the flesh in
all the parts of the place affected is equally wasted; others unequal, in which
there is a greater part of the flesh consumed in this place, and a less portion
in another place of the same Ulcer. From the part affected some Ulcers are said
to be External, others Internal; some slight and superficial, others of them
profound and deep; and they may be in this, or in that part. The Differences
arising from the Causes shall he shown in the next following Chapter, wherein
our purpose is to treat of the Causes of Ulcers.

But now the Accidental Differences of Ulcers are those that are taken from
such things as are without the Nature and Constitution of the Ulcer; and they
are such as are taken from the situation of the Ulcer, or else from their
time; viz. that some of them are Recent and new; others of them old and
inveterate.

And hither likewise there may not unfitly be referred those Differences that
are taken from Causes accidental, and such as are not common unto all Ulcers;
to wit, that some Ulcers are joined together with a fluxion, but that others of
them want the said afflux; that some of them are pure, others of them sordid
and soul, corroding, eating up, and Creeping along. For these Differences
depend upon the Causes. And hitherto likewise belong those Differences that are
taken from the Accidents and Symptoms of the Ulcers; to wit, that some of them
are altogether void of pain, others of them accompanied with a pain, an
itching, pricking, and burning; some of them easy to be cured, others
difficult and rebellious, by the Greeks called Dysepulota; some of them benign
and favorable, others such as have contracted a most pestilent and malignant
quality. And hither likewise are to be referred those Ulcers that they commonly
call Chironia and Telephia. And yet nevertheless besides these Differences,
that may be properly called such, there may yet some others be given, that are
improperly so called; and such as may rather be termed the Complications of
Ulcers with other Diseases, then Differences; and such like Differences are
these, to wit, that some Ulcers are conjoined with Pain, a Distemper, a
Phlegmone, a Callous or Brawny Flesh, a Gangrene, a Cancer, Worms, and the
Rottenness or Corruption of the Bones.

And (the truth is) the Differences and Distinctions of Ulcers are drawn from
the Springs aforesaid. But it being a truth likewise that some of the sorts of
Ulcers are taken and drawn from diverse and several Fountains (that so we may
not treat of Ulcers without any Method) I conceive that our Discourse touching
these Ulcers will be most Methodical if we handle them in the order following;
to wit, 1. If we first of all treat of a simple Ulcer, or an Ulcer considered
in the General. 2. Of an Ulcer with a Distemper. 3. Of an Ulcer with an afflux
of humors. 4. Of a sordid and foul Ulcer. 5. Of an Ulcer with Tumors. 6. Of
Flesh growing forth luxuriant and proud. 7. Of an Ulcer that is wan or Leaden
colored, and withal Callous. 8. Of an Ulcer that is hollow, and fistulous
(which we commonly call the Fistula.) 9. Of an Ulcer with Worms. 10. Of an
Ulcer with a rottenness of the Bones. 11. Of the Ulcer by the Greeks called
Dysepulot, Malignant, the Ulcers Telephia and Chironia, and Phagedaena. 12. Of
pain with an Ulcer. 13. Of the Ulcers of the Legs and other parts. 14. Unto
which we will add something touching Burnings. 15. We will conclude all with a
short Discourse touching a Gangrene, and Sphacelus.

Chap. 2. Of a simple, or single Ulcer.
IN the first place therefore we will handle a simple Ulcer; and show you what
are the Causes of an Ulcer considered in the general; and what differences it
has according to its form, its causes, and the place affected: by what signs
the Ulcer and its essential differences may be known; and what is to be
pre-advised as touching the cure; and what the Ulcer in general indicateth and
points out; and lastly, what kind of Method and course it requires for the
curing of it.

The Causes.
We have already told you in the precedent Chapter, that the nearest cause of
an Ulcer is a matter that has in it a corroding quality, whether it be bred in
the Body, or whether it happen unto the body from without.

Of the first sort are al Humors whatsoever that are sharp, and endued with a
corroding Faculty bred in the body. But now this humor is either bred without
the part affected, or else it is generated in the very part it self that is
affected. Without the affected part there is generated a choleric humor, a
salt phlegm, a Whey that is salt, nitrous and sharp, and black Choler or
Melancholy. For these if they be bred in the body, and flow unto any one part,
they may corrode and exulcerate the said part. But from what Causes such like
humors may be generated in the body, we have already shown you in the second
Book of our Institutions, touching the causes of Diseases, and elsewhere. Now
they flow unto the part affected, either by transmission, or by attraction;
both which from what causes they proceed, we have declared above, in the first
Part, and Chap. 5. of an Inflammation. And more especially in the Spring time,
various Ulcers are wont to arise from some internal vice of the Humors, as
likewise from unseasonable and immoderate exercises. For if (as Galen writes
in his third Book upon the Aphorisms, Aphor. 20.) in the Spring the Body be
impure, there happens indeed then some such like thing in the Spring time,
even as we see there is wont to be in the exercises of the Body. For although
these exercises be never so safe and healthful in themselves; yet nevertheles if
you bring forth a man that is full either of phlegm or yellow choler, or black
choler, or even also of blood it self to exercise, you shall undoubtedly by this
exercising of him procure unto him either the Falling Sickness, or the
Apoplexy; or if not these, yet most assuredly the rupture of some Vessel in the
Lungs, or a most acute and violent Fever. But unto such as have had exercise
enjoined them, for the purging out of humors that lie low and deep, this their
exercise drawing forth unto the skin a Gacochymy, that is to say, abundance of
bad and offensive humors, and scattering it throughout the parts, does for the
most part excite and cause Ulcers, and the Scabies or Scabbiness. For this is
that which Hippocrates hinteth unto us, when he says, That if we exercise an
impure and impurged body, Ulcers will from thence arise. And so indeed in the
very like manner, in the Spring time, the heat of the ambient Air dissolving
the humors calls them forth unto the skin, by an effect altogether like unto
that of exercises. For the effects of the Spring do not only resemble the
effects of Exercises, but they are also most like unto the works and operations
even of Nature her self. For indeed the parts that the Spring time acts (like
as does Nature her self) are, as well to cause that occult and secret
perspiration throughout the whole body (by the which all the superfluities of
the body are emptied forth) as thoroughly to purge the body also by diseases,
after a various and different manner. Thus ^a^ Galen. But then these Humors get
their acrimony in the part it self, by reason of some distemper in the said
part. And after this manner, like as even the Pus or pu^^lent matter it self,
by its concoction and long abode in the part becomes more sharp, and still so
much the sharper and corroding, by how much the humor (out of which it is
generated) is more tart and sharp; so likewise does the blood, which is
corrupted by the part affected, and so putrefieth.

But now the Causes that happen unto the body from without, are Septick (or
putrefying) and Caustic Medicaments. Neither do I here exclude the very actual
fire it self, from bearing a part in the number of the external causes; in
regard that the Eschar that is left remaining appertains rather unto ulcers
than unto wounds. And hither likewise is to be referred that contagion, by
means whereof the vapors exhaling from the Lungs of Phthisical persons, and by
others attracted and drawn in with the breath, do likewise exulcerate their
Lungs, and so cause in them a Phthisis or Consumption; and also the nastiness
and infections of such as are scabbed, Leprous, and affected with the foul
Disease, being communicated unto the skin, do exulcerate it, and there generate
a like disease. But that attraction which is caused in gauling and
interfairing, or in wearing of the skin by the wringing and streightness of the
shoo, is not rightly and fitly referred unto, and reckoned up amongst the
nighest and most immediate Causes. For by the said attrition the humor only is
attracted, that afterward corrodeth the Skin, and exciteth therein little
bladders or blisters. But now what the special causes of special Ulcers are, we
shall afterward show you in its proper place, where the peculiar causes of each
particular Ulcer shall be explained.

of the Ulcer cannot be filled up, neither can there flesh enough grow forth;
from whence it is that an hollow Cicatrice is caused.

19. If the Ulcer after such time as it is filled up with flesh, and that a
Cicatrice ought to have been brought thereupon, wax crude and raw again, there
is then great cause to fear, that the Ulcer will turn into a Fistula.

20. Ulcers that are in the Feet, and in the Hands, are wont sometimes to hasten
on Inflammations of the Glandules in the Armpits, or in the Groins, and Tumors
in bodies that are plethorical and cacochymical. For the matter flowing down
unto the ulcer in the Hand, or in the Foot, those very parts themselves
likewise being become more loose and weak do first of al receive and drink it
in.

21. The ulcers of the Thighs are for the most part hard to be cured, and
especially if they be cherished by any distemper and default in the Spleen: for
then the thick and melancholy humors that flow unto the ulcer do hinder the
Cute thereof.

22. Ulcers that have continued long, and are now become inveterate, are not to
be cured without much danger, unless the body be first of all carefully purged,
and a good course of Diet be observed; of which very thing Gulielmus Fabricius
(in his third Century, and Observe. 39.) gives us an instance in a certain man,
who having had an inveterate ulcer cured in his left Thigh by an unskilful and
immethodical Empirick, after some few months was surprised with a Pleurisy in
his left side, upon which he died: and that during his sickness he spit forth
just such stuff and excrements as before were wont to flow forth of the ulcer.
See likewise Ambrose Parry (in his seventeenth Book, and Chap. 51.) touching
Pus likewise from an ulcer in the Arm evacuated by the Urine.

The rest of the Prognostics shall be handled in the special differences of the
ulcers.

Indications.
Since that the Essence of an ulcer consists in the solution of unity, and
the diminution of the magnitude of the affected part; the solution of unity
shows that union must be endeavored, and that which is lost and diminished
indicateth its own restoration: to wit, the ulcer (as an ulcer) is to be
filled up with flesh, and united, and then shut up with a Cicatrice. But then
when the ulcer is conjoined with its cause, that either excited the ulcer from
the very beginning, or else if (in the Cure) it obtain the Nature of that cause
without which the ulcer had not been, the said cause is then first of al to be
removed. But then it is requisite likewise that the temper of the part
affected, as also the blood that flows thereto be such as it ought to be: but
if there chance to be any thing amiss in these, it is to be corrected; touching
which we shall hereafter speak further in the special differences of Ulcers.

If therefore that Humor that excited the ulcer be still present, it is to be
evacuated: for in every affect in which the cause is still present, the Cure is
evermore to be begun from the removal of the Cause. And moreover, because that
in the beginning there will always fall forth some of the blood without their
proper vessels, and because that oftentimes together with it other vicious
humors in the body flow thither; lest therefore that which st^cketh in the
pores of the parts should putrefie and breed an Inflammation, this blood is to
be concocted, and changed into good and laudable Pus. From whence likewise it
is that Galen in his Book of the times of the whole Disease, and Chap. 3.
writes that ulcers have their peculiar times; and that in the beginning there
i^ thrust forth a thin, inconcocted, and waterish Sanies, which in the
augmentation by the help and benefit of concoction becomes thicker; and at
length (in the state) is changed into Pus that is good and white. And therefore
in the beginning of an ulcer it will be requisite to use Concocters, which they
commonly call Digestives. And furthermore the filth and impurities which are
wont to be generated in an ulcer (in regard that they hinder the curing
thereof) are to be wiped clean away. So soon as the ulcer is cleansed, the
Cavity thereof is to be filled up with flesh: and at the length the ulcer is to
be shut up with a Cicatrice.

There is yet nevertheless likewise regard to be had unto the parts affected.
For in the ulcers of the external parts, the green just of Brass, burnt Brass,
Vitriol, Antimony, and the like, have their place; which nevertheless are by no
means to be admitted of in the internal parts. If likewise the part be so
constituted and framed, that it may give a passage unto other things (like as
the Gullet does) the Medicaments are then so to be ordered, that they adhere
unto the part. Those parts that are endued with an exquisite sense will not
admit of sharp Medicaments; which those parts that are of a more dull sense will
well enough sustain: touching which we shall speak (here and there) in the
particular ulcer^.

But now how an ulcer may be filled up with flesh, Galen teaches us in his
third Book of the Method of Physic, and Chap. 3. To wit, unto the generating
of flesh there are necessarily required the efficient Cause, and the matter.
The efficient is Nature, which (as it does in the whole body, so likewise) in
each particular part does attract and draw so much Aliment as is necessary, and
there she retains it, concocteth, applies, and assimilateth it. The matter
is a pure and sincere blood, that is generated from meat and drink. But because
(in every concoction) there is generated a twofold excrement; (one more thin,
that insensibly exhaleth, or else is discussed by Sweat; the other more thick;)
the same likewise happens in the generation of Flesh in the Ulcer; and if
they be left remaining in the part, they will moisten it, and hinder the
generation of Flesh. And therefore these Excrements in the Ulcers are to be
clean wiped away, and dried up. And this is that which is so frequently and
commonly alleged out of Galen (in his third Book of the Method of Physic,
and Chap. 4. and in his fourth Book of the Method of Physic, and Chap. 5. and
in other places, here and there) where he says that every Ulcer requires
exsiccation. And Hippocrates (in the beginning of his Book of Ulcers) thus
writes: That which is dry (says he) comes near unto that which is sound;
but that which is moist comes very nigh unto that that is vitiated. And so the
Cure of an Ulcer it is indeed the work of Nature, that restores the flesh that
is lost from the Blood flowing unto the part, and brings a Cicatrice over the
Ulcer being silled up with flesh. The Physician he only removes those
impediments that are an obstacle to Nature in her operation, whilst he
cleanses away the Excrements, and dries the Ulcer; and when he does this, he
is then said to generate Flesh, and to introduce a Cicatrice.

The Cure.
At the beginning therefore, if the body be plethorical, or Cacochymical, then
the abundance of Blood is to be diminished, or the Body evacuated, lest that
the humors flow yet longer unto the part affected. And withal let there
likewise be a good and wholesome Course of Diet appointed unto the Patient, that
so there may no more of these bad humors be generated in the Body. And for all
those things likewise that we call not natural there ought to be such a course
taken, that nothing unbefitting or inconvenient may happen, nor any hurt be
offered unto the Ulcer.

Moreover in regard that it cannot well be, but that there will somewhat of the
Blood that is poured forth of the Veins, and something of the humors likewise
stick in the Pores of the parts; that so therefore this may be Concocted, and
converted into Pus, Digestives or suppurating Medicaments are to be made use
of, which in softer Bodies ought to be more mild and gentle (such as are those
that are provided of the Oil of Roses, and the Yelks of Eggs;) and in those
bodies that are not so soft, but harder to be wrought upon, they are made of
Turpentine, the Oil of Eggs, the Oil of Roses, the Oil of Mastick, the Yelks of
Eggs; in Bodies that are more dry they are made of Rosin Turpentine, or Rosin
of the Fir Tree, the Powder of Frankincense, the powder of Linseed, Wheat
flour, Fenugreek, and Hens fat.

After this Cleansers are to be made use of. Yet notwithstanding it often so
happens, that with one Medicament we satisfy two ends and Scopes, to wit,
both concoct and Cleanse. Whereupon it is, that then in this case suppurating
Medicaments are to be mingled with Detersives or Cleansers; and so the
Suppuratives are made more hot, and more dry then otherwise they are wont to
be. Yet nevertheless, in this commixture, there is a regard to be had unto the
times; since that in the beginning Suppuratives, in the end Detersives ought to
prevail. And indeed it is more safe (forthwith in the very beginning) to mingle
Abstersives with Suppuratives, then to use Suppuratives alone by themselves.
For Nature is never idle, but even in the beginning betaketh her self unto the
generating of Flesh; and to this end she separateth the excrements, which are
therefore to be wiped away: neither must we be easily persuaded to make use
only of Suppuratives; since that it may then happen that by the use of them the
Ulcer may be rendered more moist and sordid: which happily might be the Cause, why
Galen in the Cure of Ulcers makes no mention at al of Suppurating Medicaments.
And therefore most commodiously unto these Suppuratives, or Digestives (as they
are usually called) there are presently added, Frankincense, Rosin Turpentine,
and Rosin of the Fir Tree, Oil of Mastick, the Juice of Smallage, and the like.

But now such like Medicaments as these may be made in a various and different
manner, according to the various Constitution of several Bodies. In a Body that
is soft and moist let such a one as this following be made.

Take Oil of Roses one ounce, Turpentine two ounces, the Yelk of one Egg, and
so mingle them, etc. That following is yet more dry.

Take Oil of Mastick, and of Turpentine, of each half an ounce; the Yelk of one
Egg, and so mingle them, etc. This following is yet stronger.

Take Rosin of the Fir Tree one ounce, Oil of Roses six drams, the Powder of
Frankincense, one dram; mingle etc. If there be need of more abstersion, then,

Take Honey of Roses one ounce, Turpentine, half an ounce, the Juice of
Smallage one ounce, the Powder of Frankincense, and Barley flour, as much as
will suffice, mingle etc.

The Ulcer being once cleansed, Sarcoticks (that is to say, Medicaments that
breed Flesh) are to be made use of; touching the faculty of which we have
already spoken, in the fifth Book of our Institutions, Part 1. Sect. 1. Chap.
9. Now these are of a threefold rank and order. In the first rank there is the
Meal or Flour of Barley, of Fenugreek, and of Beans, Fra kincense, Manna of
Frankincense. In the second rank there are Rosin Turpentine, Rosin of the Fir
Tree, and of the Larch Tree, Honey clean scummed, Honey of Roses, Aloes, the
Meal of Lupines, of the bitter Vetch O^obus, Pompholyx, or the soil of Brass.
In the third rank and order there are, the Meal of the Vetch Ervum, raw Honey,
the Roots of Aristolochy, of Flower-eluce, Myrrh, Antimony, Chalci^is or red
Vitrioll.

Among the Compounded there are these, Viz. Vnguentum Basilicum the greater and
the less of Galen, Vnguentum Aureum, de Tutia, de Matrisylv 1. Touching the
Emplaster that is made of Hydrelaeon (Oil and Water) and the Spume or Froth of
Silver, see Galen in his first Book of the Composit. of Medicam. according to
the kinds, Chap. 6. Or,

Take Myrrh, Aloes, of each half an ounce; Frankincense one ounce, Mastick half
an ounce, Gum Elemi two drams, Turpentine one ounce, Colophony half an ounce;
Make an Unguent according to Art.

And therefore out of these the Physician may make his choice of such
Medicaments as are most fit and convenient for every several and particular
Constitution. For the body by how much the more moist it is, by so much does it
require Medicaments that are less drying and Abstersive: and on the Contrary,
the Body when it is more dry, it then requires the stronger sort of drying
Medicaments.

And so likewise in the colder times and seasons of the year, we are to use
those Medicaments that are somewhat Warmer; but in the hotter seasons of the
year, the Medicaments that we make use of may be less hot. For if we apply
Medicaments that are weaker then is fitting, then there will be great store of
Sanies (the thinner sort of Corruption) gathered together in the Ulcer, and the
Flesh that is generated will be soft and slaggy. But if they be overstrong and
overdrying, the Ulcer will then be rendered dry, and the Lips thereof will become
very red, the flesh will be consumed and sometimes the Excrements of the Ulcer
will be bloody, and a certain kind of mordication or biting will be perceived in
the part. But if the part be rendered exulcerated and dry (as naturally it is
wont to be) and that neither Sanies nor Pus slow forth of the Ulcer, and that
there appear a good color in the Flesh, it is then a Sign of a fit and
convenient Sarcotick Medicament.

And here likewise the very form of the Mediment it self ought to be regarded.
For they are wont to be applied either liquid or humid, or Dry. In bodies hard
and dry, and when a harder flesh is to be generated the Sarcotick Pouders that
are to be sprinkled upon the Ulcer are most fit. As,

Take Frankincense half an ounce, Dragons Blood, Colophony, of each two Drams,
and make a Powder. Or,

Take Frankincense half an ounce, Aloes two drams, Dragons Blood, and Sarcocol,
of each one dram; make a Powder.

But if the Bodies be softer, we use those Medicaments that are most. And yet
nevertheless, touching the preparation of Liniments and Unguents, it is to be
observed that they be not too soft. For such as these are melted by the heat of
the part, and so easily flow about and spread all abroad. And therefore if the
Ulcers be not very deep (for in such those Medicaments are required that can
penetrate ^ven unto it) but that they stick in the Superficies of the Body, we
must then make use of those Medicaments that are endued with a thicker
Consistence. Moreover, Unguents that are overmoist, by reason of their Oily
Nature do mollefie, and generate a flesh that is too loose, and unlike unto
that lying under it, especially in dry Bodies.

When the ulcer shall be filled up with flesh, it is to be closed with a
Cicatrice, a Skin, or in stead thereof a Cicatice is to be generated, and by
the benefit thereof the Continuity that was dissolved is again to be united.
But as in the generating of flesh it is Nature that does the work, and the
Blood that supplieth the matter; so likewise the very same happens in the
generating of the Skin: the Physician by the Medicaments only removes the
Impediments. But that which is commonly told us, that the matter out of which
the Cicatrice is generated is flesh, which by the assistance of the Medicaments
is so to be altered, and by the use of Dryers and Astringents is so to be
condensed, that it may become like unto the Skin (if it be understood of the
principal Agent) is altogether false. For as the Sarcoporetick (or
flesh-causing) faculty in the flesh does only generate flesh, and restores
that which is lost; even so the Cutisick faculty (as I may so call it) or
Skin-making power, in the Skin does only generate Skin. Whence it is, that
never yet by the use of any Epulotick Medicament, or only by the use of
Sarcoticks, has there been known any Cicatrice to be produced in the midst of
an ulcer; but it begins to arise always from the Skin lying near unto it,
about the lips of the ulcer, and so by degrees is sensibly extended, until that
at length the flesh become wholly covered over with the Cicatrice. And hence it
is also that oftentimes the ulcers are brought unto a Cicatrice, without any
use at al of Epuloticks. And yet we acknowledge that Nature by the use of the
said Epuloticks may be much furthered and helped in her operation. For if this
Action be left wholly unto Nature, the Cicatrice will be generated but very
slowly; not (as Fallopius thinks) because that the flesh out of which the
Cicatrice is to be generated is so moist that it cannot be dried by the Nature
of the cutaneous or skinny part; but it is because the Cutisick faculty in the
Skin that is near unto it cannot (but very slowly) change and convert into
Skin, (which to wit, is a dry substance) that blood that flows in unto it,
the said blood being moist: which it will more easily perform, if it be assisted
by Epulotick Medicaments that have in them a drying power. But of what quality
these Epulotick Medicaments are, and what kind of Faculties they have in them,
Galen teaches us in his third Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 4. and 5.
and in his fourth Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the kinds
of them, Chap. 1. And we have likewise already spoken touching this very thing,
in the fifth Book of our Institutions, Part 1. Sect. 1. Chap. 9. To wit, by how
much the Skin is more dry than the flesh; by so much likewise ought the
Epulotick Medicaments to be dryer than the Sarcotick. But in those that are
Active the Medicaments may be as well hot as cold; or both of them, if there be
occasion.

But now these Epuloticks are likewise of three sorts, to wit, Mild, Mean, and
more strong. The Milder kind are, Cadmia washed, the Rind of Frankincense,
Aloes, the Roots of sweet Cyperess (which some term English Galangal) Lead
burnt and washed. The Compounds these; Unguent of Litharge, of Minium (or
Vermilion) of Ceruss or white Lead, of Diapompholyx, and the Cerote of
Vermilion. The mean and middle sort of Medicaments are these; Flowers of red
Roses, Pomegranate Flowers, unripe Gals, the Rind of the Pomegranate Tree,
Bole-Armenick, Terra Lemma or Sealed Earth of Lemnos, Myrobalans, Dragons
blood, Vermilion, Lead. Of the Compounds; Unguent of Tutia, Unguent
Diapompholyx, Emplastrum Diapalma, Emplastrum Gryseum, and the Emplaster of
Lapis Calaminaris. The strongest sort are; Chalcitis, Sarcocol, Alum, Brass
burnt, the offscouring of Brass. Of the stronger Compounds are these; Unguent
of Tutty, and the Cerote of Bole-Armenick. But now in the choice of them we are
to consider both the Constitution of the ulcer, and the Nature of the body. For
it sometimes happens that the ulcers which when they were sordid and foul felt
no mordacity or sharp biting (as it were) from the Medicaments, do yet perceive
and feel the same from them, after such time as they are purged and made clean.
Wherefore even then when the ulcer is at the purest, we must from the stronger
sort of Abstersive Medicaments have recourse unto those that are more mild and
moderate; like as again in sordid ulcers we are to betake our selves unto such
as are more abstersive; unless the ulcers were made sordid by the said
mordication. For now and then this very thing lies upon the Physician, as a
thing altogether necessary to be done, to wit, that he betake himself unto the
most strong and forcible Abstersive; upon which the ulcer again appears
corroded and sordid, the flesh that is dissolved and (as it were) melted by the
Medicament, defiling and fouling the same; for the colliquated or dissolved
flesh degenerateth into a filthy and noysom Sanies. And there it behooves us
carefully and diligently to consider, whether or no the ulcer (the flesh lying
under it being eaten through and dissolved) be not become sordid and foul,
because that when it required a Medicament apt and fit to take away its filth
and nastiness, there was yet nevertheless no such Medicament applied and laid
on. But now, when the ulcer is rendered more sordid and filthy by the acrimony
of the Medicament, this is evidently manifested by the Cavity that is made in
the ulcer, which will be the greater; as likewise the orifice thereof will be the
more red and hot. And then again in the next place, we ought carefully to
consider, whether the constitution of the body be soft and moist, or else dry:
for unto the soft the more mild, but unto the dryer bodies the more strong and
prevalent Medicaments are to be applied.

But the Epuloticks are then to be made use of (as Galen instructs us, in his
thirteenth Book of the Method of Physic, and Chap. 5.) when the ulcer is not
altogether filled up with flesh, but that there is yet a little thereof
wanting. For in regard that Nature is never idle, but that even likewise then
when it begins to produce the Cicatrice, the flesh likewise withal at the
same time receives yet some further increment and growth; if then at the last
Epuloticks should be administered when the ulcer is already altogether filled up
with flesh, we might well fear, lest that before ever the Cicatrice should be
completed and fully finished, in the interim the flesh should receive yet a
further growth and increase, and so the Cicatrice should thereby be raised the
higher. For in regard that the Skin is a Nervous substance, it cannot therefore
be so generated anew as the flesh, but in place and stead thereof there is
something generated that is like unto the skin, and this we call a Cicatrice.

This is likewise to be taken notice of, That Epulotick Medicaments ought to be
endued (both actually and potentially) with a drying faculty; and that
therefore (for the producing and causing the Cicatrice) Emplasters are most
fitly and commodiously administered and applied.

Gabriel Fallopius in his Book of Ulcers, Chap. 13. propounds this Unguent,
which he terms de Tutia Magistrale; and he there writes, that of all that he
had ever seen this is absolutely the best. Viz.

Take Oil of Roses, and Oil Omphacine, of each six ounces; Oil of Myrtle, and
the Unguent Populeon, of each three ounces; Plantane Leaves, and Garden
Nightshade, of each two handfuls. Let the Herbs be cut very small, and let them
be mingled altogether for the space of eight days, shaking and stirring them
well together every of those days. Then strain them, and to the straining add,
of Wax four ounces; mingle it with the rest upon the fire, until that they be
al melted: after this mingle them better with a Wooden Spatter, and while it is
yet blood warm, add of the Litharge of Gold or Silver six ounces; Ceruss two
ounces, Tutty prepared two drams, burnt Lead six drams, Brass burnt unto a
redness three drams, Camphire one dram and half: stir them well about in a
Mortar, by the space of two hours.

An Epulotick Powder.

Take the Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, Round Aristolochy, Acorn Cups, Egg-shels
burnt, Frankincense, Dragons blood, of each half an ounce; Lapin Calaminaris
one dram, Litharge two drams, and make a Powder.

This following Emplaster is likewise very useful; the which I have oftentimes
made trial of, and that with very good success. Viz.

Take of the Unguent Diapompholyx, the Emplaster Diapalma, and the Emplastrum
Gryseum, of each one ounce; Gum Elemi two drams, Sugar of Saturn one scruple,
Wax as much as will suffice, and make an Emplaster.

Chap. 3. Of an Ulcer with a Distemper.
BUt it many times so happens, that the ulcer is not solitary and alone, and
pure, but that other preternatural Affects are conjoined therewith; whereupon
also the Cure is varied. And therefore we intend in the next place to treat of
these ulcers in special.

An ulcer with a Distemper.
And first of al, there is indeed oftentimes a distemper conjoined with an
ulcer; which when it happens the Cure of the ulcer is then much hindered. For
in regard that the Nature of the part is the Efficient cause of the Cure of the
ulcer, and that the blood is the matter: if the part be intemperate, neither of
these can be in that right temper that they ought to be, neither can the ulcer
be filled up with flesh, nor closed with a Cicatrice, unless the flesh lying
underneath it be in its natural temper; as Galen tells us in his third Book of
the Method of Physic, Chap. 8.

But what the differences of the Distempers are, we have already acquainted you
in the second Book of out Institutions, Part 1. Chap. 3. which here also have
their place; and there may concur together with the ulcer a difstemper that is
hot, or cold, moist, or dry; a distemper hot and moist; hot and dry; or cold
and moist, cold and dry: and indeed the distemper may be either with or without
matter. But of the distemper with matter we shall speak in the following
Chapters. Here therefore in this Chapter we shall treat only of a Distemper
without matter.

The Causes.
Now such a Distemper as this, either it was present before the rise and
appearance of the ulcer; or else it was excited even in the very time of the
ulceration. But for the Causes of these Distempers, what they are, we have
likewise told you in the place before alleged. Which that we may apply unto
ulcers, a hot distemper in ulcers is excited by a hot Air, by too many
Swathbands and bindings, and by Medicaments that are over hot. And on the
contrary, a cold distemper is caused by the cold Air, from the not sufficiently
fencing and guarding the ulcer with Swathbands and warm Rowlers against the
coldness and injuries of the external Air; as likewise it is excited by cold
Medicaments. The moist distemper is produced by the moist Ambient Air (and
hence it is that in some places the Air is greatly hurtful unto ulcers) and by
the ^fflux of humors; touching which more in che Chapter following. A dry
distemper is caused by a dry Air, by Medicaments that are over drying, and by
the want or scarcity of Aliment. Of Compound Distempers the Causes are likewise
compound.

Signs Diagnostick.
The signs of a hot Distemper are, that heating Causes went before; and also,
that not only the Lips, but even the very flesh it self of the ulcer appears
more red than usual; and the sick person himself perceives a great heat in the
ulcer, which for the most part a pain follows: Cold Medicaments being
thereunto applied do exceedingly refresh and delight, and withal do greatly
benefit the Patient; and on the contrary hot Medicaments are greatly hurtful;
the excrements of the ulcer are sharp and biting.

A cold distemper cooling Causes went before it; in it the Lips of the ulcer
decline unto a whiteness, or unto a wan leaden color, and they are soft; and
hot things are helpful and agreeable unto the ulcer, but cold Medicaments are
on the contrary very hurtful. If the Distemper be moist then moistening Causes
had their precedence, the flesh is soft, and appears lank and flaggy, and
sometimes it grows forth overmuch; the excrements of the ulcer are many; such
things as are drying do benefit, and those Medicaments that moisten do greatly
hurt.

And lastly, A dry distemper is known by this, That drying Causes went before,
the Lips of the ulcer appear dry, and squallid, and hard; the excrements of the
ulcer are but few, or none at al. Moisteners are profitable; but drying
Medicaments cause much hurt unto the sick person.

Prognostics.
1. Whereas (as Galen tells us in his fourth Book of the Method of Physic,
Chap. 1.) for the healing and curing of ulcers the flesh that lies underneath
them ought to be altogether temperate, therefore it is that these ulcers become
hardly curable by reason of the distemper in the part lying next under it.

2. Ulcers with a distemper either hot, or cold, or moist, are cured without
any great difficulty. For with one and the same pains, and at the same time,
and with the very same Medicaments we may both remove the distemper, and cure
the ulcer.

3. But those ulcers that are attended with a dry distemper, are the hardest of
al to be cured; because that the cure of the ulcer being for a while neglected
and laid aside, it behooves the Physician to be altogether intent and busied in
the removal of the distemper.

The Cure.
A Distemper shows that the alteration ought to be by the contraries. Yet
nevertheless the Cure ought so to be ordained, that the ulcer (as far forth as
may be) may not be neglected. If yet nevertheless we cannot be helpful unto
both of them at once, and together, then in this case it behooves us to be most
intent about that that is most urgent. But since that the distemper has in it
the nature of a cause, and that it being present the ulcer cannot be cured; the
distemper is therefore first of al to be removed, unless it be so that with one
labor and pains both the distemper may be removed, and the ulcer cured. If the
distemper be with matter, there will then likewise be need of universals; of
which we shall speak further in the following Chapter.

The Cure of a hot distemper.
But as for the distemper that is without any matter at al (of which we treat
here in this Chapter) and withal hot, this hot distemper indicateth and
points at cooling Remedies, which ought to be milder, or stronger, according
unto the excess of the heat. And albeit the ulcer requires drying Medicaments,
yet nevertheless in regard that the very heat it self by consuming the humors
does render the ulcer more dry, we must therefore make use of the milder and
gentler sort of dryers: but yet notwithstanding these ought withal to be such
as are likewise endued with an astringent power; that so the flux (which the
heat is wont easily to excite) may be inhibited and restrained. Moreover, since
that the heat is wont to produce pain, let the Medicaments therefore be such as
have in them a power withal of mitigating pain, or at least such as are
altogether free from any such faculty of exciting pain; and therefore let them
be such as want the drying and abstersive power. Wherefore those Medicaments
are useful and proper that are made of the Juice and Water of Roses, of
Plantane, Endive, Vinegar, Saunders, Bole-armenick, Nightshade, burnt Lead,
Cadmia, Sugar of Saturn, Oil of Roses, Turpentine, Plantane Water often washed.
Or else let there be administered, the Unguent of Roses, the cooling Unguent of
Galen, the Unguent of Ceruss, of Nightshade, the Santaline Unguent, and the
white Unguent. As for instance:

Take Oil of Roses, Turpentine, Rose water, or Plantane water often washed, of
each one ounce, Barley meal as much as will suffice; and make a Liniment. Or,

Take Lead burnt, and Pompholyx (both of them washed) of each one dram and
half, Oil of Roses, and Violets, of each one ounce and half, Wax a sufficient
quantity; make herewith an Unguent.

The Cooling Medicaments may not only be imposed upon the very Ulcer it self,
but likewise upon the parts that lie nigh unto it, and round about it. And
therefore we may not only anoint those parts with the aforesaid Unguents, but
we may likewise impose the said Unguents upon them with a Swath-band that has
been first w^ in the Juice of Plantane, Lettice, or Nightshade, or the
Decoction made of Myrtles, of Pomegranate rindes, Pomegranate flowers,
Saunders, Plantane, Bolearmenick, and the like, adding unto the Decoction a
sufficient quantity of sharp and sour Wine.

The hot Distemper being removed, the Ulcer (as it is wont to be done) is to be
cured with Sarcoticks: which yet notwithstanding ought to be less hot and dry,
lest that the hot distemper be called back again.

The Cold Distemper of the Ulcer requires heating Remedies; The Cure of a cold
distemper.
such as are the Oil of St. John's wort, Oil of Spiknard, of the Flowerdeluce,
of Camomile, of Rue, of Dill, the Sirup and Honey of Roses, Rosin of the Fir
Tree, of the Larch Tree, the Spirit of Wine, the Cerote of Betony. And indeed
Liniments and Unguents made out of these are imposed upon the Ulcer it self.
But externally, and upon the near adjoining parts there are to be imposed
Fomentations, made and prepared (together with a strong and generous Wine) of
the Decoction of Sage, Hysop, Wormwood, Organy, Rue, Mints, Bay Leaves, and
Camomile flowers; or else let the said parts be anointed al over with those hot
Remedies even now mentioned; or else let the Cerote of Betony be laid thereon.

A dry Distemper requires moysteners. The Cure of a dry Distemper.
And here water a little warm is of good use, if with it the Ulcer, or rather
the parts near unto the ulcer, be besprinkled or fomented. For albeit
Hippocrates in his Book of ulcers teaches us, that we ought not to moisten
universal ulcers, unless it be with Wine; and further adds, that what is dry
comes near unto that that is found, and that that is moist comes not nigh
unto it; and although Galen in his third Book of the Method of Physic, and
Chap. 4. and in his first Book of the Composit. of Medicaments according to the
kinds, and Chap. 6. writes, that no moistening Medicament is fit and
convenient in the Cure of ulcers, and least of all Water: yet nevertheless,
these things are altogether to be understood of an ulcer, as an ulcer; for the
which Moisteners are no ways useful and proper. But if there be conjoined with
the ulcer a dry Distemper that hinders the Cure thereof, then (the Cure of
the ulcer being as it were left for a while) we ought to apply Remedies unto
the dry Distemper, until such time that we find that the part affected has
recovered its pristine due temper.

And lastly, The Cure of a moist Distemper.
a Moist Distemper shows us that drying Remedies must be made use of. And
because that an ulcer does otherwise require drying Medicaments, therefore the
Sarcoticks that we here make use of ought to be stronger than in a simple
ulcer; and such are, the Roots of sweet Cyperus (or English Galangal)
Ho^ehound, the Spume or f^oth of Silver, burnt Lead, Chalcitis, the drossie
scales of Iron and Brass, and such like; out of which Medicaments are to be
provided fitting and proportionable unto the greatness of the distemper of
every ulcer. For by how much the moister the ulcer is, by so much the more
forcibly and strongly drying ought the Remedies (that are required) to be. And
on the Contrary, if the ulcer be but little or nothing moist, then the Remedies
that we administer ought to be more mildly and gently drying; which is done by
adding unto the stronger sort of them, Oil, Rosin, and Wax. For by how much the
more there is of these added unto the former drying Medicaments, by so much the
more is their drying faculty and power abated and weakened; and by how much the
less, by so much the more strong and entire does their drying faculty remain.
The ulcer may first of all be washed (for the cleansing away the filth and
nastiness thereof) with Wine, or Posca, in which Astringents and Dryers (such
as are sweet Cyperus Root, St. John's wort, Wormwood, Roses, Betony, and Sage)
have been boiled: after this some of the aforesaid Medicaments may be strewed
thereon; or else an unguent may be made thereof with O^l and Wax, that without
any warming at all may be extended and spread upon the Liniment (the Greeks
call it Emmoton) and at last upon this we may likewise impose and lay on some
hard Plaster, or Cerote. These Compounds and Emplasters are by Galen recounted
in his first Book of the Composit. of Medicaments, and Chap. 13. Now as for the
manner and measure of this ^^^^ctation or moistening, let it be until the part
b^gin to be lifted up, and to appear very red, and no longer; for we must then
desist from any further washing and besprinkling it. For if we continue thus
doing any longer, then that that has been attracted will be dissip^ted. Now as
for the manner how this warm Water is to be applied unto the part, it is
threefold; and it is performed either by fomentation, or pouring it on, or by
bathing therein. The Fomentation is performed with a Sponge, a Cloth, Hurds, or
Cotton: and this Fomentation is the most commodious and convenient way of
moistening the part affected. As for pouring the warm Water thereon, or bathing
in it, we conceive not that it is any way so fit and proper. And it will be yet
far better, if the part be fomented with Oil and Water together blood-warm,
rather then with Water alone, especially in the Winter time. For although warm
Water may heat the part with an actual warmth; yet nevertheless, after the
fomentation is past, it cools the part, and withal scatters the heat; which
is prevented by mingling Oil therewith, for by this means the Pores of the Skin
are obstructed. After the fomentation, let some Cataplasm that has in it a
Moistening faculty be laid on. As for example.

Take the Leaves of Mallows boiled to a softness, half an ounce; Barley meal,
and Wheat flour, of each two drams; sweet Almonds bruised one dram and half;
Honey boiled one dram, Saffron half a scruple, Swines fat as much as will
suffice, Mingle them well together in a Mortar, and make a Cataplasm.

Or else let the said part be fomented with Oil. Or else let an Unguent be made
for it, of the Juice of Mallows one part, sweet Oil two parts, white Wax as
much as will suffice.

But if the Ulcer be dry, and the part lie under an A^rophy, so that the
pouring of Water upon it will not suffice, we must then (in the first place) do
out endeavor in taking care that the sick Person may be nourished with meats
that afford much good Juice, and which are easily distributed; that so there
may be abundance of aliment administered unto the part affected; and moreover,
if need require, it may be drawn unto the part, by the use likewise of those
Ointments we call Dropaces, or by any other ways and means.

The Distemper being removed, we are then to make use of Sarcoticks (and these
indeed must be such as dry but little) lest that otherwise the part affected
should again in^o it, ^^y Distemper, as Galen well cautioneth us, in the fourth
Book of his Meth. of Physic, and Chap. 1. and therefore together with these
S^rcotick ^ond^rs there ought to be added certain Fats and Oil, and Wax. As,

Take Frankincense, and Mastick, of each one dram; Turpentine one ounce, Oil of
Roses one ounce and half, Wax as much as will suffice, and make a soft Vngent.

Chap. 4. Of an Ulcer with the afflux of humors.
BUt very rate it is, that a Distemper happens alone unto an Ulcer; but for
the most part, the Distemper is accompanied with matter, and the afflux of
humors.

But now how many Causes there are of the afflux of humors, we have already
told you, in the first Part, Chap. 1. touching Tumors in general. To wit, unto
the exulcerated part there slow humors, either from the whole body, or else
from some one particular part generating vicious humors; whilst Nature
instigated and stird on either by the abundant store, or by the quality of the
humor, expels and drives them forth, and heapeth them up in the exulcerated
part; or else when the part (by reason of pain, or heat) attracteth the humors;
or when the humors do of their own accord flow down unto the part that is
situated in a lower place; or else when they are any otherwise moved unto a
weak and ignoble part: all which in what manner and by what means they may
happen, we have acquainted you in the place before alleged.

There is great variety of Excrements that comes from the afflux of the Humors
unto the exulcerated part. Galen in his Book of the times of the whole Disease,
divides these Excrements into Sanies and Pus. Celsus likewise in his fifth
Book, and Chap. 26. besides the blood that is known unto al, determines tha
likewise Sanies and Pus do issue forth from wounds and ulcers; and there he
thus writes: That Sanies is thinner than Blood, and yet variously thick also,
and glutinous, and colored. Pus is most thick, and most white, more glutinous
than Blood and Sanies. There issues forth blood (says he) from a wound that
is recent and new made, or else that has been of some continuance, and is now
upon its healing. The Sanies is betwixt both these times. Pus out of an Ulcer
that is now upon the very point of healing. Again, both Sanies and Pus have
certain species or kinds distinguished by their Greek names. For there is a
certain kind of Sanies, which is termed either Ichor, or Meliceria. And there
is a Pus that is called Elaiodes. Ichor is thin, something white, and it issues
forth of a bad and naughty Ulcer, and especially when a Nerve being hurt, and
Inflammation follows thereupon. Meliceria is thicker and more glutinous,
somewhat whitish, and not much unlike unto white Honey: This likewise issues
out of evil Ulcers, when the Nerves near about the Joints are hurt; and of al
these places it especially flows forth of the Knees. Elaiodes (which is thin,
somewhat white, as it were anointed with a kind of fatness, and not much unlike
unto white Oil) appears in great Ulcers, that are upon the point of healing.
Yet notwithstanding others there are that do otherwise use these names. Yet
nevertheless, if we will speak properly, Pus, with the Greeks Puon, is that
excrement of the ulcer that has its original from Blood, or from the flesh
bruised and dissolved, and it appears in ulcers that are void of al other
excrements, or such as have been just now cleansed from other excrements. All the rest of the excrements that proceed from other humors, although they may be
comprehended under the name of Ichor or Sanies; yet nevertheless the most do
distinguish between Sanies and Sordes, and they call the thin and watery
excrements by the name of Sanies (which some do call Virus or Venom) but the
thicker excrements they call Sordes; so that from the thin excrement the ulcer
is rendered moist, and from the thick it is made sordid and foul.

Signs Diagnostick.
Ulcers with the afflux of humors are known, First, by the Tumor or Swelling
that appears not only in the lips, but likewise in the neet adjoining parts.
And then (next of all) from the pain, which is very grievous and troublesome
unto the sick Person, especially if the Nervous parts be affected. Thirdly,
from the great store of excrements, which is far greater than what it was wont
to be, proportionably according to the magnitude or bigness of the Ulcer. And
lastly, albeit there be likewise administered all things that are necessarily
required unto the Cure thereof, yet we find the Cure of them very difficult; in
regard that the flowing humors hinder the Cure.

Prognostics.
1. All Ulcers (as we said but now) with an afflux of the humors are very hard
to cure; in regard that from the afflux of the humors the Ulcer is rendered
moist, gains growth and increase thereby, swells up, and the pain is likewise
hereby xcited.

2. But by how much the asslux of the humor is greater, and by how much also
the humor that flows thereto is the worse, by so much the more difficult will
it be to Cure the Ulcer.

The Cure.
First of all therefore, in regard that the Ulcer cannot be cured unless the
Flux be removed, therefore the Flux it self, with all its Causes, is to be
taken away; and thereupon, whether in the whole body, or else by the default
and something far amiss in the Liver, or the Spleen, the vicious humor be
generated, the generating of it is to be hindered and prevented, and so much
thereof as is already flown in is in a convenient manner to be prepared and
evacuated; touching which very thing we have already elsewhere spoken at large.
Moreover, lest that the humor should flow unto the affected part, it is to be
drawn back, intercepted, and driven back. Among the Revulsive Aids and
Remedies, in the first place we esteem and account of Issues that are made in
the contrary part; because that the Humor that flows unto the part affected,
they evacuate and empty it forth by some other place. And these Issues are
indeed oftentimes very necessary in old inveterate Ulcers. For when Nature has
been now of a long time accustomed to evacuate the vicious humors by the
exulcerated part, if the ulcer be altogether closed, and that there be any of
the vicious humors heaped up there, it may easily then come to pass that these
humors regurgitate and flow back again into the Veins, and so rush into some
more noble part; but all this may be prevented by a Fonticle or Issue.

But the aforesaid Defensives do intercept; which are to be imposed above the
exulcerated part, in the sound part, toward the root of the Vessels, in those
places where the Veins being bigger do appear more conspicuously; which said
Vessels (through which the humor flows) they strengthen and shut up, and
withal drive back the humor. And they are formed out of those Medicaments that
are dry and astringent; such as are, Bole-armenick, Dragons blood, Flowers of
Red Roses, Pomegranate flowers, the Rinds of Pomegranates, Myrtle, Alum with
the white of an Egg, Oil of Myrtle, Oil of Roses, autere or sharp Wine,
astringent Waters: Out of which Cataplasms or other Medicaments are prepared.

But then unto the part affected it self Repellers are to be applied, that so
the Humors that do as yet fluctuate in the Vessels of the affected part may be
repelled. And therefore the exulcerated part, or the parts near unto it, are to
be washed with Alum Water, the Water or Decoction of Plantane, of Roses, of
Pomegranate flowers, the Roots of sweet Cyperus, Cinquefoyl, and the like: but
the near adjacent parts are to be anointed with the unguent of Bole. And in the
middle of the Ulcer there is a drying Powder to be laid on, of Litharge, Tutty,
Lead, Corals, Bole-armenick, Chalcitis, the white unguent of Rhasis, and
unguent Diapompholyx. In a word, the Sarcoticks ought here to be stronger than
in the simple ulcer that is not pestered with this flux, that so they may
thoroughly dry up the humor that sticks in the pores of the parts; and yet
nevertheless they must be such as are without any mordacity at al, that so
there may be no pain excited. As,

Take Turpentine one ounce, the Suet of a Bull half an ounce, burnt Lead an
ounce, Tutty prepared half an ounce: Mingle them, etc.

But yet nevertheless, if the matter be crude and biting, some Frankincense is
to be added, to further the Concoction of the humor.

Touching the form of the Medicaments this is to be observed, that they be not
of a moist consistence, not Oily and fat, in regard that they do more loosen
and moisten the part, as Galen tells us in his first Book of the Composition of
Medicaments, Chap. 6. and in his fourth Book of the Composition of Medicaments,
Chap. 1. and 13. And yet nevertheless, we are not always to persist in one and
the same kind of Medicaments. For it oftentimes so happens that what did once
or twice do good, may afterward (the humor being any ways dried up) prove
prejudicial and hurtful, by exciting a mor^dication or biting; and there the
Medicament is then to be changed, and one more gentle to be administered in the
place thereof.

After that the ulcer is filled up with flesh, the Cicatrice is at length to be
brought over it by Epuloticks.

Guido in his Tract. 4. Doct. 1. Chap. 2. upon such ulcers as these, advises
us to lay on a thin Leaden Plate with a hole bored through it. For Lead being
thus beaten into a thin Plate cools, and therefore is of special use in such
like ulcers, if a fitting Ligature be added; in regard that it presses forth
the humor out of the part affected, and hinders the influx thereof into the
part exulcerated.

Chap. 5. Of the sordid, putrid, and corroding Ulcer.
THe moist ulcers that are accompanied with an afflux of Humors are for the
most part thereby made sordid and soul (such as the Greeks call Rupara) to wit,
if that thick and snotty excrement (which in special they call Sordes) flow
forth; and putrid, if the said excrement breath forth a grievous and noysom
smell, like unto that of a dead Carcass. For sordid and putrid ulcers (as Guido
in his Tract. 4. Doct. 1. Chap. 3. tells us) differ only in degrees, viz. in
this, That the one is such in a greater, the other in a less degree. For if the
excrements of the ulcer be simply thick and sordid, then we call it a sordid
ulcer; but if they likewise receive a putridness, insomuch that they putrefie
and corrupt the flesh that lies under it, and also the softer parts, so that
there breath forth from thence a noysom and unsavory vapor, then it is called a
putrid ulcer.

The Causes.
The nighest Causes of this ulcer are depraved humors, malignant, and such as
receive an extraneous and moist heat and putridness. And indeed these humors
either they flow unto the part affected from some other place, or else they
become such in the very part it self, by reason of some distemper or debility
in the said part, or by reason of the unseasonable use of moist, and unctuous,
and Emplastick Medicaments; or by reason of the administering thereto those
Medicaments that were too weak in drying, and omitting those Dryers that were
required. And on the contrary, likewise, the same ulcers are made sordid, by
reason of overstrong Abstersives, that even melt and dissolve the sound flesh.

And sometimes the humor acquireth so great an acrimony, that it corrodeth not
only the exulcerated part, but likewise the sound part lying near unto it, and
from day to day creeps wider and broader; and these ulcers are termed
Corrosive, Creeping, and Devouring Ulcers.

Signs Diagnostick.
Sordid ulcers are easily known by the sight; when there appear in them in
great abundance certain Impurities that are viscid and clammy; when the flesh
is become flaggy and soft, and oftentimes grows forth too far. If also there
be added a putridness, and if there be perceived a grievous stinking smell, and
such as is like unto that of a dead Carcass. If the ulcer be corrosive and
creeping, if an itching and pain be felt; and if the ulcer does continually
grow greater.

As for what belongs unto the signs of the Causes; if the humors flow either
from the whole body, or from any one part thereof, this will appear by those
signs that we have already propounded in the precedent Chapter. If the part be
weak, and distempered, this may likewise be known by signs of its own; and
there will then be no appearance at al of any fresh and lively color in the
part. It the Ulcer has been made sordid and foul by the weakness of any
Medicament, then the ulcer appears whitish, and that whiteness encompasseth
about the whole ulcer, like unto a kind of Web. On the contrary, if the ulcer
has been made sordid by a too strong abstersive Medicament, then the ulcer is
made hollow, and afterward from day to day it becomes more red; and there
flows forth a subtle Pus that is not much in quantity, but very hot.

Prognostics.
1. If by reason of the great store, and the thickness of these Sordes or
impurities the transpiration be hindered, then there follows the corruption
of the part; and so of a sordid ulcer it afterward becomes a putrid and
depascent or devouring ulcer.

2. If putridness be increased in the ulcer, at the length a Gangrene and a
Sphacelus follow.

The Cure.
In sordid and putrid ulcers there is first of al great care to be had in the
course of Diet; and the body is to be purged from al bad and vicious humors.
But upon them there is to be put Abstersive and cleansing Medicaments; such as
are Mulsa, Salt Water, and those things that are made of the juice of Smallage,
of Wormwood, Barley meal, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, Myrrh, and Honey of
Roses. But more especially the Spirit of Wine does exceedingly benefit in the
purging and cleansing of al putrid ulcers; which is therefore to be mingled
together with the other Medicaments. As,

Take Lignum Guajacum, and the Rinds of the same, of each one ounce; the Root
of long Aristolochy, the lesser Centaury, Wormwood, and Agrimony, of each one
handful; the Rind of the Frankincense tree, Myrrh, of each half an ounce: boil
them al in a sufficient quantity of Wine; unto the straining add of Honey
scummed four ounces, the Spirit of Wine one ounce: mingle them, etc. Or,

Take the Root of long Aristolochy one ounce; Wormwood, Centaury the less,
Agrimony, of each half a handful; boil them in Wine. Unto the straining add the
flour of the bitter Vetch Orobus half an ounce; the powder of Mirrh two drams;
Honey of Roses two ounces; Spirit of Wine one ounce; Turpentine as much as will
suffice to make a Liniment.

If the ulcer be become sordid by the alone use of Unctuous and Oily
Medicaments, and if that there be no other more grievous cause of the foulness
and nastiness thereof, then the milder and gentler sort of Abstersive
Medicaments may suffice: for the drier sort of Medicaments being administered,
the ulcer is easily cleansed.

But if the ulcer be become sordid and soul from the use of Medicaments that
were overstrong, then the milder are to be imposed; such as are the unguent
Diapompholyx; the stronger sort of them are, unguent Apostolorum, and the
Aegyptiack unguent. Or,

Take the Decoction of Barley one pint; Honey of Roses two ounces, mingle, etc.
Or,

Take Turpentine and Honey of Roses, of each half an ounce; Meal of Barley, and
of the bitter Vetch Orobus, and Mirrh, of each one dram; Powder of Flowerdeluce
root half a dram. Or,

Take the Juice of Smallage, and Wormwood, of each one ounce; of the meal of
Barley, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of each one dram; Turpentine one ounce;
Mirrh two drams; Honey one ounce, and mingle them, etc. Or,

Take Agrimony, Centaury the less, of each half a handful; boil them in Wine:
unto the straining add the juice of Smallage two ounces; Honey of Roses one
ounce; the meal of Barley, and of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of each one dram and
half; Turpentine washed in the Spirit of Wine, two ounces; mingle them: and
make a Liniment.

If the ulcer be putrid, it is to be washed with Oxycrate, Ley, Brine; and upon
them there are to be imposed Medicaments made of the meal of the bitter Vetch
Orobus, the root of long Aristolochy, Squils boiled in Wine, and mingled with
Honey.

But the hollow Ulcer that is sordid and putrid, is to be anointed with the
Unguent of Bolearmenick, or some other Cooler, lest that there be an afflux of
humors excited from the use and biting quality of hot Medicaments.

If the putridness be greater, so that there be cause to fear lest that the
part it self may be corrupted, then we are to make use of the stronger sort of
them, which shall be hereafter declared and set down in the Chapter of the
Gangrene and a Sphacelus.

And lastly, if the Ulcer be Corrosive, and that the sound parts be likewise
corroded; then that that is corrupted ought to be taken quite away, either by
incision, or by Cautery (whether actual or potential, it matters not much)
until that at length we come to the sound flesh, and that the sound and quick
flesh be separated from that which is corrupt and dead. But as touching these
things we shall speak further hereafter in that that follows touching
Phagedaena, and a Gangrene, and Sphacelus.

Chap. 6. Of an Ulcer with Tumors.
FRom the afflux of humors unto the ulcerated part there is not only a
Distemper generated, but there oftentimes likewise happen Tumors.

The Causes.
Now the truth it, that there is no other Cause of these Tumors then what has
been before expressed and explained, touching an Ulcer with the afflux of
humors, and above in the first part of Tumors. But now according to the
diversity of the flowing humors, such is likewise the diversity and variety of
the Tumors that are excited, to wit, an Inflammation, an Erysipelas, Oedema,
and Cancer. But what humors they are that excite those Tumors has been above
declared, where we spoke of Tumors.

Signs.
What kind of Tumor this is, and what danger it produces and threateneth,
appears likewise sufficiently from the places alleged; neither is there any
need at all that we repeat any thing here of what was there said.

The Cure.
The way, Means, and Method of Curing it was there likewise declared; which is
yet nevertheless here in such manner to be instituted, that the Ulcer may not
in the least be neglected. If therefore either the Blood offend in its quantity
and overgreat abundance, or else if vicious humors abound in the body, these
are first of all to be evacuated. In the next place regard is to be had to the
very part affected. After this, Medicaments are to be applied unto the place
affected, which may either discuss the humor that is the Cause of the Tumor, or
else convert it into Pus.

And therefore in an Inflammations there ought to be applied a Cataplasm made
of Quinces boiled with the Powder of Myrtle, or of boiled Lentiles, with the
Meal or flour of Barley, Pomegranate rinds, and red Roses. In the augmentation
of the Ulcer there must be added Camomile flowers, and Bean meal. In the State,
Mallows, Marshmallows, the meal of Linseed, and of Fenugreek. As,

Take Barley meal two ounces, the powder of Camomile flowers one ounce, the
meal of Linseed and of Fenugreek, of each six drams; and make a Cataplasm.

If the Tumor tend toward a Suppuration, the Suppuration is then to be helped
on with a Cataplasm of Mallows, Mashmallows, Linseed, Fenugreek, and Wheat, and
other such like Ripeners. As,

Take Mallows, Marshmallows, of each one handful; boil them in Water until they
be soft, and then bruise them well; When they are bruised, then add of the
flour of Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each one ounce; Wheat flour half an ounce,
Swines fat and Oil of Roses, of each one ounce, and Mingle them.

If an Erysipelas be joined together therewith, externally, and in the near
adjacent places, those Medicaments are to be imposed that we have above
propounded, in the first Part, and Chap. 7. touching an Erysipelas. There is
here very usefully imposed upon the external parts the water of Elder flowers,
and Night shade. We add this only, that sometimes it so happened), that (as in
an Erysipelas) if it be not rightly Cured, and if such things shall be rashly
and unadvisedly administered that obstruct the Pores, so that the humor can by
no means pass forth, nor be dissipated, or that there be caused an over great
asslux of humors, Pustules oftentimes, yea and greater blisters and bladders
are excited in the affected part; out of which when they are broken, there
issues forth a warry Sanies, and the part is afterward exulcerated; and unless
it be rightly handled, the Affect soon degenerateth into long continuing and
malignant Ulcers (especially in the Thighs) yea and oftentimes into a very
Gangrene it self. Which if it should change so to happen, it will then be very
requisite to make use of Coolers, Driers, and Astringents together. As,

Take Platane Leaves one handful, flowers of red Roses half a handful, boil
them to a softness, and then let them be bruised; when they are bruised and
passed through a Hair-sieve, add of Barley meal one ounce and half, the powder
of Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, with the oil of Roses make a Cataplasm.

That that is here especially useful and profitable is the Unguent
Diapompholyx; unto which (if you please) you may yet further add some Sugar of
Saturn.

If the Tumor be cold, then such a like Cataplasm as this may be imposed.

Take the Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, of each one handful; and boil them
in Ley unto a softness, and then bruise them well; then add the powder of
Marshmallow root one ounce and half, Camomile flowers ten drams, Oil of white
Lillies as much as will suffice, and so make a Cataplasm.

If a Cancer be joined with the Ulcer, there can then be no other Cure more fit
and proper then that we have already propounded, touching an ulcerated Cancer.

The rest of what might here be spoken touching these may be seen, if they be
sought for in the first part, touching Tumors.

Chap. 7. Of proud flesh growing forth in Ulcers.
IT happens oftentimes, that in Ulcers there is found proud flesh, and such
as grows forth further then what is fitting; which Malady the Greeks term
Hypersarcosis; which whenever it happens, it hindere^h that the Ulcer
cannot possibly be shut up with a Cicatrice.

The Causes.
Now this happens either from the abundance of blood that flows unto the
part affected; or else by reason that the Sarcotick Medicaments that had been
administered were overweak, and less drying then what was fit. If the former of
these be the Cause, then the flesh it self will be in a right temper, only there
will be too much thereof. If overmuch flesh proceed from the latter of the two
Causes, then the flesh will not be sound and solid, but loose and Spungy.

The Cure.
As for what concerns the Cure, if the first happen, fasting and spareness of
Diet is then to be enjoined unto the sick Person, and dry Medicaments are to be
imposed. But if the flesh begin to grow proud by reason of the use of Sarcotick
and detersive Medicaments that were in their own Nature overweak, then we ought
to make use of the stronger sort of Detersives, and such as produce a
Cicatrice; and if there be occasion, even septick Medicaments likewise. And
such are, a Sponge burnt, dry Liniments imposed, the rind of Frankincense,
Galls, Aloes, Tutty, and burnt Alum.

And indeed in the Toes, when by reason of the compression of the excrescent
Nails the flesh begins to be luxuriant, so that a man can neither put on his
Shoes, not go without pain, then burnt Alum alone sprinkled thereon will take
away the said flesh. The stronger Medicaments, are, the rust and scouring of
Brass, Chalcitis, Mercury precipitate, Mercury sublimate. And therefore
whenever there is need but of litttle drying, then let there be imposed dry
Liniments, or else such as have been soaked and well wet in this following
Decoction.

Take Galls, the rinds of Frankincense, and Mastick, of each one dram; Flowers
of red Roses, Pomegranate flowers, and Rue, of each half a handful, Alum two
drams; boil them al in Wine. Or,

Take Galls, Pomegranate rinds, a Sponge burnt, of each alike; and make a
Pounder to be strewed thereon.

There is more especially useful this green water following, which being
besprinkled upon the luxuriant flesh, or else imposed thereon by Liniments, it
takes away the said flesh without any pain at all, and generateth a Cicatrice.

The Green Water.

Take Alum Crude, and Green, of each two drams, boil them in eighteen ounces of
Wine, until a fourth part be wasted; then strain it; and then take Camphyre one
dram: dissolve it in one ounce of the Spirit of Wine, and add it unto the
former.

The stronger are these:

Take Plantane water, and Rose water, of each five ounces, Mercury sublimate
one dram; let them boil, and then strain them through a thick Linen Cloth. In
the straining let the Liniments (being cut into diverse pieces) be laid to soak,
or the Linen Cloth; and let it be again thoroughly dried, and reserved for use.
Or,

Take Galls, Pomegranate flowers, of each one dram; Dragons blood, Ceruss, the
rust of Brass, of each half a dram; burnt Alum, Frankincense and Myrrh, of each
one dram; Make hereof a Powder.

Chap. 8. Of an Ulcer that is wan, and Callous.
IT sometimes so happens that the lips of the Ulcer are made hard, wan, and
Callous. Now this is caused by those things that dry overmuch, or by the
cooling of the external Air, or by the afflux of hot humors.

But from what cause soever it happen, the Ulcer cannot be cured, neither can
it be closed up with a Cicatrice, unless that hardness be first taken away, and
the exulcerated part be reduced unto its natural state. And therefore if the
hardness be less, then Emollients and Discussives are to be made use of, such
as are of the Mucilage of Linseed, of Fenugreek, Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of
Earthworms, the fat of a Hen, and the fat of Ducks, etc. As,

Take the Mucilage of the seed of Marshmallows, of Fenugreek, of each two
drams; Turpentine one ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds, and of white Lilies, of each
three drams; Wax as much as will suffice, and make a soft Unguent.

The simple Diachylon Emplaster is likewise here very good, and of singular use.

But now if the hardness be greater, and that it yield not, neither give way
unto Emollient and Discussive Medicaments, after what manner such a like ulcer
ought then to be cured, Galen teaches us, when in the fourth Book of his
Method of Physic, and Chap. 2. he thus writes: When the lips of the Ulcer
(says he) are only somewhat discolored, or made a little harder than ordinary,
they are then to be cut out even unto the sound flesh. But whenas this Affect
has made a further progress, then it falls under deliberation, whether all that which is seen to appear preternaturally be to be cut forth, or else rather
in time, and as soon as may be to be cured. And it is without doubt, that in
this case the will and mind of the Patient is to be consulted and followed. For
some of them had rather be cured without being cut, though it be a long time
first: Others again there be that will be content to undergo any pain or
hardship, so that they may be soon and suddenly cured. For such like ulcers are
most speedily (yea and most commodiously likewise, and fitly) cured, if the
hard and wan flesh be cut forth (even unto the sound) with a fit and convenient
Instrument. For both the pain is shorter, neither is there any bad and hurrful
quality introduced into the part, as there is by corroding Medicaments. For the
hardness thereof is likewise very fitly wasted and removed by an actual Cautery.

But if the sick person will endure neither incision, nor burning, the hard
flesh is then to be wasted away, and consumed by such like corroding
Medicaments as we have elsewhere propounded. The green Water that we described
in the foregoing Chapter is likewise of singular benefit; and so is the Powder
also there mentioned. The Oil of Vitriol is one of the stronger Remedies.

Yet nevertheless, we must be very cautious how we use the stronger sort of
Medicaments in the Nervous parts: and Defensive Medicaments are to be applied
unto the near parts, lest that there be a pain excited, and a new afflux of
humors caused.

If the lips of the ulcer be leaden colored, wan, and black, they are then to
be sacrified, and the vicious blood is to be drawn forth: afterward a dry
Sponge is to be laid thereon; and at length drying Medicaments, as the green
Water, or the Powder described in the precedent Chapter, or the like Medicament.

Chap. 9. Of Ulcers that are hollowed and furrowed.
IF Pus and Sanies be long contained in the Apostem, or Impostume, and shall in
its own nature be sharp, or else shall become such by its long continuance
there, it then makes (as it were) Conney-burroughs, and forms a hollow nook,
by the Greeks called Colpas. But touching these nooks and furrows (in regard
that we have already spoken thereof above, in Part 1. Chap. 6.) it will be
altogether needless here to add any thing more unto what has been there
delivered. Only we shall yet here acquaint you with some few things by way of
Advertisement. The first is this, That hollow and furrowed Ulcers may not only
be so bred, but the sinuous and nooky ulcers may oftentimes likewise succeed
wounds; which especially happens by the negligence of the Surgeons, and
this very frequently chances in the Thighs. For if such like places where the
Muscles are larger the wound be not so ordered that the Pus may be expelled
forth by the orifice of the wound, it then by its weight descends according
to the guidance of the Muscles, and there raises furrows and Conney-burrows
(as the Latin Physicians term them) and more especially if it has been long
detained, and be thereby become sharp and corroding. And in such a like ulcer,
since that all the Pus can hardly be expelled forth by the Ligature that is
toward the upper Orifice, it will therefore be necessary to open a Sinus or nook
in the lower part; which being done, and a way and passage made for the issuing
forth of the Pus, such wounds are afterward easily cured.

And therefore in the second place it is to be noted, That we are to use such an
expressive Ligature (lest that, whether in Wounds or in Ulcers Fistula's be
generated) to wit, which begins from the very bottom of the wound or ulcer,
and ends in the orifice thereof; this notwithstanding always provided, That
by how much the nearer it approaches unto the Orifice, by so much the looser
ought it to be.

Thirdly, You are to be hereof admonished, That in regard such like sinuous
ulcers become sordid and foul, for the most part, that therefore the Spirit of
Wine is very fitly mingled together with other Medicaments, because it has in
it an excellent property and virtue to cleanse and purify such like ulcers as
these. Franciscus Valeriola has a singular and happy way of Curing this
dangerous nooked or furrowed ulcer, in the fifth Book of his Observations,
Observe. 1. and another in the same place, Observe. 7. where they may both be
seen. But yet nevertheless I hold it not amiss here to acquaint you with those
Medicaments he there makes use of; for as for Section (or cutting) he would
not for many reasons by any means allow of, or appoint it. First of all (says
he) after Vniversals, and a special regard had unto the whole body, we coming
unto the cure of an Ulcer in one that was extremely afflicted therewith, found
(in regard that it was sordid and foul, and hollow and sinuous) that it wanted
cleansing and filling up. But in regard that the Cavity could not be filled up,
without first cleansing the Ulcer, therefore the Ulcer was first of al to be
cleansed and purified: for an Ulcer can neither be filled up, nor agglutinated,
unless it be pure and clean, as Galen tells us. And therefore to cleanse away
the thin Ichorous excrements and impurities (with which the Ulcer was extremely
pestered) we proceeded in the use of many several Remedies, still proceeding
from the weaker unto the stronger.

Take the Decoction of whole Barley one quart; Honey of Roses six ounces; mingle
them, and make an injection thereof into the inside of the Ulcer with a
straight Syringe or injection pipe; this without any mordacity at al cleanses
and washes away the filth and pollutions of those thin ichorous excrements of
any Ulcer. But when we had discovered that there was present much both thick
and sordid Sanies, we then found that there was great need of a stronger
cleansing. And thereupon we made use of this other stronger and more prevalent
Remedy, to wit, mingling therewith the aforesaid Aegyptiack Unguent, and withal
mingling a small proportion of Aqua vitae, viz. Two ounces. Sometimes, and after
some certain days when we had made use of this second Decoction, and yet had
not sufficiently gained our desire as touching the detersion and cleansing of
the Ulcer, we then thought good to make use of this notable and effectual
Injection.

Take Lignum Sanctum poudered very small, and the bark of the same Wood, of each
two ounces; long Aristolochy, Centaury the less, Wormwood, Agrimony, Horstail,
Olive Leaves, Myrtle Leaves, Pimpernel, and the greater consound, of each one
handful; the rinds of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Sarcocol, of each half an ounce;
sweet scented red Wine tree pints; Honey scummed four ounces; let there be a
decoction of them al; of the straining make an injection within the Ulcer, at
the very time of injection add thereto one ounce of the best Aqua vitae for
every dose, or as often as you administer the Decoction. Where by the way this is
worthy your taking notice of, and we then found it by observation, that the
Aqua vitae (together with the aforesaid Decoction) is most powerful, and most
efficacious in cleansing sordid Ulcers that are without biting, and in
thoroughly drying of them, and in promoting the agglutination and sodering
thereof. But if together with the aforesaid Decoction you add of the best Aqua
vitae one quart, and so destil them in a Glass Alembick, in Balneo Mariae,
there is from thence a most admirable Liquor to be extracted and drawn forth,
both for the cleansing of al sordid and hollow Ulcers, as also for the
agglutinating and closing of them up: which we at that time frequently found by
experience. For truly great and admirable is the power and efficacy of Aqua
vitae in the cleansing and glewing together again (as it were) of Ulcers, and
especially those of the Nervous parts (as we then discovered by daily
experience and observation) so that we know nothing that is better for that
purpose. But when the time was come that we thought fit to restore in the Ulcer
the flesh that was lost, we then made use of this other injection; the virtue
and faculty whereof is, both moderately to cleanse, and to fill up the Cavity
with flesh; whereupon it may deservedly be styled a Sarcotick Remedy.

Take Plantane Leaves two handfuls; Agrimony, Herb Robert, Cinquefoyl Leaves,
of each one handful; the tops of Wormwood, in number three; of both the
Consounds, Horstail, Ceurach (or Spleenwort) St. John's wort, of each half a
handful; Betony one handful; make a Decoction in water: in the end of the
Decoction add, of red astringent Wine one quart, the Leaves of red Roses, and
Myrtle Leaves, whole Barley, of each two pugils or small handfuls; take of the
straining two quarts: unto which add, Beaumeal one ounce, of the bitter Vetch
Orobus half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich, Sarcocol, Rosin of the Pine Tree,
of each one ounce; Myrrh, round Aristolochy, of each six drams; Florentine
Flowerdeluce half an ounce, Honey of Roses four ounces: mingle them, and of
this Liquor make an injection within the Ulcer; for it fitly cleanses and
generateth flesh, as we may perceive by the Nature of the Ingredients; and so
the event taught us. After the injection within the Ulcer, we then very
commodiously made use of this following Unguent, with tents, Spleen-like long
Plasters, etc.

Take Juice of Plantane four ounces; Agrimony two ounces; Wormwood one ounce,
^ed Wine four ounces, Oil Omphacine of Roses one pint: boil them together unto
the consumption of the Wine and the Juyces; in the end thereof adding of Bean
meal two ounces and an half, of the bitter Vetch Orobus one ounce and half, of
Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocol, Rosin of the Pine Tree, of each one ounce;
Choice Myrrh, Flowerdeluce of Florence, and round Aristolochy, of each half an
ounce. Turpentine washed in white Wine three ounces, Honey scummed four ounces;
Wax as much as will suffice: make an Unguent; with the which after that we had
caused Liniments to be filled; we then ordered and appointed them to be imposed
upon the part affected.

After the cleansing of the Ulcer was perfectly finished, we then with very
good success made use of this Sarcotick Powder likeswise within the Ulcer:

Take Elect and choice Aloes two drams; Frankincense, the Rinds of the same,
Myrrh, and Sarcocol, of each one dram; Roots of the Florentine Flowerdeluce
four scruples: make of al these a most small and sine Powder, and apply it unto
the hollow Ulcer, to fill up the Cavity thereof.

But we likewise (after those aforesaid Remedies) thought good to make use of a
drying Fomentation, fitted for the Ulcer, and such as was very requisite and
proper for the producing of the Cicatrice.

Take the Leaves of Plantane two handfuls, Wormwood half a handful, the Leaves
of the Olive, of the Mastick or Lentisk Tree, the tops of the Bramble bush, of
each one handful; the Flowers Leaves of Betony half a handful; the Flowers of
Camomile, Melilote, St. John's Wort, Stichados, Cassidony or French Lavender,
red Roses, Rosemary flowers, the Leaves and Grains of Myrtle, of each one
handful; boil al these in a sufficient quantity of Water; and add in the end of
red astringent Wine one pottle: make a Fomentation herewith for the part
affected, and apply it twice a day. But when as this had first of all appeared
plainly to be less effectual than was expected, and not to be sufficiently
helpful; we then made use of this other that follows. Viz.

Take Centaury the less one handful; red Roses one pugil and an half; Myrrh
grossly poudered three drams; Roch Alum one ounce; boil them all together in
thick red Wine for a fomentation; and then let them be filtatred, and hard
pressed, according to the usual manner.

An Astringent and Epulotick Injection followed upon this Fomentation.

Take the Leaves of Plantane, of new Ivy, the Flowers of red Roses, of each one
pugil; the grains of Myrtle shaken well together one pugil and half; the Leaves
and Flowers of Centaury the less, of each one pugil; Roch Alum one ounce;
Pomegranate Rinds one ounce and half; let them boil all together in red Wine,
and then strain them. Of the straining we ordered them (with a sraight Syringe,
Squirt, or Injection pipe) to cast into the Ulcer, the Ulcer being first of all
thoroughly cleansed and purified: which cleansing was indeed wholly effected and
wrought by the foreordained Injections, but more sepecially likewise (and most
speedily) with this following Unguent; for it has an admirable and excellent
virtue in the cleansing of Ulcers from all their thin Ichorous excrements and
impurities: the Ingredients that it consists of are these that follow:

Take Juice of Smallage half a pint (this is admirable in cleansing of Ulcers)
the best Honey four ounces; Barley meal two ounces; of the bitter Vetch Orobus
half an ounce; Choice Myrrh two drams; Turpentine one ounce and half; let them
be boiled al together, and make an Unguent; in which let Linen Rags be well wet,
and then put into the Cavities of be Ulcer; in purges Ulcers most excellently,
and without any biting at al.

For the filling up of the Ulcer with flesh, we made use of this following
Emplaster:

Take Litharge of Gold six ounces; Oil of Roses Omphacine one pint and half;
Vinegar of Roses half a pint; boil them together with a gentle fire
(continually stirring them about with a Spatter) until they shall have gotten a
blackish color, and the consistence or thickness of soft Bituminous Clay, and a
Cerot. Make a long Roller-like Emplaster, of which make an Emplaster fit for
the Ulcer, and lay it upon the Ulcer. But in the end and conclusion of the
Cure, we made use of the Emplaster Diachalcitis with the Emplaster of
Diapompholyx: in the curing of which so great and hollow an Ulcer (after the
thoroughly cleansing of the same) we found by good experience, that there was
nothing could be better and more available then the applying of pillows or
bolsters (a little thicker than ordinary) round about the said Ulcer; and so
binding these bolsters on very hard strongly to press down into the flesh lying
underneath that other flesh that lay gaping far disjoined from it: for (as
Experience then taught us) this (if there be any thing that will do it) does
most especially procure agglutination and sodering together.

Chap. 10. Of Fistula's.
FIstula's differ from a Sinuous and furrowed Ulcer only in this, to wit, That
they are moreover callous and hard; and therefore here after sinuous Ulcers we
think it fit to treat o Fistula's. If the Sinus or nook be not speedily cured,
the Pus will moreover cause furrows, such as we usually term Coney-burrows; and
the part will contract a callousness, or thick insensible brawniness; and it will
become so hard that it can by no manner of means be agglutinated and united
again unto the parts lying underneath; which Malady is after this called a
Fistula. For a Fistula is a Sinus (nook, or furrow) narrow and long, or a
Sinuous ulcer, that is (for the most part) narrow and callous; and thereupon
such as will hardly admit of any Cure.

The Causes.
But now these Fistula's for the most part have their original from Impostumes.
For these (either by reason of the impurity of the body, or the too great
abundance of naughty humors) if they be permitted long to continue; or else if
by the unskilfulness of the Physician they shall be over long delayed, and not
well cured, the Pus then causing the aforesaid Coney-furrows, they will at length
become very deep, and withal callous, and of an insensible brawny hardness.

The Differences.
There is moreover of Fistula's very great variety and diversity. For of these
some are profound and deep, others of them straight, and others lie
transversly, and overthwart the flesh: again, some of them are simple, single,
and alone, but others of them taking their rise and beginning from one and the
same orifice are double, or even likewise threefold, or oftentimes they have
very many Sinu's, or hollow nooks: and lastly, some of them tend unto and
terminate in a Bone, others tend unto a Nervous part; and a third sort of them
^ven unto the Veins or Arteries.

Signs Diagnostick.
But now these Fistula's (in the general) are known especially by the Probe or
Instrument that is conveyed into the Sinus (to discover the depth thereof)
which how it tends and passes along, and how deeply it penetrateth it easily
seen and discerned. And withal when the searching Instrument is drawn forth, we
may then easily learn, whether the Fistula be moist, or whether it be dry. But
if it be oblique, so that the Instrument cannot pass along in a direct and
straight manner, we then are wont to put in a little long plummet of Lead, or
rather (which is much the better) a Wax Candle, that may be turned about any
way. And moreover, that flesh that lies round the Fistula appears to be
white, dry, hard, and without pain; or else if there be any pain, it is very
little and moderate, unless, happily it be near unto a Nerve; and the Pus that
issues forth is crude and raw, and sometimes likewise very stinking and
loathsome. But now whether or no there be one, or more of these Sinus's, this is
altogether to be discovered by the Probe or searching Instrument; which the Pus
likewise that is now and then sent forth will sufficiently evidence. For if
there flow forth more Pus then what probably can be contained and generated in
one only Sinus, or hollow Nook; or if when the sick Person removes and
changes his seat, that Pus that before was stopped shall begin again to flow
forth; this may be a sure and certain sign and token that there are here
present more then one of the Sinus's and that the Fistula penetrateth very
deep. But if there are more orifices of the Fistula, then we cannot so easily
discover by the Instrument, whether there be one only Fistula, or more: but
then by a Syringe, Pipe, or Squirt, liquor is to be injected by one orifice;
the which liquor if it flow forth again by all the orifices then it is al but
one Fistula: but if it issues not forth at all the orifices, then there are
more Fistula's then one. And this is likewise discovered by the color of that
that issues forth: for if that humidity that flows forth by all the orifices
be of one and the same color, it is then a sign that the Fistula is but one;
but if it be of a different color, it is then an argument that there are more
Fistula's then one. But how far the Fistula's reach, and in what part they end,
it may thus be known. If that which is touched by the Instrument be soft, and
the Pus that flows forth be white, and in great abundance, it then shows
that the Fistula sticks in the Skin alone. But if it penetrate and reach even
unto the Nerve, then there will be great pain perceived when the depth of the
Sinus is searched unto; and the Pus that is evacuated is indeed white, but then
it is very thin, and in less plenty; and the action of that Member unto which
the Nerve tends, is rendered more difficult. If it penetrate unto a Bone,
there is then present a pain in the very time of making the trial and
discovery; and that unto which the lowest end of the searching Instrument
reaches is hard, and makes resistance. And the Bone is then indeed found and
perceived to be equal and smooth, if it be not as yet become rotten and
corrupted; but if putridness has seized even upon the Bone it self also, it
then appears rough and unequal unto the touch; and the Pus flowing forth
waxes black, and is of a very ill savor. But if the Sinus reach unto a Vein,
or an Artery, and this Vein or Artery be not indeed corroded and eaten through,
then there is something issuing forth that is like unto Feces or Dreggs. For the
Blood sweating through by the Pores of a Vein, or an Artery, is mingled
together with the humidity of the Ulcer; and thence it is, that what flows
forth appears feculent, or dreggy. But if the Vein or the Artery be eaten
through, then sometimes there will blood break out, and flow forth: and this will
be very red, and with a kind of leaping or dancing motion, and with a tickling,
if it come from an Artery; but more thick and dark, if it issue forth from a
Vein.

Prognostics.
1. Simple or single Fistula's that are yet but new begun, which are in the
fleshy parts alone, not deep, in young vigorous bodies, and such as are of a
good Constitution, are easily cured; but more difficultly those wherein many
parts are corroded, and eaten quite through, such as are old and inveterate,
without any sense and feeling, deep, full of turnings, and having diverse and
different hollow Nooks; such as are nearly situate unto noble and principal
Members; and when they are in old and decayed bodies, and such as abound with
ill humors.

2. And so are those (in like manner) very dangerous, and hardly cured (or
rather indeed altogether incurable) that reach even unto the heads of the
Muscles, unto the Veins, unto the Arteries, unto the Nerves, the Bones, the
Joints, and the very Vertebrae of the Back; that reach and extend unto the
Cavities of the Bellies, as the Thorax, or the Abdomen or Paunch; or even such
as penetrate likewise unto the very Bowels themselves, as the Lungs, Womb,
Intestines, and also unto the very Bladder it self. For why, such like
Fistula's as these, either they will not bear nor admit of any Medicaments, or
it may happen likewise that the Medicaments cannot possibly attain and reach
unto them.

3. Yea some certain Fistula's there are that indeed ought not to be cured; to
wit, such as are old and inveterate, as having been of long continuance, and
such as are removed from the noble parts, and such as by the superfluous and
vicious humors have now of a long time been accustomed to be purged and emptied
forth. For such like Fistula's as these (in regard that they preserve men from
diverse Diseases) are by no means to be closed up; because that when they are
shut up they cause and procure very many Diseases; as Hippocrates has it, in
his sixth Book of Epidem. Comment. 3. Text 39. But on the Contrary, if they
shall at any time chance to be closed and shut up, they are then again to be
opened.

The Cure.
Now the Cure of these Fistula's is twofold; one the true and perfect Cure; the
other only palliative (as they call it) or imperfect, to wit, such as wherein
the Fistula is dried up within, and consolidated without, the Sinus
nevertheless still remaining. Which kind of Cure Galen seems to hint unto us
in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 4. where he has these words. Yet nevertheless
(says he) the Sinus is straightened and closed together, as being thoroughly
dried by the Medicaments; insomuch that the part may seem to have attained unto
a soundness no way to be found fault with. For evermore indeed, if any one
continually using an exact and accurate Diet comes by this means to have his
Body very healthful and sound, and very free from superfluities, the Sinus then
remains restrained and kept in. But so soon as any superfluity is collected,
and gotten together, it is again filled up; and so there appears to be again
the same Impostume that there was from the very first; and so again it is
evacuated (as is fitting) with Medicaments, and then it is dried, and by these
means it is restrained and kept in; and all this is evermore done with much
more ease unto the sick Party, then in those that have the Impostume newly
begun in them. For neither do the parts that are so far divided and separated,
yet feel, or are in the least sensible of pain: for now although they are far
distant one from another, yet nevertheless they are very speedily filled up,
the Sinus easily and soon receiving that that flows unto it. And the truth
is, Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente is of Opinion, that this kind of Cure
is not altogether to be despised, and contemned; For sometimes (as he writes)
this succeeded well unto him, although not always. Now the Cure is performed,
the body being first of all purged, and a fitting Course of Diet ordained; and
afterward the Tents and Fistula being taken away, and a new Sponge thoroughly
soaked in a liquor that is strongly drying being applied and fast bound upon
the place; such as is the water of hot Baths, Ley, Limewater, and the like.
For by this means the mouth of the Fistula shuts again together, so that the
Fistula may seem whole and sound; which indeed sometimes by the benefit only and
operation of the Native heat does altogether coalesce and grow together again;
but for the most part it remains closed up only so long as there are no
superfluous humors collected and gotten together in the body, for after that
there is any humor again gotten together in the Sinus, the Fistula is likewise
again opened.

But now the true and genuine Cure of a Fistula is thus accomplished.
Universals in the first place are not to be omitted, but a Diet is rightly to
be instituted, and the body thoroughly purged from all superfluous humors; and
especial care is to be taken, that there may no more of the humor flow in unto
the part affected. Which being done, before we descend unto Topical Remedies,
there be some that administer certain Potions that may dry the Interior parts,
and strengthen them, and that may prepare the Fistula for Consolidation, and
may thoroughly purge it. Of such like Potions Tragaultius has described two:
the former whereof is this.

Take Agrimony three parts, Plantane two parts, Olive Leaves one part; Cut them
small, and bruise them well, and then boil them in white Wine; let the sick
Person drink hereof a small Cup full (three or four ounces) every day. Or,

Take Osmund (or Water-Fern) three parts, Gentian two parts, Centaury one part;
boil them in the same manner (as aforesaid) in white Wine; which Potion
expels and drives forth likewise Bones that are corrupted. Others there are
that commend this Potion.

Take Sanicle (i. e. Bears Ears, or French Couslips) Mugwort, Speedwel, Saracen
Consound, Winter-green, of each one ounce; Savine one ounce and half, Hors-tail
half an ounce; boil them in white Wine, and make a Potion; which if we will at
any time make stronger and more operative, we may then (in the drinkng of it)
unto each Dose add and mingle therewith half a scruple of Oculus Cancri (or the
Crabs Eye) prepared.

For Savine, and Crabs Eyes, are of singular use and benefit in the expelling
and driving forth of corrupted Bones, Pus, putrified Veins, and the like. Or,

Take Saracen Consound, Sanicle, Speedwel, of each one ounce; Tormentil Root
half an ounce; Avens, and Carduus Benedictus, of each an ounce and an half;
boil them in Wine.

Afterward, before any thing else be done, we must do the utmost of our
endeavor that the callous hardness and brawnishness may be removed. But now
whenas the narrowness of the orifice of the Fistula does for the most part
hinder the application of those Medicaments that are to be administered for the
removal of the callous hardness, it is therefore to be dilated: which may be
done either by fire, or by an Iron Instrument; or else more commodiously, and
without pain likewise, by long sharp tents that are made of Sea-Spunge, the
pithy substance of the Elder-tree, the Roots of Gentian, Aristolochy, Briony,
or even likewise of the wild Rape thoroughly dried. For these things being
formed into a Pyramidal figure, and put into the Fistula the sharp-pointed end
downward, they soak up the humidity of the Fistula, and by this means they are
rendered the thicker, and so by little and little they dilate and widen the
orifice, without any pain at al. Which things are sometimes likewise soaked and
anointed over with such Medicaments as are in their own nature fit to take away
the callous hardness, when the callus hinders the dilatation. For there
arises a callousness (especially in the external orifice of the Fistula) to
wit, in the very skin it self, it being such as easily becomes hard, and such
as is made thicker than the flesh, that is softer, and easily receives in the
excrements, and the humors that flow thereunto. Yet nevertheless the very flesh
it self sometimes likewise gets a callous hardness in the cavity of the
Fistula. The callousness that is in the orifice of the Fistula is sufficiently
apparent both unto the touch, and to the sight. But now whether there be any
callousness likewise in the Sinus it self, this may be discovered by the
searching Instrument. For when the Instrument is put into it, there is then
perceived very little or no pain, and there is no blood at al issues forth,
but there is a certain hardness perceived, if a Callus be present. Which if it
be absent then there is a great pain excited, the blood flows forth, and
there is no hardness at all perceived.

But now wheresoever this Callus is, it is to be removed; which is done, either
by Medicaments, or by Cutting, or by the Fire. But then likewise Medicaments
are to be administered, sometimes such as are mild and moderate (and such are
Emollients and Digestives) and sometimes again those that are stronger, and such
are Detersives or Cleansers: and lastly, now and then also, the strongest sort
of al, and such are Causticks. In those that are but young, and in their
youthful age, and that have their flesh soft and tender, here Emollients and
Digestives only are sufficient, which do dissipate the said Callus, and the
matter that is impacted and stuffed into the part that constituteth and causes
the Callus; unto which we may likewise (if there be occasion) add and mingle
therewithal some of the Abstersive and Cleansing Remedies. And such are the
ashes of Figs mingled with the fat of a Goose; the Decoction of Fern Root, of
Agrimony, of Olive leaves, the great Diachylon, and the Unguent Apostolorum.
But for the most part there will be need of the stronger and more forcible
Remedies, which by cleansing, or likewise by burning do waste and consume the
aforesaid Callus. The stronger sort of Medicaments are, the Root of Spondylima
(we usually call it Cow-parsnep, or Meadow-parsnep) peeled and pared round
about, Asphodel Root, Snakeweed, Briony, the Decoction of Lupines, and
especially (above al) the lesser Centaury. There are some likewise that make
use of the Root of black Hellebor; and this they put for three days into the
Fistula. But Antonius Chalmeteus pre-admonisheth us touching this Root, and he
tells us that it is a very unsafe and dangerous Remedy, and especially if the
Fistula be in any part of the Thorax or Chest. For when on a time he himself
(as he says) had once, and but once, filled with Hellebor a Fistula that was
in the Spina Dorsi, near unto the Region of the Heart, the sick person very
often fell into fainting and swounding fits. Those things that are yet stronger,
are, the Aegyptiack Unguent, Vitriol burnt, Vitriol precipitate, the Oil of
Sulphur, Trochisques of Minium, Chalcitis, and that which by the Apothecaries
is called Misy, and Sorry; out of which there may be made Compositions for the
present use. Celsus in his fifth Book writes that this following is found by
good trial and experience to be of singular use; and Paulus Aegineta does the
like also in his fourth Book, and Chap. 49. in which place we may see more
hereof.

Take of the Rust and soil of Brass twelve drams; Ammoniacum two drams; Let the
Ammoniacum be dissolved in Vinegar, and the aforesaid Soil of Brass therewith
mingled. Or,

Take strong Ley four ounces; the Decoction of Lupines one ounce; Honey of
Roses strained one ounce and half; Alum half an ounce; and mingle them. If we
mind to add any further virtue and strength thereto, to make it the more
operative, we may then add half a dram of Precipitate Mercury. Or,

Take the best Wine Vinegar three parts; of the oldest Oil two parts; Litharge
one part; let the Litharge be bruised in a Mortar with Vinegar: and afterward
let them boil al together, until they have gotten both the color and
consistence of Pitch; of which we are then to form long sharp Tents, for the
present purpose. Or,

Take Litharge half a pound; boil it in Vinegar and Rose water; and then strain
and filtrate it. Afterward,

Take Calcined Tartar as much as will suffice; dissolve it in destilled Vinegar:
Mingle the Waters, and make thereof that they term Lac Virgineum, or Virgins
Milk. Or,

Take of the Egyptiack Unguent half an ounce; Sublimate half a dram; Ley one
ounce; Rose Water two ounces; Plantane Water four ounces; and then let them
boil a little.

The green Water above mentioned and described is likewise very useful.

But yet nevertheless, if the narrowness and depth of the Fistula hinder the
fit application of these Medicaments (as for the most part it so falls out)
then the said Fistula is either wholly to be opened, or else the Medicaments
are to be injected even unto the very bottom thereof. When you have a mind to
open the Fistula, then let the searching Instrument be first of al conveyed
thereinto, and so let it be opened upon the said Instrument. But if it be not
thought fit to open the whole Fistula, then Medicaments are to be injected, and
these must be either liquid or dry. The liquid are injected by a Funnel or
Squirt; and they are to be washed with Ley, Mulsum, Seawater, Limewater, the
Water of hot Baths, Aqua vitae, or the Spirit of Wine; of which last this is by
the way to be observed, that if it be mingled together with other convenient
Medicaments, it is then of singular use and benefit in the cleansing and drying
of sordid Ulcers; as we may see in Valeriola his fourth Book, Observat. 10. and
in his fifth Book, Observe. 1, 7, 8.

But the dry are made into a Powder, and blown into the Ulcer by a Quil put
into the mouth of the Fistula; especially if the Fistula be but short and
within the flesh: but if it be long, it may likewise be opened on the opposite
part, that so on both sides the Medicament may be injected. Where this is not
to be passed over in silence (touching which we likewise gave you notice
before, in the Cure of Sinus) that we use our utmost endeavor, that the orifice
of the Fistula may be open downward toward the Inferior parts, that so the
Humors may the more freely flow forth; or if it be not open, then in that very
place the Fistula is to be opened, unless there be some great and weighty
impediment to hinder the same.

The opening of a Fistula.
But when notwithstanding all the Medicaments the Fistula yields not, neither
gives place at al unto the most prevalent Remedies that have or can be
administered; and that sometimes in this case the operation of the hands brings
more assistance, help, and benefit, we are sometimes likewise to betake our
selves unto the Iron Incision Knife, and the fire it self. To wit, the whole
Sinus is to be opened; which yet nevertheless it will not be safe for us to
attempt in those Fistula's that reach unto the great Arteries, or the Nerves,
or the Tendons, or the Membrane that girdeth in the Ribs, or any other parts
that are of the like Nature with these. But whenever this opening shall be
judged fit and feasible, the Sinus being then first of al searched by the
Probe, or by some Liquor cast into it, the whole (such as it is) may be opened.
The Fistula being opened, the callous hardness ought either with Medicaments,
or the edg of a Penknife, or a Razor, to be drawn forth, even so far until we
come unto the good and sound flesh; which may be perceived, not only by the
color, but even likewise from the blood, and the sense of pain. The same kind
of Callus (if it be extraordinary hard) may most chiefly be taken away with a
red-hot Iron; this being done as with most speed, so with the least sense and
feeling of pain. But nevertheless the ^i^e does so terrify and affright
people, that few or none will admit of this Remedy. But yet in the mean time
while these things are in doing (whether it be by Caustic Medicaments, or by
the fire-hot Iron, or by the fire it self) the part is all the while to be well
guarded round about, with some one or other Defensive Cooler and Repeller, lest
that upon the exciting of pain an Inflammation should be raised.

The Fistula being thus thoroughly dried, and burnt, we are then to make use of
some mitigating Medicament, and such as may loosen and cast off the crustiness
thereof. But if the Fistula reach unto, and end in a bone, this so soon as it
is discovered by the Section, we must with all care and diligence pare and
scrape away whatsoever we find to be corrupted and black in the said bone: and
this indeed must be but only in the very superficies of the bone: for if the
rottenness has further corrupted the said bone, then the scaly corrupted part
thereof is to be cut forth with a Wimble, unless it fall forth of its own
accord; but if the rottenness shall have penetrated even unto the marrow of the
bone, then that that is corrupted is to be taken out with the Cizers that are
for that purpose. But lastly, if the Bone be wholly corrupted, then all the whole
bone is to be taken forth; which may indeed be done in small bones; but it
cannot be so done in others. The bone being now purged, those things are
afterward to be administered that are called Incarnatives, viz. Such Medicaments
as generate and breed flesh. Unto which if the Fistula give not place, it is
then a sure sign that as yet all that that was corrupted is not wholly taken
away. The Fistula is thereupon to be opened deeper, and the bone to be scraped
with all the utmost diligence and care that may be, and then it must be further
cleansed. But if the Fistula will not yet after al his be cured, we may without
al doubt conclude, that it has penetrated so deep into the body, that it is
altogether impossible to find out the end and bottom thereof. And therefore the
whole business is then to be committed and left unto Nature: which yet
nevertheless we may likewise assist and help with Medicaments; for which end
and purpose Nicholaus the Florentine prescribes this following, which (as he
says) will both draw forth the bones that are broken and corrupted, eat through
the naughty putrefied flesh, and heal the Fistula.

Take Salt torrefied by the fire, Tartar, and Agarick; let them be made into a
very fine Powder; and then this Powder being tempered together with Honey, let
it be imposed upon the Fistula.

The Callus being now removed and quite taken away, if there be any thing
sordid and foul yet left remaining, we must then make use of Detersive, and
Sarcotick Medicaments. For which end, Pimpernel, Golden Rod, Centaury the less,
the Root of Aristolochy, and the like, are to be administered.

Take Turpentine washed in the Spirit of Wine three ounces; the Juice of
Smallage three drams; Pimpernel half an ounce; Honey of Roses strained, one
ounce and half; let them boil until welnigh the one half of the Juyces be
wasted away. Afterward, add of round Aristolochy one dram; the meal or flour
of Lupines three drams; Myrrh one dram: mingle, etc.

Which said Medicament, either the Tents may be dipped in it; or else it may in
some other manner be administered unto the Fistula.

There is extant in St. Augustines 22. Book of the City of God, and Chap. 8. a
most miraculous Cure (and such as is well worth the reading) of a Fistula by
devout Prayers.

Chap. 11. Of an Ulcer, with Vermin, or Worms breeding therein.
ANd sometimes likewise Worms are generated in Ulcers. But now what the cause is
of the breeding of these Worms, we have already told you in the second Book of
our Institutions, Chap. 9. and in the third Book of our Practice, Part 2. Sect.
1. Chap. 5. What was there spoken has here place likewise: for Worms are
generated in Ulcers that are sordid and foul, and which were not cleansed as
they ought to have been, neither purged from their Pus and Sanies; and this
especially if it be in the Summer time, and the Air being hot and moist.

Signs Diagnostick.
If the Ulcer be open, then the Worms appear unto the sight; but if by reason
of the streightness and narrowness of the Ulcer the Worms cannot be seen, they
may yet be known by other signs; by a certain biting, both of pricking and
pain, and by the sense of motion. And there is most commonly likewise a certain
stink perceived in those Ulcers.

The Cure.
The whole business and substance of the Cure consists in this, to wit, that
the Worms be taken away, and the putridness of the Ulcer be hindered and
prevented. If therefore the Worms lie open, and may be discerned, they are then
to be drawn forth with Instruments sitted for the same purpose: but if they lie
hid, or stick so close and fast unto the part that they cannot be drawn forth,
they are then to be killed with Medicaments that may likewise withal take away
the putridness, and the overgreat humidity of the part; and this is done by
Medicaments made of Wormwood, Horehound, Dittany, Fern, Scordium or Water
Germander, Featherfew, Centaury the less, the Leaves of Peaches, Lupines,
Gentian, the Gall of a Bull, Aloes, and Mirth. As,

Take Wormwood, Centaury the less, Horehound, of each half a handful; boil them
in ordinary Spring Water, and strain them: Take of the straining half a pint;
Honey two ounces; Aloes two drams; Mingle them, etc. Or,

Take Gentian Root half an ounce; white Hellebore two drams; Dittany of Candy,
Wormwood, Centaury the less, of each half a handful; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water; then take of the straining six ounces; the Elixir of
Propriety two drams; Mingle, etc. Or,

Take Unslaked Lime a sufficient quantity; extinguish it with Wine Vinegar; and
afterward let it be stirred well about with Oil of Roses, that so a Cataplasm
may be made hereof. Or,

Take Aloes two drams; Myrrh poudered one dram; the meal of Lupines two drams;
Bulls Gall half an ounce; Flour of Brass one dram, Honey as much as will
suffice, and make a Liniment. Or,

Take Meal or flour of Lupines three drams; Elixir propriet. two drams, Bulls
Gal three drams, Honey a sufficient quantity, and make hereof a Liniment.

Chap. 12. Of a Varicose Ulcer.
TOuching Varices we have indeed spoken above, in the first part, Chap. 44. yet
notwithstanding it sometimes so happens, that an Ulcer may be joined with, and
accompany these Varices; and this Ulcer they call a varicose Ulcer. Which Malady
is easily known from the signs of a Varix, and from Ulcers.

Now this varicose Ulcer cannot be healed, unless the Varices be first of all
healed, as Galen teaches us, in his fourth Book of the Method of Physic,
Chap. 2. And therefore whenever at any time we are minded to take in hand the
Cure of such an Ulcer; in the first place the Cure must be directed unto, and
look toward the said Varices; which how it may be accomplished, we have told
you in the place before alleged. Now there is extant (in Gulielmus Fabricius
his fourth Century, and Observat. 85.) a History of this varicose Ulcer, how it
was cured: the History he relates in these very words. In the year 1589.
(says he) when I returned home unto my Fathers House out of France, I was
called unto a certain Patient here in the Neighborhood, The History of a
monstrous Ulcer
a man about forty years old, very strong and able of Body, and of the best
Constitution, Adolphus auff them Bruch by name. This man was sorely troubled
with a malignant and inveterate Ulcer in his left Leg, together with a Varix of
an extraordinary great bigness: for it was as thick as my Arm near unto the
Hand-wrist, and almost a span long. But it began in his Ham, and thence
descending downward toward the Feet it fetched a ring, and made two
circumvolutions. But it was notable to observe, that so soon as ever he lifted
up his Leg on high, the blood immediately retired; but the Leg being set again
upon the ground the blood again descends, and that in a very moment; and
(that I may tell you in a word) the blood ebbed and flowed, no otherwise then as
if in some hollow Pipe or Conduit it had been cast, first into this, and then
into that part thereof.

Moreover, it being so that varicose Ulcers can by no means be consolidated
unless the Varix be first cut forth, I therefore thus set upon the Cure. Having
appointed my Patient a good and wholesome Course of Diet, and now and then also
thoroughly purging his Body, and opening the Arm-Vein of the same side, and
putting the sick Person upon a Bench, I then easily and gently separated the
Skin in the Ham from the Vein it self. And then with a Thread twice doubled
(which I conveyed in by a Needle that I crooked on purpose) I laid hold on the
Varix; and in the lower part of the Varix I proceeded in the very same manner.
But before ever I would draw the Thread close, and tie the knot, I commanded
that his Leg should be again set upon the ground from off the Bench; and this I
did to this end, that the blood might in manner as aforesaid flow downward: for
I much feared lest that the Blood by reason of its ebbing and flowing being
made very thin and subtle, should here cause some inconvenience, or other,
etc. See what further follows in this History, in the first part of this
fifth Book, Chap. 44. in the Conclusion of the said Chapter, in which we treat
of Varices.

Chap. 13. Of an Ulcer with the rottenness of a Bone.
IT happens likewise sometimes that a rotten and corrupted bone lies under
the Ulcer. Now Bones are corrupted, and contract a rottenness, either from
internal Causes, to wit, the long afflux of the excrementious humors unto the
bones, or else the venomous quality and acrimony of the Sanies, or else by some
hidden propriety; like as it often happens in the French Disease, that the
very bones become rotten, the Skin in the mean time remaining whole and sound.
The external causes are, the Ambient Air, especially that that is cold, a
contusion of bruise, an Incision, and tart or sharp Medicaments.

Signs Diagnostick.
If the Bone be in the open view, the corruption thereof does then easily
appear, because (as Celsus writes in his eighth Book, and Chap. 2.) that that
is vitiated at the first appears almost as if it were fat, and afterward,
either black, or rotten. But although the Bone lie hid, and do not in the least
appear, yet nevertheless its Corruption discovers it self by certain Signs.
And if a Fistula went before, or that there were an Ulcer of a long
continuance, then the Bone is corrupted by the touch of the Pus and the Sanies;
touching which Hippocrates thus writes, in the sixth of his Aphotisms,
Aphorism 45. If the Ulcers (says he) be Annual, and such as return year after
year, or if likewise they be of a long continuance, then there will necessarily
follow an Impostumating and putrefying of the Bone, and the making of hollow
Cicatrices. Moreover, he says that such like Ulcers are indeed sometimes
brought unto a Cicatrice, but that they are soon after again renewed, the
Cicatrice being broken. For the humor and the Sanies that sweateth out of the
corrupted Bone eats through the Cicactrice, and renews the Ulcer. And
therefore if there be any Ulcer ofen renewed, it evermore gives us great cause
to suspect that there is one or more Bones corrupted, as Galen tells us in his
Comment* upon the sixth Book of the Aphorism. Aphor. 45. and Paulus Aegineta in
his fourth Book, and Chap. 10. And this is oftentimes to be seen in the
rottenness of the Teeth, out of which there stilleth forth a Sanies through the
holes of the Cheek or Jaw Bone, and there in the external part of the Jaw it
exciteth and causes an Ulcer: which although it may be, and oftentimes is
healed, yet notwithstanding after a very short time the Cicatrix is again
broken. If such an Ulcer therefore appear in the Cheek, and be there often
renewed, the Teeth are then to be looked into, and if there be any one of them
rotten, it is forthwith to be brawn. For the Ulcer cannot possibly be perfectly
and wholly healed, before the Tooth that supplieth the material cause unto the
Ulcer, be drawn forth. Thirdly, the flesh that lies above upon the Ulcer is
soft and flaggy; for it is made thus soft by the Sanies that sweateth as it
were out from the Bone: and sometimes likewise it becomes wan and
Leaden-coloured by reason of the vicious humor that flows forth from the
Bone; in the seventh Book of the Aphorisms, Aphor. 2. Fourthly, the Sanies that
flows forth of the Ulcer is more abundant then what is usual, considering the
bigness of the Ulcer; it is likewise thin, stinking, and of very ill
consequence, as Galen tells us in his third Book of Fractures, Tit. 18. And if
there be a dry Liniment put into the Ulcer, so that it may teach even unto the
very bone; and the next day drawn forth again, it will stink loathsomly. And
lastly, if the Probe or searching Instrument be conveyed into the Ulcer, even
unto the very bone, then the said Ulcer is not found to be smooth and slippery,
and hard, but unequal, rough, and soft.

But whether this rottenness be deep, or only superficial, Celsus in his eighth
Book, and Chap. 2. teaches us how we may discover it in this manner. If (says
he) a slender and small Probe be thrust into the hole of the Ulcer, it will by
its more or less entering thereinto give us sufficient notice, whether the
rottenness be in the top and superficies only, or whether it has descended
deeper. The blackness likewise of this Sanies and rottenness may rightly be
gathered from the pain, and from the Fever; which if they be mild and moderate,
it is then an Argument that the said rottenness has not descended very deep:
but when the aforesaid Symptoms are great, then the rottenness has gotten down
very low and deep; but it will appear yet more manifestly, by turning about the
Wimble in it. For there is then an end of what was amiss, when there cease to
come forth any more of the black scursiness. Thus Celsus.

Prognostics.
1. All rottenness in the bones hinders the Cure of the Ulcer; neither can
any Ulcer be perfectly healed, under which there lies a bone that is corrupted.

2. If by reason of the diseased and rotten bone the flesh be become blackish,
and of a Leaden color, it then betokens much evil; 7. Sect. Aphor. 2. For
as Galen Comments upon the aforesaid Aphorism, it signifies no mean and small
distemper of the bones, but an extraordinary corruption of them.

3. If the rottenness of the bones be near unto the Nervous parts, as in the
Hands, or Feet, or else in the Joints, and heads of the greater bones; or
otherwise about the heads of the Muscles, and the Nerves, and the Tendons; it
is not in any of these cases easily cured; in regard that we cannot with any
safety make use of, or appoint any Chirurgical operations.

4. The Cure (in like manner) it altogether as difficult, if the rottenness be
about the great Arteries, and the Veins.

The Cure.
Besides the Indications that the Ulcer affords us, the rottenness of the
bone shows us likewise that what is corrupted must be wholly taken away: for
neither can that that is dead be by any means corrected, and amended. For that
which is in the flesh and soft parts, we call it Sphacelus; but if it be in the
bone, it is then rottenness.

But now that the corrupted bone may be taken away, it is first of all to be
cleansed, and then made bare (if it be covered with flesh) the Ulcer being cut
off. But nevertheless (as we told you erewhile) there cannot oftentimes any
Section or Cutting be administered, by reason of the Nerves, Muscles, Tendons,
Arteries, and the greater Veins. The bone is therefore then (as much as may be)
to be cleansed with a Gentian, or Rape root, tenderly conveyed into the Ulcer.
The flesh likewise that lies at the top of the bone may be consumed by a
Caustic Medicament, or by any potential Cautery, and so the bone may be bared
in the same manner as Issues are wont to be excited.

The corrupted bone when it is made bare, it is then to be taken away either by
Surgery, or by Medicaments. We must of necessity make use of Surgery,
when the Corruption of the bone is more deep, and not in the Superficies; or
when we desire a quick and speedy Cure, as in the bones of the Thorax. For
Nature does but very slowly separate the corrupted bones, and scarcely (now and
then) in the space of thirty five, or forty days. And therefore this
separation of the corrupted bone from the sound may otherwise be assaied by
Medicaments.

Now those Medicaments that separate the corrupt bone from the sound ought to
be very drying, that so they may consume the superfluous humidities in the
corrupted bone, and that they may likewise dry even the very bone that is
found, that so the Expulsive faculty may separate from it that that is vicious
in it; and that the ossifique or bone-breeding faculty may generate a bone, or
at least a Callus, that may thrust forth the bone that is corrupted.

The milder sort of Remedies (for this purpose) are the Root of Sowfennel,
Medicaments, in case the Bone be corrupted
white Briony or white wild Vine, Flowerdeluce, Myrrh, Aloes, Alum. The
stronger sort, are, the Root of round Aristolochy, of Water-dragons, the Rind
of Allheal, of the Pine Tree, the Pumice stone burnt, the dross and refuse of
Brass, the Mineral Chrysocol, and the Spirit of Wine. The strongest of al;
Euphorbium, than which Fallopius writes that he himself never found any more
excellent, and that would sooner take away the corrupted bone; burnt Copperas,
the ashes of the Fig Tree, Lime, Aqua fortis, the Oil of Vitriol, and the Oil
of Sulphur.

Of those Medicaments there are Compounds to be made, which are to be applied
either in the form of a Powder; or else mingled with Honey, Rosin, Wax, Unguent
Aegyptiack, or some other such like Unguent, and so applied in the form of an
Unguent.

This following Powder is very efficacious; Viz.

Take Root of round Aristolochy, Flowerdeluce, Myrrh, Aloes, the Rind of
Alheal, the refuse of Brass, the rinds of the Pine Tree, equal parts of al: let
them be al mingled together, and made up with Honey into the form of an Unguent.

This Powder following is likewise very much approved of.

Take Mummy, and Sarcocol, of each half a dram, Euphorbium one dram, and make a
Powder. Or,

Take the Root of round Aristolochy, of Sowfennel, of each half an ounce; the
rinds of the Pine Tree two drams; white Agarick, Earthworms prepared, of each
one dram and half; Euphorbium one dram; make a Powder, or an Unguent with Honey
of Roses; as likewise this Oil:

Take Citrine Sulphur one pound; put it near unto a gentle fire that it may
melt; unto which add, of burnt Tartar made into Powder half a pound; mingle
them with continual stirring until they are cold. Afterward let them be
pulverised, and set in a moist place upon a stone until they melt; and with
this Oil let the corroded bones be anointed. Or,

Take the Root of long Aristolochy, Briony, Sow-fennel, Flowerdeluce of
Florence, of each one dram, Euphorbium one scruple; make a Powder, and strew it
upon the bone. Or,

Take Powder of the Root of Sow-fennel, of round Aristolochy, of Opoponax, and
Euphorbium, of each half a dram; Turpentine an ounce and half, Wax half an
ounce; boil them to the consistence of a Cerote. Or,

Take the Roots of both Aristolochies, of Briony, of Sow-fennel, of Florentine
Flowerdeluce, of each half an ounce; Centaury the less, the Rind of the
Pine Tree, of each three drams; Aloes two drams, flour of Brass a dram and
half: unto all the aforesaid pour of the Spirit of Wine as much as will suffice,
and extract the Tincture.

But if the corruption of the Bone be so great that it cannot be wholly taken
away by Medicaments, then there will be need of Surgery; and the corrupted
bone is to be taken away, either by shaving and paring off, or else by burning.
Now for the abrasion or paring it away, there are here two Instruments that are
made use of; the scraping Iron Instrument, and the Wimble or Anger. The former
of there takes place, when the bone is not so deeply corrupted; but the Wimble
is to be used when the rottenness has penetrated very deep into the bone. Of
shaving or paring, Celsus in his eighth Book, and Chap. 2. thus writes: He
that shaveth these rotten Bones (says he) must with all boldness and courage
make an impression with his Iron Instrument, that so he may do somewhat, and may
the sooner make an end. The end is then, when we come either unto a bone that
is white, or unto a bone that is solid: for it is manifest by the whiteness of
the bone that the fault in regard of the blackness is cured; and by that same
solidity it is likewise manifest that what was amiss in the bone in regard of
the rottenness, is in like manner ended. We also told you before that unto the
sound and whole bone there will be some small access of Rosy fresh-colored blood.
But if at any time it descend deeper, we may well question both of them, as very
doubtful: as for the rottenness, our knowledge is indeed therein somewhat
quicker. A small and slender Probe is put down into the hole, which by its
entering more or less, shows unto us whether the rottenness lie in the top,
or whether it be descended deeper. The blackness may likewise indeed be guessed
at (if not certainly known) from the pain, and from the Fever; which if they
be mild and moderate, then we may conclude that the said blackness is not
descended very deep; but yet nevertheless it is made more manifest when we come
to make use of the wimble; for there is then an end of what was amiss, when
there cease to come forth any black dust. And therefore if the rottenness
has descended deep, we ought then to make many holes (with the wimble) as deep
as that that is amiss in the bone: and then into those holes burning hot Irons
are to be let down, until at length by this means the bone be wholly dried. For
withal (after this) both whatsoever is vitiated and corrupted will be loosened
from the lower bone, and that hollow nook will be filled up with flesh: and the
humor that afterward issues forth will be either none at al, or certainly very
little. But if there be any blackness, or if the rotteness be likewise passed
over unto some other part of the bone, it then ought to be cut out; and this
same may likewise be done in the rottenness penetrating into some other part of
the bone: but that which is altogether vitiated must be wholly taken forth: if
the inferior part be whole and sound, then only so far as there is any
corrupted, it ought to be cut forth. And also whether the Breast Bone, or
whether it be a Rib that is rotten, it is rendered by this fault unuseful, and
therefore there is a necessity of cutting it forth. Thus Celsus.

By all which it appears, That the Ancients after the paring and shaving of
the bone were wont likewise to burn it, this burning being the chiefest remedy
for the consuming of all the excrementitious humidity. But then notwithstanding
in the applying of a Cautery we must always beware, lest that the flesh that
lies near be likewise burnt together with the corrupted bone: and therefore
the Cauteries are to be applied through Iron pipes, by which the flesh is to be
defended and safeguarded; of which Iron pipes we ought to have many in
readiness, that so after one is grown hot, another that is cold may be applied;
or if we think good to make use of one only, then as often as it is hot we may
put it into cold water to cool it. And whatsoever of the humor sweat forth out
of that bone, it is to be cleansed and wiped away with a Sponge or a Linen
cloth, lest that otherwise it corrupt the nearly situated parts. After the
burning, we are then in the first place to apply Rose Water with the white of
an Egg, for the preventing of the Inflammation, and the moderating of the pain;
afterward we are to administer the Oil of Roses with the Yelk of an Egg; and
then after this, Butter with Honey of Roses. But unto the bone that is burnt,
the Powder of the Root of Sow-fennel, of Aristolochy, Euphorbium (or some other
of the forementioned Remedies) is to be imposed and laid upon the corrupted
bone, until the said bone be separated, and parted.

After the taking forth of the corrupted bone, some drying Powder (and such as
are called Cephalic Pouders) is to be strewed upon the place. After this the
Ulcer is to be filled up with flesh; and at length to be closed and shut up
with a Cicatrice.

Chap. 14. Of Ulcers hard to be cured, commonly called Cacoethe, Telephium, and
Chironium.
THere are Ulcers likewise that are here and there in the Writings of
Physicians termed Dysepulote Ulcers, Cacoethe, Telephia, Chironia, and
Phagedaena; which what they are, we shall in this and the following Chapter
explain unto you. And in general, al those Ulcers may be called Dysepulote (or
hardly healed) that are not to be cured without much difficulty, and such as
are not closed up with a Cicatrice without much ado. Touching the right curing
of which Galen wrote both the fourth Book of his Method of Healing, and his
fourth Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to their kinds. And
this indeed happens for four causes, as Galen tells us in his fourth Book of
the Method of Healing, Chap. 1. For of those Ulcers that are hardly cured and
rebellious, some of them are made such by reason of the distemper in the
ulcerated part, and others of them become such by means of the humor flowing in
unto them. But now this very distemper may again be said to be twofold, since
that the subjected flesh is sometimes such as has exceeded the bounds of
Nature, in the quality only; but sometimes likewise with a certain necessary
Tumor or swelling. And in like manner, the afflux of humors admits of a
twofold division; to wit, into, First the bad and depraved quality, and
secondly, the excessive quantity of the humor or juice that flows in. But in
the mean while, either some, or else all the aforesaid Affects are alike and
indifferently mingled together. Yet nevertheless, the same Galen in the sixth
of the Aphorisms, Aphor. 45. adds a fifth cause; where he writes, That
Ulcers retrain a long time, not only because of the afflux of humors, or by
reason of any disposition in the Member contracted from the humors flowing in;
but also (thirdly) by reason of some passion of the bone that is corrupted in
that place. For although Ulcers that have a corrupted bone lying underneath
them may sometimes be cured and covered over with a Cicatrice: yet
notwithstanding that foundness is not firm, and of any continuance, but the
Ulcer is afterward again renewed; and this happens so long as the rotten bone
remains unhealed.

And yet nevertheless, Galen in his first Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to their kinds, Chap. 18. distinguishes between these
Dysepulote Ulcers, that is to say, such as are hardly brought to a Cicatrice,
Malignant ulcers.
and the Ulcers Cacoethe or Malignant: and he calls such of them Dysepulote,
that arise from the conflux of either many or sharp humors; without this, that
the part affected has already such a disposition, that although that that
flows in should be good, yet notwithstanding it corrupts it: now those
Ulcers that have already gotten this aforesaid disposition, he calls
Cacoethe, or malignant. So that al those Ulcers that are hardly cured (from
what cause soever it be) may in general be called Dysepulote Ulcers; and now in
special likewise those that are so made, without any depraved disposition of
the part affected. But in regard that all the differences and causes of Ulcers
hardly cured have hitherto been explained, there is no need that we add any
thing more concerning them.

And yet nevertheless, there is one cause of those Ulcers that are hardly
curable that I have sometimes observed, which I think it not fit here altogether
to pass over in silence. It happens very often, that in long continued Ulcers
the skin is extenuated, and the fleshy panicle and fat is wasted: which if it
happen, we may conclude that the Ulcer is not healed, since that the skin can
by no means be agglutinated unto the flesh lying underneath it: for when the
Capillary Veins tending to the skin are eaten asunder, they cannot then convey
unto the skin that blood that is necessary for consolidation.

This is known, because that the skin is not only by the touch perceived to be
extenuated; Ulcers Chironia.
but the color is likewise changed, and becomes wan and dark, and the skin (as
it were) withers away.

There is in this case little or nothing to be performed by Medicaments; but
the skin is either to be corroded by some Caustic Medicament; or else (as I
have sometimes caused it to be done) the Ulcer is to be opened longwaies with
the Iron; and this may very easily be done.

As touching the Ulcers Chironia and Telephia, the Chironian Ulcer has its
name from the Centaure Chiron: though some there are notwithstanding that
render another reason of the said appellation. Zenodotus (as Erasmus of
Rotterdam relates in Chil. 2. Cent. 8. Prove. 21.) thought that Chiron received
from Hercules a Wound in his Foot, and that the said Wound being altogether
incurable, he perished thereof; so that incurable Ulcers are hence called
Chironian Ulcers: But Pliny in his twenty fifth Book, Chap. 6. and Ovid in the
fifth Book of his Fasti, are of opinion that Chiron was not wounded by Hercules
(who was his friend) but that Chiron being entertained by Hercules, Chiron his
Arrow fell accidentally upon the Foot of Hercules, and caused therein a most
dangerous and envenomed Wound; and that Chiron himself healed this Wound with
Centaury, which Plant was therefore by those that came after called Chironium;
and that this Chiron was the first Inventor of the ancient Chiturgery, being a
part of Physick^ and that from Hands, and the operation of those hands it
received ^s name. So that any contumacious and malignant Ulcer, that by reason
of its contumacy has need of some Chiron to cure i^, and which was at the
first cured by the said Chiron, may be called a Chironian Ulcer.

Celsus in his sixth Book, and Chap. 28. defines a Chironium Ulcer in this
manner: It is (says he) great, and has lips that are hard, callous, and
swelling. The Sanies that issues out of it is not much, but thin; there is no
unsavory and stinking smell, neither in the Ulcer, nor in its Tumor. There is no
Inflammation, the pain is but little and moderate; nothing creeps therein;
and therefore it brings along with it no great danger; yet however it is not
easily cured. There it sometimes a thin Cicatrice brought all over it, but this
is again soon broken, and the Ulcer renewed. It happens most especially in
the Feet, and in the Thighs.

The same Celsus, seeing that he makes no mention of Telephian Ulcers, it is
not to be doubted but that he thought them to be the same with the Chironia: as
likewise Paulus Aegineta does when in his fourth Book, and 26. Chap. he thus
writes: Inveterate Ulcers (says he) and such as hardly admit of a Cicatrice,
some call them Chironia, as though they needed a Chiron himself to heal them;
others there are that call them Telephia, because that Telephus continued long
troubled with such a like Ulcer. Those that think that both the Chironium and
the Telephium Ulcers consist not so much in their corrosion as in this, that
they are both of them malignant and contumacious, so that they are wont to
continue with the sick persons even unto their old age, these dissent from
Galen, who (in the second Book of the Method of Healing, Chap. 2. and 14. of
the said Method. Chap. 17.) thinks that Phagedaena consists in erosion; and
that Chironium and Telephium are a species hereof. Where we must know (as Galen
acquaints us in his Commentary upon the sixth of the Aphorism, Aphor. 45.) that
al Ulcers that become greater and worse, the Ancients called al these Ulcers
Phagedaenae; and if in this manner we take Phagedaenae, then Chironia and
Telephia may be called a Species or l^nd of Phagedaena. But there are some
certain of the latter Writers that have endeavered to distinguish them, giving
unto each of them a proper and peculiar appellation; and some of these they call
Chironia, others of them they term Telephia, and a third sort Phagedaenae. So
that Phagedaena being taken for a corroding Ulcer, is one while the Genus of
Chironium and Telephiuns Ulcers; and another while a certain determinate
Species of a corroding Ulcer, differing from Chironium and Telephium; which (to
wit) besides the skin, eats through the flesh it self; and yet nevertheless
is not altogether so malignant as Chironium, or Telephium, or the Cancer.

To wit, Telephian Ulcers are the same with Chironia, so called from Telephus,
who was a long time afflicted with such an ulcer. And what Galen (in the fourth
Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to their kinds, Chap. 4.) has
written touching Chironia, to wit, They call (says he) those Chironian Ulcers
that are not meanly and indifferently malignant or contumacious, but such as
are so in the highest degree; The same is likewise to be taken and understood
of the ulcers Telephia.

The Causes.
Now such like Ulcers have their original from a Melancholy humor, having some
(though not much) black Choler mingled together with it.

Signs Diagnostick.
Such like Ulcers are known, in that they have their lips il colored, and for
the most part they are red, and itching; and although the Ulcer be never so
lightly and gently handled or wiped, yet there is a pain perceived; the parts
lying round about it swel up, and the Ulcer is from day to day dilated; and not
only the skin, but the flesh likewise that lies under it is eaten through.

Prognostics.
Every sort of these Ulcers is Contumacious, and hard to be cured, as we told
you before.

The Cure.
As touching the Cure, Universals being premised, and the body emptied of the
vicious humor, and a fit course of Diet prescribed, there are to be applied
unto the Ulcer Medicaments that are compounded of such things as are cold and
dry, astringent, and withal Dicussive: and such are Plantane, Nightshade, the
tops of the Black-berry or Dog-berry bush, the Flowers of Roses, Cypress Nuts,
Pomegranate flowers and rinds, Mastick, the bark of Frankincense, burnt Lead,
Litharge, and the like.

And therefore in the first place, let the Ulcer be washed and fomented with
this or the like Decoction.

Take Plantane one handful, Flowers of red Roses, Pomegranate flowers, and
Cypress Nuts, of each half an ounce; Myrtle berries, Pomegranate rinds, Sumach,
of each three drams; Alum burnt half an ounce; boil them in Water and wash the
Ulcer well therewith. Or,

Take the Juice of the Bramble, Plantane, Nightshade, Shepherds-staff, of each
four ounces; the whites of six Eggs, Alum four ounces; destil them in a Leaden
Alembick: Let the Ulcer be washed and fomented with this Water: and let the
parts likewise that lie near unto it be anointed over with some Defensive.

After the Ulcer is thus washed, let the Unguent Diapompholyx be laid thereon;
as also the white Camphorate Unguent, and the Unguent de Minio. Or,

Take Tutty prepared half an ounce, burnt Lead, Ceruss washed, of each an
ounce; let them be well mingled together in a Leaden Mortar, pouring in unto
them by little and little the Juice or water of Plantane, and make hereof a
Mass: afterward add of Bolearmenick three drams; Oil of Roses and Wax of each
as much as will suffice, and make an Unguent.

More of these like Medicaments shall be declared in the Chapter following.

Chap. 15. Of the Ulcer Phagedaena.
Phagedaena what it is.
ANd because (as we have told you) there is likewise mention made of Phagedaena
among the Ulcers; we shall therefore here in this Chapter explain it, and show
you what it is. It is so called from the Greek word Phagein, from its Eating;
and this (whether Tumor or Ulcer) has received its name from eating through
and corroding, because it eats through the parts lying near unto it. And
indeed it is properly an Ulcer. But yet nevertheless, in regard that the Lips
of the Ulcer strutting forth with black Choler are lifted up into a Tumor, it
is therefore by some referred unto Tumors; and there is mention hereof made by
Galen in his Book of Tumors, Chap. 14. But we will treat here of it among
Ulcers. But yet nevertheless, as touching its name, this is to be noted, that
it is not always taken in one and the same signification. For sometimes (as
Galen tells us, in Epidem. 6. Comment. 3. Text 37.) Phagedaena signifies an
appetite unto, and eating of much meat, and hence (by the Author of the
Medicinal Definitions) it is defined to be, a Constitution in which Persons
having an appetite unto much Food, and devouring much thereof are not able to
retein and keep it; but when they have cast it up, they again desire more; and
in this manner it is also defined by Aurelianus, in the third Book of his
Chronic. Chap. 3. So that Phagedaena being taken in this manner, and in this
sense, is nothing else but that we call the Dog-like appetite. And therefore
Pliny, in his Book 20. Chap. 5. 13. and in his Book 30. Chap. 9. and Book 35.
Chap. 13.) for distinction sake (when he speaks of an Ulcer) is wont to add
the name of Ulcers, and to call them Phagedaenae of the Ulcers. And furthermore
the name of a Phagedaena does sometimes signify a certain kind of destruction
that befalls unto Bees; of which Columella writes in his tenth Book, and
Chap. 13. But here in this place we take Phagedaena as it is only an Ulcer;
touching which Galen in his Book of Tumors, and Chap. 14. thus writes;
Whatsoever of the Ulcers there be that eat and devour, and reach unto the
Bodies lying round about them, and continually eating through that that is
sound, all these Ulcers are by the Greeks called Phagedaenica: but those that
are compounded of both (to wit, of an Ulcer, and a Tumor, surrounding the
flesh) these are called Phagedaenae. Thus Galen. Moreover also Herpes feeds
upon, and eats up the parts lying near round about; but the exulceration is
in the Skin alone: but the Phagedaena (together with the Skin) reaches even
unto those parts that lie underneath.

Nome is likewise a different Affect, so called from the Greek word, Nome.
signifying to feed; because that it is wont to move forward (still feeding the
Disease) from the sick and unsound parts unto those that are whole and sound,
and of these sound particles it is wont always to add something thereof unto
the unsound; so that it has its Appellation not from the substance of the
thing declared and shown; but from something that is Accessory, which is to
feed; as Galen tells us in his fifth Book of the Method of Healing, Chap. 4. For
Nome signifies an eating or devouring putridness, albeit that the Ulcer creep
but slowly. But Phagedaena is from humors that are sharp and corroding, even
without any putridness.

But what a Phagedaena is, we are now to declare unto you. What Phagedaena is.
Now a Phagedaena in special, and properly so called, is an Ulcer that feeds
upon and eats through the flesh lying underneath it, and those things that
are about it; and then preying upon some what belonging unto the sound parts,
which it adds unto those that are diseased and unsound; as we may see from
the sixth Book of the Aphor. Aphor. 46, and in Galen his Book of Tumors, Chap.
12. To wit, the Phagedaena which the more ignorant Physicians call the
Ambulative or walking Ulcer, is an Ulcer that is tumid and profound, eating
through the parts lying near, and the flesh that lies underneath.

For it has a Tumor about its lips, by which it is distinguished from Nome,
Its difference from Nome.
which likewise eats through the adjacent parts, but then it is without any
Tumor. Although that it be likewise otherwise distinguished from Nome, because
that in Phagedaena the Corrosion is only from a Malignant quality, and the
acrimony of the humor; whereas in Nome there is likewise a putridness conjoined.
And it is also a deep and profound Ulcer, and such as does not only eat through
the Skin, but even through the flesh also; in which respect it differs from
the Herpes, that corrodeth and eats through the Skin only.

The Causes.
This Malady has its original from an adust or burnt humor, and Choleric, and
such as almost degenerateth into the Nature of black Choler or Melancholy; or
else from yellow Choler with salt Phlegm, and a serous or wheyish humor
therewithal mingled: which humor is not so thin as that that causes the
Herpes; not yet so thick as that which produces the Cancer. But now these
humors proceed, either from some principal Member affected with a hot and dry
Distemper; or else they are burnt in the very part that is affected, that lies
under some hot and dry preternatural Distemper.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Signs are already declared and explained; and they may be collected out of
this, and the foregoing Chapter.

Prognostics.
1. These Ulcers are hard to cure; whereupon they are likewise in the general
called Cacoethe.

2. Yet nowithstanding some are more malignant then others: for which cause
there is a necessity that we have in a readiness diverse Medicaments, differing
in strength and virtue. For we never yet heard of any one that with one only
Medicament easily cured al such like Ulcers as these.

3. Eating Ulcers, with a hot and dry distemper of the Liver, or else conjoined
with the foul Disease (which we commonly call the French Pox, or the Neapolitane
Disease) are not to be cured without much difficulty.

4. Earing and devouring Ulcers unless they be rightly and speedily healed,
they often degenerate into an exulcerated Cancer.

The Cure.
About the Cure of this Ulcer it is to be noted (as elsewhere likewise we have
often said) that in it nothing will any whit profit or avail (as it is also in
other Diseases) whilst that the Cause still remains. And therefore in the
first place, such a Course of Diet is to be prescribed that will not only not
generate such like adust humors, but likewise qualify and correct their
acrimony: and afterward these bad humors are to be evacuated out of the body.

And moreover this also is to be observed, which Galen likewise takes notice
of (in the place before alleged, Viz. in the fourth Chapter of his Book of
the Composit. of Medicam. according to the kinds of them; upon the Medicament
of Asclepiades) where he has these words; Rightly (says he) has Asclepiades
added these words unto the end of his prescribed Medicament; Viz. and loosen
this every third day, and mitigate the pain with fomentations; and soften the
same Emplaster when you have washed it, and again lay it on: for unless the
Medicament shall stick somewhat long unto the Skin, it effects but little or
nothing: which most Physicians are ignorant of, who think that if thrice a day
they wipe away the Sanies from the Ulcer, they then do better then those that
do it but twice a day. And the truth is, there is most commmonly a great error
committed in this very point; whilst most men think that they take the best
course with the Patient, if they wash such a like Ulcer three or four times a
day. But since that the Medicament does not at all act any thing unless by the
Native heat it be drawn forth into act, and in regard that in malignant and
long continued Ulcers the heat of the affected part is very weak, it needs
much time therefore to excite and draw forth the strength and virtue of the
Medicament. Wherefore the same Medicament ought to be kept sticking upon the
part affected a long while; neither is its action to be disturbed, when the
virtue and strength thereof is scarcely yet drawn forth by the heat of the
place affected (so that it now but begins to act) and a new Medicament to be
applied. In which case notwithstanding the condition of the humor exciting the
Ulcer is to be considered. For if it be very sharp, it is the oftener to be
wiped away, lest that sticking in the ulcerated part it more corrupt the same.

Chap. 16. Of an Ulcer with pain.
BUt now the Causes do not only cherish and increase the Ulcers, and there are
likewise certain Diseases therewith joined to accompany them, but there
happens likewise oftentimes a pain unto these Ulcers, which is therefore
immediately to be mitigated; in regard that pain attracteth, augmenteth the
Ulcer, and causes Inflammations and the Erysipelas to arise. Now as touching
pain in general, we have already spoken in the first Book of our Practice, Part
3. Sect. 1. Chap. 2. So that we are here only to treat of the pain of Ulcers.
This pain therefore in ulcers arises for the most part from a sharp and
corroding humor. But now whereas the pain is to be taken away, either by taking
away the cause, or properly by mitigating the pain, or by taking away the sense
thereof (as we have shown you in the fifth Book of our Institutions, Part 2.
Sect. 3. Chap. 8. and likewise in the place alleged) the last of these ways
is not so safe, because that it cannot be administered without great detriment
unto the part; and therefore it is not to be put in practice but only in case
of urgent necessity. For this reason it is most safe to take away the cause of
the pain; or if this cannot be done but in a long time, and that there be cause
to fear that in the mean time the Ulcer may be increased and made worse, then
in this case Anodynes are to be made use of: which what they be, we have shown
in the place alleged. Those things that here much benefit, are, the Yelks of
Eggs, Saffron, Turpentine, Oil of Roses, Rosin of the Fir Tree, out of which
mingled together Liniments may be made, to be imposed upon the ulcer. But upon
the Compass or Circuit of the ulcer, the Fat of a Hen, of a Goose, of a Duck,
the Mucilage of Linseed, of Fenugreek, of Marshmallows, the Oil of sweet
Almonds, of Cammomile, of Dil, and of Violets, are to be imposed. Or,

Take Mallows, Marshmallows, of each one handful; boil them to a softness, and
then bruise them well; when they are bruised and passed through a hair sieve,
add of Barley meal one ounce; Linseed and Fenugreek, of each one ounce; Oil of
Roses two ounces; Oil of Camomile and white Lillies, of each one ounce; the
Mucilage of Marsh-mallow seeds, the extracted Water of the Elder flowers an
ounce and half; Saffron one scruple; the Yelks of two Eggs: Make a Cataplasm.
Or,

Take Crumbs of white Bread two ounces; soften them in Milk; and then add of
Barley Meal, and Linseed, of each one ounce; the powder of Camomile flowers
half an ounce; Oil of Roses an ounce and half; Water-lilly half an ounce; the
Yelk of one Egg, Saffron one scruple: mingle them and make a Cataplasm.

But if at any time we have a mind to fit the Medicaments unto the cause, in
regard that most commonly in ulcers the pain arises from hot and sharp humors;
therefore to take away this pain we may administer the juice or the water of
Nightshade, Plantane, Henbane, Sengreen, Oil of Roses, Whites of Eggs, with
Rose water: of his those Cataplasm that are made of Mallows, Plantane,
Nightshade, and Oil of Roses, are to be said on; or else an Unguent of the
white of an Egg, Oil of Roses, and Licharge, well bruised and mingled together
in a Leaden Mortar, and afterward boiled with the Juice of Sengreen, until all the juice be consumed; or a whole Egg carefully mingled together with the Oil of
Roses, and Turpentine, in a Leaden Mortar; or else the white Camphorate Unguent.

If necessity drive us unto Narcoticks, then the Oil of Poppy, of Henbane, of
Mandrake, of Frogs, or the juice of Henbane, al or any of these may be applied
with Milk.

Chap. 17. Of the Ulcers of the Legs, and other particular Ulcers.
ANd these things we thought fit (in a compendious way) to speak of Ulcers in
the (general; which any one may easily apply unto the ulcers of particular
parts. Neither do we conceive it to be at al needful, that we should speak any
thing more of the ulcers of all the particular parts, since that we have already
treated of them in our former Books, as we shall by and by tell you. And
therefore in this Chapter we will speak only of the ulcers of the Legs in
special. The Ulcers of the Legs.
For it oftentimes happens that bad and depraved Humors, especial the
Melancholy, as well by their own weight tending unto the Thighs, as by nature
thrust and driven down thither (as unto the external part) do excite ulcers;
and this especially happens after Erysipelas's that very frequently intest
the skin; and chiefly in Women, where without doubt there is a concurrence of
something amiss in the Womb: and I know that in some certain Families such
ulcers are so familiar, that all the Women therein (although they seem to be
otherwise very well) have of these long continued ulcers in their Thighs. And
therefore by all means possible we are timely to meet with, and prevent these
ulcer. For unless they be speedily healed, Nature will accustom her self to send
away all the vicious humors that are bred and heaped up in the whole body unto
these parts, which afterward, if the ulcer be closed up, and the body be not
diligently and often purged, will excite other more grievous Diseases,
especially in those that are aged: for if they be neglected, they are wont
likewise to gain growth and increase, to corrupt the parts that lie near, and
to become callous; so that if some speedy course be not taken for the healing
of them, they afterward become altogether incurable.

Now that these ulcers may be rightly cured, first of all the body is to be
thoroughly purged from the vicious humor; and the fault of the Spleen (which for
the most part is here present) it to be corrected, and a Purgation oftentimes
to be repeated.

And afterward the Unguent Diapompholyx is to be imposed (which I have ever
found to be most efficacious in this kind of ulcer) so long as until there
appear a Pus good and white: and then this Emplaster:

Take of the Unguent Diapompholyx, the Emplaster Diapalma, the Emplaster
Gryseum, of each one ounce; Gum Elemi two drams; Sugar of Saturn one scruple:
mingle them well in a Leaden Mortar.

With which two Medicaments I have oftentimes happily and successfully cured
the long continued ulcers of the Thighs. Or,

Take Ceruss two ounces, Litharge one ounce, Oil of Roses one pint, Wax two
ounces; let them be carefully mingled in a Leaden Mortar: afterward add Tutty
prepared with the Water of Nightshade, of Frankincense, and Lead burnt, of each
one ounce; and let them be again stirred about in the Mortar, and then make an
Unguent. Or,

Take Wax, Rosin, of each one ounce; the Suet of a gelt Pig two ounces; Ship
Pitch, Oil, of each three ounces; Mastick, Frankincense, and Myrrh, of each
three drams; Litharge one ounce and half, Ceruss half, an ounce. Let the Oil,
Rosin, Wax, and Suet, melt together and then let them be boiled unto a just
consistence: and after let the rest of the Ingredients be added. Of,

Take White Wax, Turpentine, Rosin, of each one ounce; Frankincense, and
Mastick, of each two drams; Styrax Calamite three drams; Gum Elemi six drams;
round Aristolochy two drams; the juice of Milfoyl, and Betony, of each half an
ounce; Oil of Roses as much as will suffice and make an Unguent.

But let the Wax, Rosin, Turpentime, and Oils, be first of al dissolved
together; after this let the Juyces be poured unto them; and when they begin to
grow cool, add the Pouders. Or,

Take Oil of Roses twelve ounces; Ceruss three on ounces; Litharge four ounces
and half; Frankincense, and Mastick, of each half a dram; Dragons blood half an
ounce; Myrrh, and Sarcocol, of each two drams: boil them a little, until they
be red; after remove them from them fire, and then dip therein an old Linen
cloth; which when it is thoroughly soaked in the matter of the Emplaster may be
taken forth and spread abroad to make a Sparadrape.

Touching the ulcers of the rest of the parts, we have already treated of them
in the formers Books of this our Practice. To wit, in the first Book, Part 3.
Sect. 2. Chap. 18. of the ulcers of the Adnata and Cornea Tunicles of the Eye:
ibid. Sect. 3. Chap 3. of the ulcers of the Ears: ibid. Sect. 4. Chap. 1. of
the ulcers of the Nostrils: In the second Book, part 1. Chap. 3. of the ulcers
of the Lips: ibid. Chap. 16. of the ulcers of the Gums: ibid. Chap. 21. of the
exulceration of the Throat-pipe: ibid. Chap. 22. of the ulcers of the Tonsils:
Part 2. Chap. 1. of the ulcers of the Aspera Arteria or rough Artery: ibid.
Chap. 12. of the ulcers of the Lungs: ibid. Chap. 18. of the Fistula's of the
Thorax: Part 4. Chap. 3. of the ulcers of the Heart: Book 3. Part. 1. Sect. 1.
Chap. 1. of the ulcers of the Oesophagus: ibid. Chap. 17. of the ulcers of the
Stomach: Part 2. Sect. 1. Chap. 9, and 10. of the ulcers of the Intestines:
Part 3. Chap. 5. of the impostumes and ulcers of the Mesentery: ibid. Chap. 7.
of the ulcers of the Pancreas: ibid. Chap. 8. of the Caul: Part 4. Chap. 8. of
the Spleen: ibid. Part 6. Chap. 8. of the Liver: Part 7. Chap. 11. of the
Reins: Part 9. Sect. 1. Chap. 6. of the Bladder: ibid. Chap. 9. of the Urinary
Passage: Part 8. Chap. 5. of the Testicles: ibid. Chap. 6. of the Cods: ibid.
Chap. 8. and 10. of the Yard: Part 10. Chap. 5. of the Navel: ibid. Chap. 7.11.
of the Abdomen: Book 4. Part 1. Sect 1. Chap. 48. of the Neck of the Womb:
ibid. Chap. 10. of the Fistula's of the Neck of the Womb: ibid. Chap. 11. of
the Cancer of the Womb: ibid: Chap. 12. of the Gangrene and Sphacelus of the
Womb: Sect. 2. Chap. 14. of the Cancer of the Womb: ibid. Chap. 19. of the
ulcers of the Womb: ibid. Chap. 20. of the Testicles in Women: Part 3. Sect. 1.
Chap. 7. of the Cancer of the Breasts: Chap. 8. of the ulcers and Fistula's of
the Breasts: ibid. Chap. 11. of the ulcers of the Teats.

Chap. 18. Of Burnings.
WE may not unfitly unto Ulcers subjoyn Burnings, which do likewise excite and
raise ulcers. For oftentimes it happens, that by some mischance and
unfortunate accident the Members may be scalded, either with water, or with hot
boiling Oil, mor melted Metal; or else one may chance to fall into the Fire,
into the Water, or into scalding hot Oil; which whenever it happens, then
pain, blisters, and exulcerations are excited.

The Differences.
Now of such things as are burnt there are three degrees or Differences. For
sometimes there is only a heat and pain excited in the part affected by the said
burning; and unless that Remedies be forthwith administered, the Scarf-Skin will
be separated from the true Skin, and blisters will be raised, in the which there
will be a certain clear water contained: and oftentimes likewise suddenly and in
a moment the blister or bladder is lifted up, and the very Skin it self is
burnt, dried up, scorched, and contracted together; and yet notwithstanding,
there is all this while no Crust or Eschar produced: but at other times the very
Skin it self, yea and oftentimes the flesh that lies under it is burnt, dried
up, and an Eschar produced, and the Skin becomes black, loses somewhat of its
sense and feeling; and after that the Eschar is fallen off there is left behind
an ulcer sufficiently deep. For fire dissolveth the continuity, and exciteth a
pain: and because the moist parts in the Skin are resolved by the force of the
fire, and endeavor to exspire and breathe forth, but are still kept in by the
thickness of the Scarf-skin, they lift it up, and raise the bladder or blister.
But sometimes again there is by the force of the fire some kind of humidity
left remaining in the part, from whence the Skin is contracted and drawn
together: but sometimes also the moisture of the part is altogether dissiputed
and dried up, and an Eschar is produced: and this happens according to the
variety of the things that burn. For Water burns less than the other; and
this Water likewise more or less, according as it is more on less hot. For
stubble, straw, flax, and the like, cause no great and vehement burning, unless
the burning be long continued. But Oil burns more, and so do Fats, Varnish,
Pitch, Honey, Wax. And the greatest and most vehement of al burners, are Lead
and Tin meltd, Iron and other Metals made red hot by the fire, as likewise the
very actual Fire it self, Gunpowder, and Lightening. And so likewise by how
much the thicker the subject matter of the Fire is, and the more its force and
strength is augmented by the concurrence of its many Atoms, and the more it is
condensed; and lastly, by how much the longer the action of the Fire is
continued, by so much the greater the burning must needs be. But if the fire be
in a subject more thin, and so its Atoms be the more dispersed, and but little
united, and if its action likewise continue but a short time, then the burning
is so much the less.

Prognostics.
Touching the Diagnostick Signs there is no need that we speak any thing at al;
since that the burning will sufficiently manifest it self. Its Degrees likewise,
and how far it has gone, will sufficiently appear by what was said a little
before.

As for the Prognostics: 1. By how much the lighter the Burning is, by so much
the more easily it is cured, and so much the less is the evil that it brings
along with it: but by how much the burning is greater, by so much the harder it
is to cure, and so much the more grievous the evils that it brings along with
it. For oftentimes an Inflammation of the part, yea even a Necrosis or
Mortification (the Radical humidity being consumed, and the Native heat
dissipated) arises from thence, ulcers hard to cure are likewise from thence
excited, the motion of the part is abolished, and there are filthy and deformed
Cicatrices left remaining.

2. Burning by Lightening is likewise very dangerous, and for the most part
deadly.

3. By how much the purer the Body is, by so much the more easily is the
burning cured. But if the Body be either Plethorick, or Cacochymical, then from
the pain and heat there is very easily caused an afflux of the humors; and from
thence Inflammations, putrid ulcers, and other evils are excited.

4. The Burning is likewise sometimes more, and sometimes less dangerous,
according to the Nature and condition of the parts affected. For if there be
but only one part burnt, there is then less danger than if many parts, or the
whole body be burnt. For when many parts, or the whole body be burnt, it is very
rare that the persons thus burnt should ever be perfectly well and sound; but
most commonly they die miserably by the very vehemence of the Symptoms.

5. If the burning be so deep that it reach even unto the greater Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, it is then dangerous. For when the exsiccated Vessels are
contracted and shut up, the blood and the spirit cannot then flow unto the
affected part; from whence there is caused an Atrophy, a Gangrene, and a
deprivation of sense and motion.

6. The burnings of the Abdomen are not cured without much difficulty: for the
Skin is there softer; and those Muscles by reason of their various motions are
variously extended and contracted.

7. If the burning reach even unto the Intestines, it is then deadly.

8. The burning likewise of the Groyns is very dangerous, since that those
places are moist, and therefore the more fit to receive the afflux of humors.

9. The burnings of the Eyes are also dangerous. For although they be but
light; yet notwithstanding they may produce either a stark blindness, or a
deprivation of the sight, or at least a dimmution thereof.

10. If the hairy parts be ever a whit grievously burnt, they always continue
smooth and slick: for hairs are never generated in that hard Cicatrice that is
brought over the affected part.

The Cure.
Indeed some there are that from the ordinary and well known Axiom of Physicians
(viz. That Contraries are the Remedies of Contraries) are of opinion, that such
Members as are burnt ought so be cooled; and therefore they think that unto
those parts that are burnt there must Coolers be immediately applied. But this
their opinion has its original from that vulgar but false Conceit, viz. That
the burning is only an alteration, and the introducing of a hot quality; whenas
notwithstanding the very fire it self, and likewise its Atoms, are
communicated unto the part that is burnt, and an Empyreuma (as al of them are
forced to confess) is produced: for what, indeed, else is this Empyreuma (which
al of them tell us ought to be called forth) then the small parts or particles of
the very fire, that have penetrated themselves into the burnt part: and
Experience it self teaches us, That cold things will not cure burnings; but
that (on the contrary) by the said Coolers (the fiery particles being thereby
thrust down much lower) the pain is wonderfully augmented, and inflammations,
yea and the Gangrene it self, and the Sphacelus excited: but that such things
as are hot, and that call forth the Empyreuma, are very helpful: from whence
likewise it is (as we al well know) that the burnt parts are not to be plunged
into cold water, but rather to be put somewhat near unto the fire. Which
although that Platerus seem to find fault therewith, yet use has t^ught even
the very vulgar the truth of this; and Aristotle long since took notice hereof,
as appears in his Sect. 2. Problem. 56. Neither are those things that are
applied hot, applied in the nature of Anodynes, since that al Anodynes will not
do it, as by and by in the Cure it will appear: but only those of them which
have virtue and power in them of calling forth the Empyreuma. But now
similitude and likeness begets attraction; and the external fire calls
forth the incrinsecal fire, that is to say, that very fire that it self
conveyed into the burnt part; as Ambrose Parry tells us very truly, in his Book
11. Chap. 9.

In the Cure therefore of Burnings, let the first care be to call forth the
Empyreuma: to wit, in the same manner, like as we have told you in Part 1.
Chap. 15. touching Kibes, that the cooled parts are not rightly cured if they
be put near unto the fire, or plunged into hot water; since that hence the pain
becomes so much the more intense and vehement; yea and that oftentimes a
Gangrene and Sphacelus are excited; but if they be first rubbed with Snow, or
dipped into cold water, then the cold is drawn forth: so if the Empyreuma be
called forth by those things that are hot (which is done by means of the
similitude or likeness) then this Malady is soon taken away. Which that it may
be rightly done, the Cure is to be instituted and ordered according to the
degrees of the Burning above propounded.

First of al therefore, if the Burning be but light, The Cure of a light
burning.
we must prevent what we can the breeding and arising of Pustules or blisters:
for if this be done, the sick person is then already freed from all the evil of
the burning. But now this is to be speedily done; and therefore whatsoever
Medicament we have ready at hand, we must forthwith make use thereof: and
therefore the Member (if the nature and condition thereof will so bear it) is to
be put a little near unto the fire, or else deeply plunged into hot water; or
else fomented with a Sponge, or a Linen cloth doubled, and then well soaked in
warm water, that so the Empyreuma by reason of the likeness may be extracted;
or else immediately a Linen cloth dyed in Varnish is to be imposed upon the
burnt Member; or a Linen cloth well wetted in the Ley or water in which unslaked
Lime has been extinguished. And then presently Onions bruised in a Mortar with
Salt are to be laid upon the burnt part: or else this Unguent. Viz.

Take of a raw Onion one ounce and half; Salt, Venice Soap, of each half an
ounce: mingle them in a Mortar, pouring in unto them as much of the Oil of
Roses as will suffice, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Venice Soap three ounces; raw Onion one ounce; Salt six drams; the Oil of
Eggs half an ounce; Oil of Roses and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce and half;
the Mucilage of Quince seeds one ounce: mingle them, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take the green Rind of the Elder tree, or the first shoots of the Elder; let
them he well bruised, and then boiled in Butter that is new and unsalted, and
then strain them. Or,

Take Unslaked Lime often washed in Rose Water, and with the Oil of Roses make
a Liniment. Or,

Take Oil of Lin-seed, Oil of Olives, of each one ounce and half; Salt half an
ounce; the Whites of two Eggs: Mingle them, etc. Or,

Take May Butter unsalted, Venice Soap and Varnish, of each a like quantity:
Mingle them, etc. Or,

Take Oil of Roses three ounces, Camphire three drams, the Whites of three
Eggs, and mingle them. Or,

Take the Juice of Onions three ounces; Oil of Roses, fresh Butter, the fat of
a Hog, of each one ounce; Lime washed in Rose water half an ounce; the
Mucillage of Quince seeds extracted with Rose Water one ounce; a little
Turpentine, and make a Liniment. Or,

Take the middle Rind of green Elder one ounce and half; the juice of the first
shoots of Elder one ounce; Oil of Linseed and Roses, of each six drams;
Varnish, and Hogs Fat, of each one ounce; Wax one ounce and half; Frankincense
pulverized one ounce; boil them a little while in Water; and when they be
cooled, gather the fat together, and make use thereof instead of an Unguent.

Of Lime often (even twelve times) washed, and the former water always thrown
away, there may be made many Unguents very good against Burnings: for either it
is mingled with fresh Butter, or Oil of Roses, or Oil of St. John's wort: and
sometimes there are other things added, as the Mucilage of Quince Seeds, of
Fleawort, the white of an Egg, and white Wax. These things are likewise very
good.

Take the Juice of the middle rind of the Elder one ounce and half, Cream of
Milk one pint; boil them to a Just consistence; and then add of the Mucilage of
Quince Seeds, the extracted water of Nightshade, unsalted Butter, and Ceruss,
of each half an ounce, mingle them, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Oil of Linseed four ounce, new Wax two ounces, whites of Eggs as much as
will suffice; mingle them over the fire, and make an Unguent.

For the healing of all kind of Burnings, this is likewise very prevalent.

Take Oil Olive one part, whites of Eggs two parts; let them be shaked together
with all exactness and care, and thoroughly mingled together, that so a white
Unguent may be made thereof; with the which the burnt place is oftentimes every
day to be anointed wi^h a Capons Feather, even until the Crust shall fall off of
its own accord; neither is there here any External ligature to be made use of.

Ambrose Parry (in his Parisian Nosocomium) writes, that this following has
been made use of with very good success:

Take Lard small shred one pound, let it melt in Rose water, and then let it be
strained through a thin Linen Cloth: let it be washed four times in Plantane
water, or some other convenient water: and afterward add the Yelks of three
new-laid Eggs, and so make an Unguent. Or,

Take Crawfish as many as you please: bruise them to pieces alive in a Mortar;
and afterward take new fresh Butter, make it boiling hot and then scum it:
whilst it is yet hot, cast in the mashed Crawfish and boil them until they wax
a little red; afterward strain it, and let this Unguent be kept for use, for it
is singularly good.

Omnibonus Ferrarius in his fourth Book of the Art of Curing Infants, and Chap.
25. commends this that follows as a rare secret, and such as he himself had
oftentimes made tital of with very good and happy success, although the
Pustules were already raised. Viz.

Take the whites of two Eggs, Oil of Roses two ounces, Rose water one ounce,
Mingle them together exactly.

Afterward let a white linen Cloth, or silk (that is very thin woven) being
first thoroughly wet and soaked in that Liniment be laid upon the burnt part,
and not at all taken off until the Malady be healed; but only let the Linen
Cloth be again anointed over and well wet with the said Liniment, twice or
thrice every day. After the fourth day is past, in the place of the Whites of
Eggs take the Yelks of the same; and continue the use hereof until there be
seen to appear the breeding of a new Scars-skin: and then with a pair of Cizers
let the little Cloth be from day to day cut off by some and some, where it
shall appear that this new Scarf-skin is generated, until at length the whole
Cloth be cut away; which when it is wholly taken away, there will appear no
sign or mark at all of any hurt or burning. Or,

Take the middle rind of the Elder as much as you will; boil it in the Oil of
Olives; when it is strained, add of Ceruss two parts, burnt Lead, and Litharge,
of each one part; Mingle them exactly in a Leaden Mortar.

And yet nevertheless this is to be observed touching al Unguents, that they
ought to be so ordered, that they may not stick over stiffly and too close unto
the part, but so that they may easily be cleansed and removed. Neither indeed
will these kind of Ulcers admit of a strong and exact cleansing; but they must
only be wiped clean by putting a fine thin and soft Linen Cloth upon the part,
and so cleansing it from its filth and purulency. But if the Unguents stick too
close, they then cause much pain unto the Party, and much trouble to the
Physician in his cleansing away of the filth and impurities.

If the Blisters or Pustules be elevated, and yet notwithstanding the Malady
never a whit more grievous than before, they are not then immediately to be
opened: for if they be presently opened, by reason of the Skins being made
naked and bare, there will a pain be excited, and the Cure will be the longer ere
it be wrought. But at length on the third day, when the new Scarf-skin
begins to be formed and bred, then they are to be opened: but this opening
must not be long in doing, lest that the humor within contained be made the
sharper, and so it corrode and eat through the Skin.

Unto this first degree there belongs (for the most part, Burning by
Gun-pouder
for it there be greater store of the Gunpowder, the hurt will be so much the
more vehement) that burning that happens by means of Gunpowder; which
oftentimes has this peculiar unto it, that some Corns of the said Powder will
remain and stick fast in the Skin of the Face, and there cause a great
deformity. Which if it so chance (for otherwise if the part be only hurt by the
flame of the said Powder, and that there be no Corns thereof driven into and
fixed in the Skin, it is then to be healed and cured like as other Burnings)
forthwith the Corns of Powder are to be drawn forth with a Needle, or some
other Instrument fit for the purpose: but if they cannot be al of them
presently drawn forth; we must then permit the Pustules to be lift up; for so
by this means some of these grains of Powder may be the more easily drawn
forth. But if the Surgeon be not presently called at the very beginning, and
if after the burning is quite healed there remain still some blemishes, then
there is to be laid on a Vesicatory of Cantha^ides and Leven; and the Bladders
or Blisters that are excited are to be cut with a pair of Cizers, the Powder to
be taken forth, and the place (the like hereunto is to be done likewise at
other times in such like burnings) is carefully to be washed from its blackness
with the Decoction of Fenugreek and Camomil flowers. And afterward this or the
like Linimet is to be made use of. Viz.

Take Gum Elemi one dram; Dissolve it in the Oil of Eggs, of Roses, and of
white Lilies, of each two drams; Unguent Basilicon three drams; unsalted Butter
one ounce; and mingle them.

Gulielmus Fabricius in his Book of Burnings, Chap. 6. makes use also of the
Powder of Precipitate.

But Paraeus does rightly inform us, that this Gunpowder does sometimes so
penetrate in the Skin and the Flesh (these notwithstanding being not greatly
hurt) that it cannot by any Remedies be taken or drawn forth, neither by
Phaenigms, nor by Vesicatories, nor by Scarification, not by Cupping glasses,
so that oftentimes there reman^ some certain footsteps and prints thereof; as
experience it self testifies.

But for the moderating of the pain, let the parts that lie near be anointed
over with this Unguent.

Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, of Roses, of white Wax, of each one ounce; let them
melt over the fire; and then ad of Camphyr one scruple, and a little of the
Mucilage of Quince seeds; Mingle them, etc.

Burning from Lightening.
And hither belongs that Burning that happens from Lightening. But now in
regard that Lightening has Joined therewith a Malignant and poisonous quality
(which manifestly appears from the stinking smell it carries along with it,
and that great power it has to hurt the body, yea oftentimes to Kill; as also
by this, that even the Dogs will not touch the flesh or Carcasses of those
Creatures that have been destroyed by Lightening:) therefore when any one has
been blasted and burnt with Lightening, then the Party is immeditely to be put
into a Sweat, by giving of him some of the Powder of Bezoar, or Treacle, or
Bezoar Water. The Arteries also, the Lips, the Tongue, and the Nosethrils, are
to be anointed with Wine in the which Treacle has been dissolved; and unto the
Hand-wrists and the Heart there ought to be applied Cordial Epithems! but unto
the burnt place there are to be applied Unguents made of Onions, the Leaves of
Rue, and Treacle: there are likewise to be administered Cordial Syrup^,
Conserves, and Pouders.

If there be an Eschar drawn over it, it is speedily to be removed with a
Penknife; and then such a like Unguent as this is to be applied.

Take of the Powder of the Root of Swallow-wort, of Angelica, of each half an
ounce, the Leaves of Rue, and Water-Germander, of each one dram; Treacle two
drams; Treacle Spirit three drams; Honey of Roses two ounces, mingle, etc.

The Ulcer being cleansed, this sarcotick Powder is to be strewed thereon for
the breeding of flesh.

Take Roots of Angelica, and Swallow-wort of each one ounce; Myrrh, Mastick,
Frankincense, the Leaves of Water Germander, of each half an ounce; Aloes
succotrine two drams; make a Powder, which may be sprinkled with the Juice of
the true and right Nicotian or Tobacco and Sanicle; and hereof Trochisques are
to be made, which must be dried in the shade, and (when there is occasion)
again reduced into a Powder.

But then if there be likewise any bones broken, then we are not to make use of
those extraordinary and common Astringent Cataplasms (lest that the evaporation
of the poison should be hindered) but some other, of Bean meal, Barley meal, of
Lupines, of Angelica root, of Swallow-wort, of Rue leaves, Leaves of Water
Germander, and Treacle: and this is to be renewed day by day, until such time
as the strength of the poison be overcome and discussed. And upon the place
there is a Defensive to be put, lest that the poisonous vapors through the
vessels ascend up unto the Heart.

But if the Burning be so great the vehement, The Cure of Burnings of the
second degree.
that there be not only bladders or Blisters raised, but that the Skin be
likewise burnt, overdried, and drawn together, then those Medicaments that only
draw forth the Empyreuma will not suffice, neither are they alone to be applied;
but su^are likewise to be administered that mollify and soften the Skin that is
so much dried. And therefore all the Pustules are forthwith to be cut and
opened, that so the hot and sharp humor may flow forth; and then such a like
Unguent is presently to be laid on upon the place affected,

Take of the Basilick Unguent one ounce, Oil of Roses, of Almonds, of white
Lilies, of each tree drams; Yelks of two Eggs; Mingle them etc. Or,

Take of new fresh Butter, the new and fresh fat of a Hen, of each one ounce;
new Wax, and Oil of white Lilies, of each half an ounce; let them melt upon the
fire, and then mingle therewith of Saffron one scruple, Mucilage of Quince seeds
one ounce; Mingle them, etc.

Or else this of Fabricius:

Take New fresh Butter washed in Rose Water three ounces; Oil of Violets, of
the Yelks of Eggs, of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce; Barley Meal one
ounce and half; Saffron one scruple; Mucilage of Quince seeds one ounce; Wax as
much as will suffice, and make an Unguent. Or else another of those things that
were before mentioned. Or,

Take Litharge, Ceruss or Vermilion, as much as you please; let them boil in
Vinegar; the Vinegar being passed through the filtring bag, add of the Oil of
Violets, or Oil of Eggs, a sufficient quantity; and let them be carefully
mingled together: And afterward,

Take the Pulp of sweet Apples roasted under the Embers two ounces; Barley Meal,
and Fenugreek seed, of each half an ounce; and with Milk make a Cataplasm: unto
which add of Saffron half a scruple: mingle, etc.

But upon the burnt place such a Defensive is to be laid on.

Take the Powder of Bole-armenick, Dragons Blood, Pomegranate flowers, Flowers
of red Roses, of each half an ounce; Oil of Roses three ounces; Wax one ounce
and half, a little Vinegar, and make an Unguent.

And then the Member it self is afterward to be bound about with a Swathband
that has been well wet in Oxycrate, or else a Linen cloth thoroughly moistened
in the said Oxycrate is to be imposed upon it, that both the pain may be
mitigated, and the influx of the Humors hindered and prevented. They commonly
make use of that tart Brine or pickle in which the Cabbage is kept and
preserved.

If (lastly) the Skin be not only somewhat dried, Cure of Burning of the third
degree.
but that all the Radical humidity thereof be wholly consumed, and the Native
heat altogether scattered; yea and the very flesh it self, and the Veins, and
the Arteries, and the Nerves be burnt (so that there be cause to fear that the
part may Gangrenate) in the first place, then the Pustules and all the blister
(...) to be cut, and the water contained in them to be dried up. And then
afterward we must do our endeavor that the Eschar may forthwith the first or
second day be separated; or if this may not be done, it is then to be cut in
diverse places with a Penknife, that so there may be a passage and way made for
the issuing forth of the humor, and the admission of the Medicaments unto the
part affected: and therefore instantly the Liniment of Gulielmus Fabricius
(that is anon to be described) ought to be laid on. Or else,

Take unsalted Butter washed in Rose Water three ounces; the Basilique Unguent
one ounce; the Mucillage of Quince seeds extracted with Rose Water, Oil of
sweet Almonds, and white Lilies, of each half an ounce; the Yelk of one Egg:
Mingle, etc. Or,

Take fresh Butter, Oil of Roses, Hogs Fat, of each one ounce; the Yelks of two
Eggs: mingle, etc. Or,

Take the Mucillage of Quince seeds extracted with the water of Parietary or
common Pellitory of the wall two ounces; Oil of white Lilies one ounce, the
Yelk of one Egg, Wax as much as will suffice to make a soft Unguent.

But upon the Linen cloth there must be laid on a little of the following
Emulsion:

Take Gourd seed hulled two ounces; Quince seed two drams; Fenugreek seed one
dram; pure Water three quarts; make an Emulsion: adding hereunto of white
Venice Soap half an ounce; Camphyre half a scruple: Mingle them, etc.

Defensives are not here so fit and convenient, (especially if the part begin
already to swel up, and most of al if there be danger of a Gangrene to follow)
in regard that they hinder Transpiration.

If there be a Gangrene already begun, then the Cure is to be ordered and
ordained, as we shall further show you in the following Chapter: and if there be
any thing that is quite burnt, it is timely to be separated, lest that the
puridness corrupt the sound parts.

When by the Eschar that which was burnt shall be separated, the ulcer is then
to be cleansed, filled with flesh, and closed up with a Cicatrice; as we have
hitherunto told you in the Cure of ulcers, and as we shall further show you in
the following Chapter. But yet let not those things that you administer to
produce the Cicatrice be over dry, lest the Cicatrice be made foul, unsightly,
and rugged.

Gulielmus Fabricius (to cause the Cicatrice in the burnt places) made use of
these things following:

Take Emplast. Palmei two ounces; Hens Fat, and Goose Fat, of each half an
ounce; let them melt together: and then mingle therewith of burnt Alum,
Calcined Lead, Litharge of Gold, Lapis Calaminaris, of each one dram: let them
be bruised together in a Leaden Mortar, adding thereto of the Mucillage of
Quince seeds, and Fenugreek, of each a sufficient quantity, and make an Unguent.

He likewise in this case very often made use of the Alabastrine Unguent (and
that with singular benefit) of which this is the Description:

Take of the Alabaster stone calcined one ounce and half; of the white Pumice
stone calcined half an ounce; burnt Alum two drams; make of them al a very
small and fine Powder: And afterward,

Take white Wax, Goats Suet, the Oil of sweet Almonds, and white Lilies, of
each one ounce; Oil of the Yelks of Eggs half an ounce: make an Unguent that
mollifieth, and asswageth pain, and draws over the part a fair Cicatrice.

If the Veins, and the Arteries, and the Nerves likewise be burnt (lest that
the part should be surprised with an Atrophy by reason of the want of Aliment,
but that the Vessels that were straightly shut up may be opened) they are to be
anointed over with this following Unguent.

Take the juice of Earthworms two ounces; Man's Fat, Hens Fat, Bears Fat, of
each one ounce; Spirit of Wine two drams: Mingle them, etc.

If the parts that are naturally severed and disjoined be burnt, as the
Eyelids, the Lips, the Fingers, (lest that they should grow together) dry
Liniments, or most thin little plates of Lead are to be put betwixt. And then
at length there is likewise a special regard to be had unto the parts affected,
in the choice of the Medicaments. For it will be altogether unfit and improper
to apply unto the burnt face those Medicaments that are made of Onions, liquid
Soap, as also Varnish, in regard that the Eyes may hereby be easily hurt. And
therefore upon the Face we must lay on the Unguent of Omnibonus Ferrarius
(before mentioned) or some other of Soap, that is made thicker, that so it may
not slow and run abroad. As,

Take Oil of Roses, and of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce; Venice Soap
one ounce: Mingle them, etc.

The burning of the Eyes.
If the Eyes be hurt, then let there instantly be dropped into them Woman's
Breast-milk, or any other Milk blood warm: Or let such a like Collyrie be
administered:

Take Rose Water three ounces; Plantane Water one ounce; of Quince seeds, and
Fenugreek, of each one dram: let them stand a while in a hot place, and then
let them be strained.

If the burning be vehement, and a crust be excited, we must then be very
careful that the Eyelids be not drawn back, which will cause a great deformity:
and therefore a Fomentation by Emollients is to be ordained. As,

Take Roots of Marshmallows, of common Mallows, of each six drams; the Leaves
of Marshmallows, and common Mallows, the flowers of Melilote, and of the Elder
tree, of each half a handful; seeds of Fenugreek, and Linseed, and Quince seed,
of each half an ounce; boil them, and let the Eyelids be fomented with the
Decoction.

Afterward let them be anointed with this Unguent:

Take of the Mucillage of Quince seeds, and Fenugreek, of each two drams; Oil
of sweet Almonds, Man's Fat, of each one ounce; Gum Elemi one dram: let them
melt over the fire, and then let them be strained. Or,

Take Oil of white Lilies, Oil of Eggs, of each half an ounce; Man's Fat six
drams; Gum Elemi two drams; new Wax one ounce; Saffron one scruple; let an
Unguent be made hereof.

But then likewise let the Skin be oftentimes extended with both the Hands.

If the Joints be burnt (in regard that they are parts almost bare and void of
flesh, nervous, The Burning of the Joints.
and endued with an exquisite sense) lest there should be caused an afflux of
humors, and so a more grievous Malady should thereupon follow, Universal
Evacuations are not to be omitted. But let not the Topical Remedies be over
sharp, as are those of Onions, Soap, and the like; but let them be mild and
Anodyne: and great care must be taken to prevent the contraction of the Nerves,
an the incurvation or crooking of the Joint. As,

Take Oil of white Lilies, and of sweet Almonds, and of Earthworms, of each one
ounce; the Fat of a Hen, and Man's Fat, of each half an ounce; Unguent Dialthaeu
six drams; Gum Elemi two drams: Mingle them and make an Unguent.

Ferula's likewise, or other Instruments, are gently, and without causing any
pain, to be fitted unto the Member, to prevent the contraction of the same. But
if the Nerves shall chance to be contracted, and the joints incurvated, then
(generals being first premised) the part affected must first of al be fomented
with an Emollient Decoction, made of the Root of Marshmallows, Briony Roots,
white Lily Roots, the Leaves of Marshmallows, and common Mallows, Ground Pine
or Herb Ivy, Flowers of Camomile, of St. Johnswort, Linseed, and Fenugreek seed.

Afterward let it be anointed with this following Unguent.

Take of the Unguent Dialthaea one ounce; Man's Fat, Hens Fat, and Goose Fat, of
each half an ounce; the Juice of Earthworms one ounce: and mingle them.

And upon the part there is to be imposed the Emplaster Diachylon simplex, and
the Emplaster de Melilot. or the Melilote Plaster.

And withal likewise the contracted Member is with fit and convenient
Instruments sensibly and by degrees to be extended; such Instruments as these
we speak of are to be found lively set forth and delineated in the Surgery
of Gualtherus Ryff, and in Gulielmus Fabricius his Tract of Cumbustions; and
thither we refer you for the sight of them.

If the Groins be burnt, (in regard that those places are moist, loose, The
burning of the Groyns.
and very apt to receive fluxions; and because that thither the humors do very
easily flow by reason of the vicinity of the Glandules, and that thereupon a
Gangrene is there soon excited) let the Medicaments be there more dry than in
other parts. And therefore if there shall break forth no Pustules, then the
Medicaments that are made of Soap, Onions, and Lime, are very useful. But if
the Pustules be already raised up on high, then let them be timely and speedily
opened: and afterward let this Unguent be imposed.

Take Unguent of Roses one ounce, Unguent Basilique six drams, Oil of the Yelks
of Eggs, and white Lilies, of each half an ounce; Myrrh and Aloes, of each one
dram; Mingle them, etc.

Upon the Unguent let the whole part be covered with such a like Cataplasm;

Take Barley meal, Bean meal, and that of the Bitter Vetch Orobus, of each one
ounce, Powder of Roses half an ounce; with Honey of Roses, or Oxymel simple,
make a Cataplasm.

But if the burning be great, so that there be fear of a Gangrene, then those
Medicaments are to be made use of that shall be prescribed in the Chapter
following touching a Gangrene.

There are likewise oftentimes very unsightly and deformed Cicatrices left
remaining after the burning, Cicatrices how they are to be prevented.
by reason of the extraordinary drying caused by the Fire. If this be feared it
is then to be prevented by applying of Emollients during all the time of the
Cure. But those Remedies that are well enough known to be over drying we ought
not to make use of them for the producing of the Cicatrice: to wit, the part is
to be fomented with that Decoction that was but even now propounded, as
touching the Contraction of the Members. And afterward the part is to be
anointed with this Liniment:

Take Oil of Roses, and white Lilies, of each half an ounce; Man's fat, Hens
fat, the fat of the Fish Thymallus, of each three drams; Oil of Myrrh half a
dram, the Juice of Earthworms half an ounce; Mingle them.

The Diet.
And withal let there be a good and right Course of Diet appointed unto the
Patient. Let his Diet therefore be such as is Cooling and moistening; and let
the sick Person eat Brothes, in which Endive, Sorrel, Lettice, and Borrage were
boiled: and on the Contrary let him abstain from those things that are hot;
sharp, and salt: let him drink no Wine, but Barley Water, or small Beer. If need
require, there may likewise be appointed the opening of a Vein, and the
Purgation of the Body.

Chap. 19. Of a Gangrene and Sphacelus.
INdeed a Gangrene and a Sphacelus are neither Tumors nor Ulcers: neither (to
say truth) is Sphacelus so much as a Disease; but only the very Mortification
and deadning of the part; but then the Gangrene is a notable and extraordinary
Distemper, tending unto the aforesaid Mortification; which may likewise invade
the Party without any Tumor at all; yet notwithstanding because that most
frequently it follows Tumors, and especially Inflammations, there are some
therefore that among Tumors do treat of the Gangrene, and the Sphacelus. But
there are others, who (because that when the part is Gangrenated an Ulcer
necessarily follows thereupon; and in regard that after the Sphacelus there
is an Ulcer left remaining) treat of the Gangrene and Sphacelus among the
Ulcers: and these we choose to follow, and therefore it is that in the end of
this Tract touching Ulcers, we thought fit to say something of the Gangrene, and
the Sphacelus.

Now the Gangrene (which they call the Fire of Marcellus or St. A Gangrene what
it is.
Anthonies Fire) is an imperfect Mortification or Corruption of a part, tending
unto a Necrosis, that is to say, a deadness or Mortification; unto which unless
there be speedy and fit Remedies administered for the Curing thereof, the Member
becomes altogether dead, loses all sense and life, and feels nothing at
all, whether it be Cut or burnt: which Necrosis being already thus far
perfected is by the Latins termed Syrderatio, and by the Greeks Sphacelus; so
that these two Maladies differ not but only in their greatness. For in a
Sphacelus the part is wholly deprived of all sense and life, and is altogether
dead: but in a Gangrene there is not as yet present a perfect Corruption of the
part. And in regard that in a Gangrene there is not as yet so great a
Corruption, neither a perfect and absolute Mortifitacion, therefore it only
invadeth the softer parts: but now the Sphacelus (in regard that it is a
perfect, The different between a Gangrene and Sphacelus.
entire and absolute Corruption of the part) does not only invade the softer
parts, to wit, the Skin, the flesh, the Veins, the Arteries, and the Nerves;
but it likewise corrupts and spoyleth even the very bones themselves. And yet
nevertheless we acknowledge, that in the Sphacelus likewise the softer parts are
at first only corrupted, and that not the bones, but the Veins also, and the
Arteries, and the Nerves, remain and continue safe and sound; but yet if the
putrid part be not speedily separated, it cannot possibly be avoided but that
the more solid parts must likewise be infected with this putridness.

The Causes.
Whenas therefore in the Gangrene and Sphacelus there is caused a Mortification
of the Member; in the Gangrene indeed one that is but only beginning; but in
the Sphacelus a perfect and absolute Mortification; and that the mortification
of the part depends upon the destruction of the innate and natural heat (as
on the contrary, the life of the part depends upon the preservation and
safety of the said Native heat) we conclude that whatsoever destroys the
Native heat of the part, that same may likewise be accounted a cause of the
Gangrene and Sphacelus. Now the Native heat is destroyed, when by its contrary
it is either corrupted or suffocated, or dissipated, or altogether extinguished
for want of Aliment. It is destroyed by its contrary, either acting by a
manifest quality, and cold; or else by a secret and hidden quality, as by
poison. It is suffocated, when the transpiration it hindered: It is dissipated
by a greater heat: It is extinguished, if necessary food and sustenance be
denied: so that there are (as you see) five causes of the Generation of a
Gangrene and Sphacelus: to wit, overmuch cold, a poisonous quality, the
hinderance of transpiration, a vehement external heat, and a defect of Aliment,
and the heat flowing in.

For first of al we see that oftentimes (in the Winter) those that take
Journeys in the Snow and Ice have the extreme parts of their feet, and of their
hands, their Ears, and their nostrils almost dead with cold, by reason of the
vehemence thereof: and thus it happens sometimes also, that by reason of
Medicaments over cooling in a Phlegmone, or an Erysipelas, carelessly and
incauteously administered, the part is taken and surprised with a Gangrene, or a
Sphacelus: although I had rather refer this case unto transpiration hindered.

There is also a very great power of destroying the innate heat in those things
that are poisonous, and such things as destroy our Bodies by a secret and
hidden quality. For sometimes the humors in our bodies do so degenerate, and
acquire so great a malignity, that they bring a Necrosis or deadness unto those
parts whither they are by Nature thrust, as we see it done in a Carbuncle. And
so in like manner the biting and stingings of poysonful Creatures do corrupt
and putrefie the parts. And the same also is done by the Septick Medicaments,
which if they be not wisely and carefully administered have in them a power of
corrupting the flesh; especially in places that are hot and moist, as in the
Emunctories, the privy parts, and the other places that are like unto these.

Thirdly, Transpiration hindered exciteth likewise a Gangrene. For whereas our
heat stands in need of perpetual ventilation and cooling, if this be denied,
it is suffocated by the abundance of Vapors. And for this very cause in great
Inflammations, and especially in the moist parts, there very frequently
happens a Gangrene, the Native heat being extinguished; as otherwise likewise
we see that a little flame is extinguished and put out by casting thereon good
store of water; and that the flame is stifled if it be put under a
Cupping-glass that has no hole or vent in it, or any other Vessel whatsoever
that is kept covered, which is preserved in a Cupping-glass that is perforated,
or any other Vessel that is open. And this chiefly happens, if in Fevers
(especially if they be malignant) the humor be with violence either thrust
forth, or that of their own accord they rush unto any one part. And so I
remember that here a certain Citizen that was taken with a malignant Fever,
from the humors that were thrust down unto the Scrotum, had the said Scrotum al
of it so inflamed and mortified with a Sphacelus, that there was a necessity of
cutting off the whole Scrotum or Cods, so that the stones hung down altogether
naked and bare; which yet notwithstanding (the Gangrene being cured) became
afterward covered again with flesh that grew out of the Groyns. That
Inflammation likewise which the Gangrene follows is sometimes caused by
Wounds, and these not always great, but oftentimes also very small and slight
Wounds, that seem inconsiderable, and of no moment. So Henricus ab Here
relates in the first Book of his rare Physical Observations, Obser. 12. That
he was present and saw a man fifty nine years of Age, who having pared the
Nails of his Toes, and cut them to the quick, was presently surprised with a
Gangrene, and within a very short space died thereof. And he tells us
likewise of two other eminent persons, who being desirous to have the hard and
callous brawniness of their feet pared away, were both of them taken with a
Gangrene that within a short time caused their deaths. And this may likewise be
done by Emplastick Medicaments, in great Inflammations, and especially if they
be unseasonably applied in moist places, which frequently produce there a
suffocation of the Native heat.

Fourthly, A preternatural heat likewise, and such as is extraneous and from
without produces the Gangrene, by wasting the Radical moisture, and the Native
heat: and so many times a Gangrene follows after great burnings.

And lastly, A Gangrene arises from the defect of Aliment, to wit, the blood,
and the spirit flowing in, that is altogether necessary and requisite for the
cherishing of the Natural heat implanted within. For whereas the innate heat
stands in need of continual Nutriment (as the flame does of Oil) if this be
denied, it languisheth and is extinguished; like as is the flame when the Oil
in the Lamp fails. And in this manner a Gangrene happens unto the external
parts of the body, sometimes in an Atrophy, Consumption, and the like Chronical
and long continued Diseases that extenuate the body. And for this very cause it
is that when the greater Joints are put out of Joint, if they be not again well
and rightly set, then the disjoynted bone presses together the vessels that
lie near, and hinders the influx of the blood, and of the Spirits into those
parts that lie underneath; from whence there follows a leanness and
consumption of the said parts, and in process of time very frequently a
Gangrene also. And so it is found by experience, that from a hard Tumor about
the Vena Cava (where parting several ways it descends into the Thighs)
pressing the same together, and hindering the descent of the blood into the
Thigh, a Gangrene very often arises. And in this manner a Gangrene likewise
happens, if any part be too hard and long bound about with Ligatures and
bands; or else if Medicaments that are over astringent shall be imposed upon any
part.

Signs Diagnostick.
It is no hard matter to know the Gangrene For the color of the part begins
to be changed and turned unto black, the flesh to grow loose and flaggy, the
pulse and sense to be diminished, and the heat to be abolished. Which said
Symptoms the more the Gangrene tends unto a perfect corruption and a
Sphacelus, by so much the more are they increased and made more evident. For in
a perfect and absolute corruption and Sphacelus the life and sense of the part
are wholly abolished; there is no pulse at al to be perceived; the part,
whether you cut or burn it, is insensible of pain; the flesh appears to be
cold, is made soft and flaggy, so that it yields unto the touch when it is
pressed by the fingers; which yet nevertheless, after it is thoroughly dried,
becomes black, wan, and altogether deadned, and it yields a noysom and
stinking savor like that of a dead Carcass; and the skin if it be taken up with
the fingers seems to be separated from the flesh lying underneath it. And
here Ambrose Parry advises every Physician, that when he has discovered by
these signs that there is a Gangrene, and a Sphacelus, he no longer defer the
doing of what is to be done, neither suffer himself to be deceived by the
motion; some whereof is oftentimes still left remaining even in a mortified and
dead Member. For in a Sphacelus the corrupted parts are moved, not by the
motion of the whole and entire Muscle, but because the Head (and no more) of the
Muscle is yet whole; the which while it is moved, it does together with it draw
the Tendon that is inseparable from it, and the tail likewise thereof, although
it be now wholly dead, and without any true and proper motion.

And these signs (that appear in a perfect corruption and Sphacelus) are still
the same in every one of them; whatsoever the cause be that it draws its
original from; whether it be from cold, or from a poisonous quality, or from
transpiration hindered, or from an extraneous heat, or lastly, from the defect
of Aliment; unless it be in this only that such like Symptoms in a Sphacelus
that has its original from an occult cause and such as is poisonous (as for
example, the Delirium or dotage, the Syncope, and the like) are greater and
more grievous. But in a Gangrene and mortification that is but yet now
beginning, there is observed a diversity of the signs and symptoms, according
as the Gangrene has its original from diverse and different causes. For in a
Gangrene that arises from cold there suddenly appears an acute and pricking
pain, and a redness in the part, which soon after is changed into a black
color; and the heat that was in the part is extirguished; and there is
perceived a coldness and stupidity (with a certain kind of horror) as it uses
to be in (Quartan Agues. And moreover, in a Gangrene that proccedeth from a
poisonous and malignant humor in the body, which Nature thrusts forth unto
the external parts, there is present a continual Fever, and a strong conflict
of Nature with the Disease; from whence the Syncope, Dotage, and the like, have
their original; and such a Gangrene as this arises for the most part in the
external Members, and the extreme parts thereof, (as for instance, the great
Toe of the Foot) with a certain Pustule or Bladder, (under which there is
present a black spot) which oftentimes is suddenly derived into the whole Leg
and Thigh.

But that Gangrene that follows upon great and extraordinary Inflammations
(that proceed most usually from the hinderance of Transpiration) is known by
this, That the fresh and flourishing color that is wont to appear in
Inflammations is turned into that which is pale and wan; that beating pain
which before did infest now cease, the sense is become dull, and there arise
very great Pustules that are full of a thin ichorous excrement, like unto that
that comes from the washing of raw flesh. Which appear almost the same, when
the Gangrene has its original from an extraneous heat. If lastly, the Gangrene
seize upon the part by reason of the want of Aliment, or through a dry
distemper, then there is present neither pain nor inflammation, nor swelling,
but rather a leanness, and the body is immediately cooled; and this Gangrene
happens for the most part in those places of the body that are the utmost and
extreme, as for instance, the Ankles and Toes. But when at length the Pustules
arise, and the part becomes pale and wan, then the pains likewise appear, and
the Fever is excited. But if the Gangrene happen by reason of hard tying and
Ligatures, then the part swells and it distended, and there arise greater
Pustules, full of a thin excrement, resembling the washing of raw flesh: but the
evident Causes we may easily learn and understand from the sick person himself.

Prognostics.
1. That the Gangrene is a Malady very dangerous is sufficiently manifest unto
every one. For unless it be speedily cured, it degenerateth in a very short
time into a Sphacelus, and the part becomes altogether dead. For this cause
therefore there is not any the least delay to be made; but help is to be
afforded with all possible speed: which may be done with less difficulty in a
body that is as yet young, strong and vigorous, where the vital spirits are as
yet entire, and especially where the Muscles and Nerves are as yet unhurt.

2. But that Gangrene which is with an afflux of poisonous humors, and an
occult quality, is more difficult to be cured than that which is without any
such afflux: for there are but very few that recover of such Gangrenes.

3. There are Gangrenes that are yet more dangerous, and these are they that
begin in the moist parts: for the innate heat is sooner suffocated in such
parts by the great store of humors abounding therein.

4. And for this cause it is that the Gangrene that arises in Hydropical
persons is likewise very seldom cured, but most usually it degenerateth into a
Sphacelus; and that which arises from the Antecedent Cause is likewise ever
more dangerous than that which has its original from the primitive Cause; in
regard that in the former the Bowels are more affected.

5. But a Sphacelus is yet far the more dangerous Malady. For the part that is
taken with the Sphacelus can no way be restored and made sound again; but it is
forthwith to be cut off, and separated from the part that has life: which if
it be not speedily done, then the sound parts that lie near will likewise be
infected, and the putridness will at length creep into the rest of the body,
from whence there will be extreme danger of present death; before which there
usually precede Dotings, Watchings, the Syncope, Convulsions, Ructures and
Belchings, Sobbings, and a cold Sweat breaking forth over all the Body: and
some of them die while they ate yet speaking, and others of them die being as
it were oppressed with sleep.

The Cure.
The Cure of the Gangrene that it may be rightly proceeded in, first of al
regard is to be had unto the Diet (and the Antecedent Cause, if it be present
in the body) before ever we come to Topics. Most Physicians prescribe and
command a Diet that is cool and drying: which albeit that it be most true of
that Gangrene that is accompanied with an afflux of Humors, and follows great
Inflammations: yet nevertheless the Diet is sometimes also to be varied
according to the variety of the Causes; as anon in the species or several kinds
of Cure we shall further show you.

And so also the Evacuation of the blood, and the preparation and purgation of
the vicious humors ought to be enjoined, according to the Nature of the peccant
humors. This in the general is to be pre-cautioned, that regard be had unto the
Heart, that it be well and safe guarded against all the malignant vapors that
exhale from the putrefying part. And therefore we must here administer for the
comforting and strengthening of the Heart, Medicaments of Borrage, Bugloss,
Carduus Benedictus, the smallest Sorrel, Bole-armenick, Terra sigillata, Bezoar
stone, Citrons, Treacle, Mithridate, Species of Diamargarit. frigid.
Electuarium de Gemmis, Confection of Hyacinth, Alkermes, and the like. Or,

Take the Water of Scabious, Sorrel, Borrage, Roses, and Carduus Benedictus, of
e^^h one ounce and half; Syrup of Sorrel, Citrons, and Pomegranates, of each
one ounce; the species of Diamargarit. frigid. Bole armenick, and Terra
sigillata, of each one scruple; Mingle them, and make a Potion. Or,

Take Conserve of Roses two ounces; of Sorrel, of Borrage, and of Gilliflower,
of each one ounce; Citron rind candied, Rob de Ribes, of each half an ounce;
prepared Margarites, Bole-armenick, Terra sigillata, the temperate Cordial
Species, of each one scruple; Syrup of Sorrel, and of Citrons, as much as will
suffice, and mingle them.

Let the Heart be likewise guarded externally with Topics: As,

Take the Water of Roses two ounces; of Borrage and Sorrel one ounce and half;
of Carduus Benedictus one ounce; Vinegar of Water-Germander six drams; Spirit
of Roses one scruple, Mace, Lign-aloes, Rinds of the Citron, of each half a
dram; Saffron half a scruple, Camphire six grains: Mingle them, and make an
Epithem, which must be applied unto the Region of the Heart, for its defense
and preservation.

In a Gangrene likewise for the most part the sound part ought to be fenced and
guarded; and we must be always doing our endeavor, that the said part receive
none of the putridness. And for this end the above mentioned Defensives of
Bole-armenick, and Terra sigillata must be administered; unto which (by reason
of the malignity) Water Germander may be added, and mingled therewith. As,

Take Bole-armenick one ounce; Terra sigillata half an ounce, Hartshorn burnt
and prepared one dram, Camphire half a dram, Wax six drams; Oil of Roses four
ounces, Rose Vinegar one ounce, the juice of Water Germander half an ounce, the
white of one Egg: mingle them and make an Unguent. As,

Take Bole-armenick, and Terra sigillata (or sealed Earth of Lemnos) of each
half an ounce* Mingle them with Vinegar of Water Germander. Gulielmus Fabricius
frequently made use of this that follows.

Take Barley meal four ounces; Bolearmenick two drams, Galls, Cypress Nuts,
Pomegranate rinds, of each one dram and half; with a sufficient quantity of
Oxymel simplex make a Cataplasm.

A Gangrene from overmuch cooling.
But now that we may come unto the more special Cure, we will in the first place
declare unto you, in what manner the Gangrene that has its original from an
overgreat cooling ought to he Cured. But now that it may be well known, how and
in what manner al those are to be dealt withal that have been over cooled
(whether it be so that the Gangrene be already present and in being, or that it
be only near at hand) we will from the very begi^^ing briefly pursue and declare
the truth of the thing.

The Cure of such as are overcooled.
If therefore there be any one over cooled, yet notwithstanding that as yet
there is no Gangrene present; neither is the part as yet become wan, pale, and
cold, but that there is rather a redness in the part, together with a vehement
and burning pain; then in this case the man is not instantly to be moved near
unto the Fire, but he is rather to be placed somewhat more remote from it, that
so by degrees the heat may recover and recollect it self. But if it be so that
the part be not altogether stiff and stifled with cold, so that there be no
longer any blood left therein, then it is forthwith to be welchafed, and rubbed
with Snow; or the overcooled members are likewise to be thoroughly washed with
cold water, upon which they will begin by little and little to wax warm, and to
recover their former heat. Which the Inhabitants of the Northern Climates have
much in use; who are wont when any Travelers are overcold, stiff, and almost
dead therewith, first of all to plunge them deep into cold water; and before
ever they give them any entertainment, to wash and rub their Hands, Feet,
Noses, and other Members, with Snow. And that from the inward parts the heat
may the more strongly diffuse it self unto the external parts, and that all the
cold may be expelled, it will be requisite to administer suppings made of Wine,
and to drink Wine and Treacle mingled together. The aforesaid People of the
Seprentrional Regions use to give their Guests (when they are almost dead with
cold) Hydromel, with the Powder of Cinamom, Cloves, and Ginger, and the like
Spices; after which they put them to bed, and cause them there to Sweat. For
which purpose there be some that outwardly apply likewise unto the body Flagons
or Stone Pots full of hot water. Afterward when the pain and the coldness are
something mitigated, gentle rubbings with the hands anointed with the Oil of
Camomile, sweet Almonds, and Dil, are to be administered; and the parts are to
be fomented with sweet Milk, in the which there may also be boiled the Leaves
and Berries of the Laurel, Rosemary, Camomile, Sage, Organy, French Lavender,
and the like. The Decoction of Rape roots is likewise singularly useful; and
commonly unto those members that are pained with overcoldness they use to apply
the Decoction of Rape roots that have been first frozen with cold.

After this we must betake our selves unto those things that are hotter, such
as the Oil of Lilies, of Turpentine, of Wax, Nettle seed, Cresses. But if there
be not only a fear of a Gangrene, but that there also be one already present,
and that the Member already begin to die, we must then use our utmost endeavor
that the heat may be preserved in the part, and that from other parts it may be
again called back unto it: and therefore here is little or no benefit to be
expected from Defensives, but Scarifications are rather to be administered, and
the parts to be fomented with those hot Medicaments that were but even now
mentioned; unto which we may add Scabious water, Germander, the Root of
Asclepias or Swallow-wort, and the like. Unto the parts there may be
administered, Treacle, Mithridate, Trochisques of the Viper, the Ley in which
Water Germander has been boiled, and Treacle Waters.

Secondly, A Gangrene from the afflux of Malignant humors.
If the Gangrene has its original from the afflux of Malignant humors, or a
malignant quality; then by appointing a Cooling and drying Diet, and by
administering of Meats sauced and seasoned with Citrons, Lemmons, and
Pomegranates; and likewise by evacuating and emptying forth of the peccant and
depraved humors, either by opening a Vein, or by purging Medicaments (if need
require, and that the nature of the Disease, and the strength of the Patient
will bear it; but we are here always to take heed how we give those things that
are too strong) the Malignity is to be expelled, and the depraved matter to be
driven forth from the more inward unto the external parts; and such a like Cure
almost is here to be instituted, as is wont to be in malignant Fevers; to wit,
there are Medicaments to be administered of Citrons, Sorrel, Roses, Borrage,
Water Germander, Carduus benedict. Dittany of Crete, Swallow-wort, Angelica,
Treacle likewise and Mithridate. And we must do our endeavor that a Sweat may
be provoked by these medicaments, and that the Poison may be driven forth from
the Noble members unto the exterior parts. Which that it may the more
successfully and more easily be done, the malignant matter is likewise by
Topics to be drawn forth unto the external parts.

Where we are also to take notice, that if poison stick outwardly unto the body
(as it happens oftentimes from the strokes of poysonful Creatures) then
Defensives are to be administered, lest that the Poison creep broader, and
spread it self unto the more interior and Noble parts. But if the malignant
matter be bred in the body, then Defensives are by no means to be administered;
but the said Matter is only to be called forth unto the external parts; unto
which end Scarifications may be administered unto the part affected,
Cupping-glasses likewise and Leeches may be applied; and moreover the part also
may be washed with the Decoction of those Medicaments that resist malignity and
putridness; such as are Wormwood, Rue, Dittany, Asclepias or Swallow-wort,
Angelica, and especially Water Germander, which is of a most sovereign virtue
in all Gangrenes, and that that has in it an extraordinary power to preserve
from putridness. And others there are that to attract do make use of the
Raddish root, the Seed of Cresses, and the like.

But if Poison shall chance unto the body from without, and shall either by a
blow, biting, or any other touch be transufed into the part affected; then
those Medicaments that do strongly attract the Poison, dry it up, and consume
it, are to be made use of: for which end and purpose, an actual Cautery may
most fitly be administered. The part affected being either scarified, or burnt,
then there are further to be applied those Medicaments that resist putridness,
and prevent the Necrosis or Mortification, and such as do also attract and draw
the offensive and depraved matter; as an Emplaster of the aforementioned
Medicaments; with which we may likewise mingle Leven, and Garlic roasted in
the Embers. And at length, the Gangrene being in a fair way of recovery, if
there has happened any Ulcer from the scarification or burning, it is then to
be cleansed by Medicaments of the Juice of Smallage, and Honey of Roses (unto
which if need be, there may be added some Spirit of Wine) and other things are
moreover to be done that are fit and convenient for the Ulcer.

A Gangrene from Inflammation
Thirdly, The Gangrene that is wont to follow upon great Inflammations, and to
arise from the abundance of blood and humors that suffocate the Natural heat of
the part, is cured in this manner. First of all, the Diet that is appointed
ought to be slender, and such as is cooling. The blood and humors that flow
overmuch into the part are to be emptied forth of the whole body, by opening of
a Vein, Scarifications Cupping-glasses, Purgers, and other convenient Remedies;
and lest that they should any longer flow into the affected part, they are to
be drawn back, and derived unto some other place; and round about the part
affected there is some kind of Defensive to be applied, as we told you above,
in the first Part, Chap. 5. touching an Inflammation.

And then immediately the blood and humors that are corrupted in the part, and
suffocate the Native heat, are to be evacuated out of the part affected, that
so the cause may be taken away, and the former heat and vigor may be restored
unto the Member.

Wherefore the part must presently (since that there is danger in delay; and
the blood that has already begun to be corrupted, by reason of its abundance
and thickness can hardly be digested or dissipated by Medicaments) be scarified
with many sections, and these ought to be made deep enough; and of the
corrupted blood a sufficient quantity (to wit, great store and plenty thereof)
is to be evacuated. And yet nevertheless, in the greatness and depth of the
Incisions, we ought to have respect unto the greatness of the Affect it self;
and according as the Affect is more or less nigh unto putridness, and a
Sphacelus, so thereafter the Incisions are to be moderated. Some likewise there
are that apply Leeches, or the lesser sort of Cupping-glasses, if the blood be
not sufficiently and plentifully evacuated by scarifications alone. The
Incision being made, the part is to be washed with salt water, or a Ley; unto
which we may likewise add Lupines, or Aloes, and boil them together; that so if
any of the thicket blood continue yet sticking in the part, it may be washed
off; and that the Relics or Remainders of the putrid matter may be evacuated;
and al possible resistance made against the putridness. And for this end, this
Decoction following may be made use of; with the which the affected Member (as
often as any new Medicaments are applied) is to be washed.: Viz.

Take of the strongest Ley, and of the best Vinegar, of each one quart; of
Water Germander, Lupines, Wormwood bruised, of each half a handful; of
Flowerdeluce root, round Aristolochy, and Swallow-wort, of each half an ounce:
let them all be boiled to the consumption of the third part; unto the streining
add of Aloes and Myrrh pulverized, half an ounce; and then let them boil once
or twice again; at length add Hooney of Roses one ounce. Spirit of the best
Wine three ounces; Mingle them, etc.

When the part is washed, then the Aegyptiack Unguent is to be laid on; which
here is reputed the most excellent of all the rest, as being a most efficacious
Remedy for the taking away of putridness, and for the separating of the dead
flesh from the sound. But if the Corruption be more then ordinary, then
Gulielmus Fabricius compoundeth such a like Remedy as this following, which
likewise resists malignity.

Take Rust of Brass three ounces, of the best Honey, and with the Decoction of
Wormwood, and Water Germander scummed, one pint, Vinegar of Squils, six ounces,
Alum, and Salt Armoniack, of each half an ounce; the Juice of Rue, and Water
Germander, of each two ounces; boil them to a good thickness: and afterward
add of the best Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an ounce; Camphire one
dram, and mingle them.

This Water is likewise very useful, if a woollen Cloth be we therein, and so
imposed upon the place affected; it has likewise been happily and successfully
administered in the Gangrene of the Cods; of which we have spoken above.

Take Vitriol one ounce, the tops of the Oak one handful, Frankincense half an
ounce, Camphyre two drams, Urine two pints and half; boil them to the
Consumption of a third part, and then strain them.

But the Aegypriack Unguent is not alone to be applied, but upon the Unguent
that Cataplasm is also to be imposed, which resolves, dries, and hinders
putrefaction; such an one as Johannes de Vigo in his second Book, first Tract,
and seventh Chapter describes and commends; and which many other Physicians
and Surgeons now a days likewise make use of. And all these are to be
applied blood-warm; and they are so long to be continued, until the putridness
be removed.

But if the Malady will not yield unto these Remedies, then we are to have
recourse unto those that are stronger, to wit, Causticks, such as those
Trochisques of Andro, Polyidas, Musa, and Pafio, which dissolved in Vinegar and
Wine may be imposed upon the part. Many indeed do here commend, and prefer
Arsenick before all other Remedies; but Gulielmus Fabricius does (and not
without good Cause) reject and altogether disallow of it in the Cure of a
Gangrene, as that that not only has in it a Septick and putrefying faculty,
and a quality of melting the flesh, as it were; but that likewise produces
very great and grievous Symptoms, vehement pain, Dotings, Syncope's, and the
like, the malignant vapors being communicated unto the principal part. It is
therefore more safe to make use of an actual Cautery, as that which hinders
and preventeth putridness, dries and corroborateth the part.

This is also much commended.

Take Mercury; dissolve it in Aqua fortis; when it is dissolved, precipitate it
the Oil of Tartar; after it is precipitated, wash it. Or Mercury alone
dissolved and mingled with the Water of the Trinity Flowers; and woollen Clothes
wet in this Liquor may be imposed on the part.

The Crust in what manner soever it be produced is to be taken away by those
Medicaments that have been above declared, in the first Part, and Chap. 13.
touching a Carbuncle. Neither are we to wait so long til Nature shall altogether
have separated the Corrupt from the Sound, but the highest part of the Crust is
with the edge of a Knife or a Penknife to be cut even unto the sound part, that
so there may be a way made for the Medicaments unto the deeper parts, and the
rest that are corrupted. For if we expect until the Crust shall be freed of its
own accord, it may possibly happen, that under the Crust a new putridness may
be contracted. The rest of the Cure is in the same order to be proceeded in, as
is fit to be done in Ulcers.

Fourthly, If the Gangrene happen from overmuch heat, A Gangrene from too much
heat.
then (a Cold Diet being prescribed, and the hot humors being duly qualified
and evacuated) if the Malady take its original from an internal Cause, the
Member affected is to be scarified, and then washed with such a Decoction as
this.

Take the Water of Endive, Sorrel, Lettice, Nightshade, and Vinegar, of each
one pint; Syrup of Sorrel, two pound, of Lupines half an ounce, Water Germander
half a handful, Salt three ounces: boil them till a third part be consumed.

After this the Aegyptiack Unguent, and the Cataplasm but even now mentioned,
is to be imposed; and the rest which were before prescribed are speedily to
follow. Where notwithstanding this is to be observed, that (unless in case of
urgent necessity) we must not have recourse unto the actual C^utery, lest that
hereby (to wit, by the power and force of the fire) the extraneous heat, which
is the Cause of the Gangrene, be augmented.

Fifthly and lastly, If the Gangrene arise from the defect of Aliment, and
Blood, and Spirits, A Gangrene by reason of an Atrophy in the part.
and chiefly in truth if it be by reason of a Dryness, and an Atrophy
(necessa^ry Nutriment being denied unto the part) then meats that are hot and
moist, easy of Digestion, and such as generate much and good blood, are to be
given unto the sick Person; and outwardly the body is likewise to be moistened
with Oyntment^ of sweet Oil, or with Oil of sweet Almonds; and all things are
carefully to be avoided that exsiccate and dry the body. And unto the part it
self that is already affected with the Gangrene the Aliment is by all manner of
means to be attracted. And therefore here there is no place left for
Defensives; in regard that they shut and stop up all passage of the blood and
Spirits unto the part affected. And therefore we are not only to anoint the
part affected and the other members with the Juice of Earthworms, which is
made of the said Earthworms first washed in Water, and then in Wine, and so
put into a great Vessel with good store of the Oil of sweet Almonds and
Violets, and melted by a gentle and moderate heat over hot Embers, and
afterward strained (which is a sprecial and sovereign Remedy in the Atrophy,
and extenuation of the parts) but the part affected is therewith likewise gently
to be rubbed and chafed; unto which also Cupping-glasses not scarified are to
be applied. But it will be most fit and requisite, if there be already present a
putridness, to administer those things that do alike both attract and resist
putridness; such as are, Salt Water boiled with Water-Germander, Liquid Pitch,
with the meal of Lupines, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, Myrrh, and the like. But
if the Gangrene has already made any progress, the part is then to be
scarified, and the Aegyptiack Unguent, and that likewise that is compounded of
Pitch, and those other things a little before mentioned, are to be laid thereon.

A Gangrene from the interception of the blood and spirits.
Moreover, If the Gangrene happen from the interception of the Blood, and the
Spirits likewise, (whatsoever the Cause then be that thus intercepteth the
blood and the spirits) it is immediately to be taken away; as, if the said
interception be from the binding of the part, it is forthwith to be loosened;
and withal those Medicaments that resist putridness, as likewise those that
discuss that that is corrupted (such as are those that are made of the Meal of
Beans, of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of Lupines, Aloes, Water-Germander, and the
like) are to be imposed. And if the Gangrene has already gotten unto any
height, the place is to be scarified; and those other things that are required
in all Gangrenes, are to be done. If an astringent and repelling Medicament be
the Cause, the said Medicament being removed, the heat is to be recalled by
Frictions, Lotions, and Anointings. And so we must also proceed in the Gangrene
that has its original from other Causes that intercept the Spirits. For the
Cure of the Gangrene it self does scarcely at al differ; the difference lying
only in the removal of the Causes. But if the Malady become to that, that the
Member is now already altogether mortified and dead, and that it be
sphacelated, from whatsoever cause it be that the Malady has its original,
there is then one only way of curing it. For seeing that what is altogether
dead in the body cannot possibly recover life again, and that it has now
altogether the nature of a thing that is preternatural, there is this one only
Indication, to wit, that it is to be taken and amputated from the body. Which
if (by reason of the unfitness of the place) it cannot conveniently be done,
then the case is wholly desperate. For some parts are much more fitly situated
for amputation than others; as for instance, the fingers, the feet, the hands,
the genitals may be cut off with less danger. But if the Malady be in the
Thorax or Chest, or in the Belly, the parts cannot then be cut out, and
especially if there be many particles of the Member at Once infected. For it
sometimes so falls out, that the whole Member is not to be taken away, but only
some part thereof. But oftentimes indeed the whole Member is wholly to be
amputated and cut off, to wit, when the putridness has seized Upon and
corrupted all the parts thereof round about: which in some may be speedily done,
and without any great danger, as in the Scrotum or Cods; but in other parts the
amputation is full of difficulty and peril; as in the Feet, Army, and Hands, But
after what manner the said amputation and the taking away of that which is
corrupted is to be performed, we will now acquaint you. Now this may be done
diverse ways; some there be that having first applied a Defensive upon the
sound part, they then with many straight and oblique Sections scarifie the dead
flesh that lies near unto the sound; and this they do very deep, even unto the
very bone. And afterward upon the Wounds they strew the powder of Arsenick and
Sublimate, that so the mortified part may be separated from the sound. But in
this way of extirpating the corrupt flesh, Arsenick (as we lately gave you
notice) is suspected; and therefore in the stead thereof we are to administer
other burning Medicaments, of the ashes of Vinesprigs and unslaked Lime. The
Crust that is al over the part affected is to be taken away with a Penknife;
neither must we expect til it be separated of its own accord. Yet nevertheless,
that the dead part may be dried, and be easily separated from the sound,
Fallopius applies this Sparadrape:

Take Aloes, Myrrh, Acacia, Gallia Moschata, Alipta Moschata, all the Saunders,
Lign Aloes, Cumin, Alum, of each one dram; make a Powder: Of which,

Take one ounce; Ship-pitch, Rosin of the Pine Tree, Colophony, of each two
ounces; Frankincense, Mastick, Styrax liquid, of each one ounce and half; Gum
Arabic, and Tragacanth, of each half an ounce: Let them be all melted; put a
Linen cloth into the Liquor until it be thoroughly soaked in the Medicament. And
afterward let al other things be done, as it uses to be in other Ulcers.
There are others that with an actual Cautery burn that that is corrupted, even
until there be a pain perceived in the part; and al other things are afterward
to be done according to art.

But now Fallopius does advise us (if much dead flesh be to be taken away) not
to make use of an actual Cautery alone, in regard that from the said burning
there will be caused a most abominable loathsome stench. Others there are that by
Section and the Razor amputate that that is corrupted; and afterward to avoid
the Hemorrhage, and to dry up and consume the relics, they apply likewise an
actual Cautery, if need require. But what has hitherto been spoken touching
this way and method of Curing, is to be understood only of that Sphacelus
wherein the whole Member is not corrupted, and when there is no cause of taking
away the Bone likewise.

For if the whole Member be corrupted, The cutting off the corrupted Member,
when to be done.
and therefore to be amputated; this cannot be effected either with an actual
Cautery, or a Potential; neither yet with a Razor; but there is a necessity of
cutting off the whole entire Member, the Foot, the Hand, etc. But in what manner
this amputation ought to be performed, Authors differ much in their opinions
concerning it. Celsus in his seventh Book, and Chap. 33. persuades us to make
the Section between the sound flesh and the dead; and rather to take away some
of the sound, than to leave any of the dead flesh remaining, left the Malady
that is left corrupt that that is sound. Which way of curing most of our late
Physicians disapprove of, by reason of those dangers that follow the Section in
the sound part, to wit, an immoderate profusion of the blood, and an
extraordinary great pain, and the faintings and swoundings that depend upon
these. And therefore that these may be avoided, they advise us to make the
Section in the corrupted part alone. Fallopius indeed with a Razor cutteth into
the dead flesh (even unto the bone) a fingers breadth distant from the sound
part; and then after this he forthwith takes away the bone with the saw; and
then again with Irons red hot he burns the greater Vessels, and the flesh,
even unto the causing of pain. Hieronymus Fabricius also leaves a portion of
the sound flesh (as much as one fingers breadth) and appoints the Section
likewise to be made with a Razor in the dead flesh; and he afterward burns
the part with fire-hot Irons (after the same manner) to hinder and restrain the
Hemorrhage, and to waste and consume the relics of the putrefaction.

But here in this place we are to advertise you, that sometimes the putridness
will yet creep further, and infect the near neighboring parts; but then again,
that sometimes the putridness cease, neither does it creep any further unto
the parts near adjoining; which whenever it happens, then round about the
corrupted part there appears a Circle that is exactly red, and of an
exquisite sense. In the latter case indeed, that way of curing seems not
altogether improper and unfit, in a part that is corrupted and dead. For by
this means those many dangers which accompany that Section that is made in that
part that is alive, are prevented; to wit, the profusion of blood, pain, and
faintings; since that through the corrupted part the blood cannot pass; and
because that the said part has no sense at al. But if there be any of the dead
flesh left remaining, this, when the putridness shall cease any longer to creep
(although there shall not be any Cauteries administered) will afterward divide it
self of its own accord; and then it will be separated by Nature, upon the
administering of fit and proper Medicaments. But if as yet the putridness be
creeping forward, and that Nature has not as yet of her own accord begun to
separate the sound from the corrupt, then the Section cannot be instituted in
the corrupted part alone, without present danger. For it oftentimes falls
out, that in the interior parts, and in the bottom of a Member, the corruption
penetrateth far deeper and further than in the skin it appears to do. For the
Muscles and their Vessels in the interior parts (in regard that they are there
hotter than they are without) do easily receive the putridness. Wherefore if
any will yet be instituting the incision in the mortified part, seeing that he
leaves behind much putridness in the interior parts, either he will hasten
sudden death upon the sick person (by leaving the said putridness that will be
always creeping further, deeper, and broader) or else by reiterating and
renewing of the Section he must needlessly and unadvisedly again exe^uciate and
torture the Patient. Neither makes it any thing at al to the matter that the
pain is excited in the sound part. For as Celsus says in the place before
alleged, it is little or nothing material, whether that guard and defense be
sufficiently strong and safe, that is but one alone. And as Hippocrates has
it, Unto extreme Diseases the Remedies that are to be administered must likewise
be extreme. But in very truth, the pain may in a manner be moderated, and the
sense obscured by the fastening on of the Ligatures, intercepting the passage
of the Animal Spirits for a certain time, as we shall afterward show you; and
likewise how with a very sharp Razor the Section shall be almost quite finished,
before ever the sick Person shall perceive what it is in doing. But yet they
themselves who make the Section in the the Corrupted part cannot
(notwithstanding) hereby prevent all manner of pain. For so soon as the bone is
cut asunder with the Saw, then there happen very sharp and most acute pains,
because of the Periostium, or that Membrane that encompasseth the bones; which
pain if any would avoid, then of necessity he must make the Incision with the
Saw in that part wherein the said Membrane it self is dead: which if he should
do, without all doubt even there likewise the bone it self is corrupted, and
there would be so great a putridness left remaining in the Vessels, and in the
Muscles (which are very apt and ready to receive the said putridness) that it
cannot possibly be afterward all of it extinguished, no not with the Cautery
it self. Neither do those Cauteries themselves take away all that is corrupt
without much pain; of which there ought indeed many to be applied and
administered, if all the dead flesh that there remains be to be taken away.
And moreover, Cauteries have likewise in them these inconveniences, that by
their vehement beat they melt the fat and the humors; and they so vehemently
heat the parts, that thereupon in those parts that have their sense and feeling
there is an extraordinary pain excited; and the flesh for the most part is so
consumed by the force of the Fire, and withal contracted, and wrinkled, that a
great part of the bone sticks forth naked and bare, which very often requires
a new Section. The Hemorrhage likewise is not so greatly to be feared. For if
the Vessels be intercepted by Ligatures (as we shall show you) there will not
then flow forth much of the blood. And if the blood should chance to flow forth
in somewhat a greater abundance then ordinary, yet this would make rather for
the benefit of the sick Person, then be any ways prejudicial and hurtful unto
him. For by this means the blood in the Vessels that happily has received some
putridness, is evacuated; and so by this means all the danger is taken away and
prevented, lest that the putridness should creep any broader, and by spreading
it self any further should again prevail and get strength.

That we may therefore briefly declare unto you after what manner the said
Section ought to be performed, Universals (if the malady will admit of any
respite and delay) are not to be neglected; and especially there is a due
regard to be had to the strength of the Patient. Let the sick Person therefore
first of all eat a porcht Egg with a piece of Bread toasted, and thoroughly
soaked in Wine; and let him be strengthened with Perfumes, Epithems, and other
Cordial medicaments. Some there are that before they set upon the Section do
prescribe some kind of Narcotick Medicament, to dull and stupefie the Sense:
but Fallopius much blames these; for (as he says) gentle and slight
stupefiers benefit little or nothing; and as for those that are strong, they
are very dangerous. After this, the sick Person being fi^ly placed, and held
fast by the standers by, or (if need be) fastened by tying, and the Muscles
being drawn upwards toward the sound part, upon that part in which the section
ought to be made the Member is most strictly and very hard to be tied down with
Ligatures. By which binding, first of all the overgreat flux of blood is
prevented; secondly, the sense of the part (by the shutting up of the Animal
Spirits) is somewhat dulled; and thirdly, the Muscles that are by this means
drawn upwards (the Section being ended, and the bands loosned) do again devolve
and move downward, that they may cover the extreme and naked parts of the bones.

The place of Amputation
As concerning the place of Amputation; in the Fingers, and Toes, the Section is
most fitly made in the very Joint. For in the Joint (if at least the Malady
will admit thereof) the Amputation is made with the least danger, and likewise
with the least pain. For the Nerves and the Tendons so soon as they are cut
assunder they are instantly contracted upwards, and covered with flesh, neither
does there follow any Convulsion hereupon. But if in the Feet the Sphacelus
transcend the Ankle, then the Leg is to be cut off a little below the Knee; so
that the Patient may be the better fitted and accommodated with a wooden Leg.
For which cause (in the Leg) the amputation is not always to be made in that
part that is nearest unto the dead part, but there is oftentimes also much of
the sound part to be amputated. For if much of the Leg be left, this will be
very burdensome unto the sick Person, and a great impediment to him in his
motion. But then on the Contrary, in the Arm, as little as may be of the sound
part is to be amputated; but the Section ought to be instituted as near as may
be unto the corrupted part.

And therefore when we have made choice of the most convenient place, then with
a very sharp Razor the Section is to be made even unto the very Bone; and if it
may be done, the very Periostium is likewise to be cut in sunder; and if there
be any small portion of the flesh left behind, or if there be any of the flesh
hid betwixt two Bones (lest it should afterward hinder that Section that is
made with the Saw) that flesh is likewise to be cut off with a Knife that is
fit for the purpose. And then instantly, and with as much speed as possibly may
be, the Bone is to be amputated with the Saw, unless the Section be in the
Joint; for then the Member may be amputated with the Razor alone. The
amputation of the Member being finished, the next thing to be done is the
stopping of the flux of blood, after that it has flown forth sufficiently.
Most Practitioners burn the Vessels with a Cantery. But Paraeus much disliketh
this course; for he conceives it indeed to be very cruel and barbarous, in
regard that it causes an extraordinary great pain, if the Section be made (as
it ought to be) in the quick and live flesh; and very bad and dangerous
Symptoms happen unto the Nervous parts: unto which we may add that by the said
burning very much of the sound flesh is consumed, whereupon the bones are left
bare, and the flesh, together with the Cicatrice, either it is not at all
brought over the naked part; or if it be, it is not without much difficulty.
And therefore he Practices another way of stanching the Hemorrhage; to wit,
with a Crows-bil he lays hold upon the Vessels, and draws them altogether,
and then binds them as close as may be. The Vessels being thus straightly tied
together with a Ligature; or (if you judge this more) fit shut up close with a
Cautery; the bonds are then to be loosened, and the courser part of Flax or
Hemp (we call it Hurds) after it has been thoroughly soaked in the White of an
Egg, and sufficiently besprinkled with a Powder that has in it a virtue and
faculty of stanching the blood, is to be laid upon the Member. And yet
nevertheleless for the most part, without any such Ligature or Cautery, the
blood may likewise be stopped and stanched after this manner; As,

Take the finest Flour three ounces, Dragons blood, Frankincense, Aloes, of
each two drams; Bole armenick, Terra Sigillata, Parget or Plaster, of each one
dram; Water Frogs prepared (though there be some that for this use and purpose
do rather commend those of them that live among Trees) one ounce; the Flix of a
Hare cut very small, a thin Sponge torrefied by the Fire, of each two drams,
and make a Powder.

Upon the Vessels likewise that pour forth blood there may very fitly be
applied and laid on that Mushrom so much used by C^iturgeons to stanch blood,
which they call Crepitus Lupi. Others there are that make up Emplasters of
Dragons blood, Bolearmenick, Terra Sigilata, and the finest Volatile flout (and
the like) with Pitch. Afterward the Trunk of the amputated Member is to be
safe guarded with those Defensives, or such like, as we have above mentioned;
the like unto which is this also that follows; which is to be applied with
Hurds, and Swathe-bands, having been first well and thoroughly soaked in Oxycrate.

Take Bolearmenick, Terra Sigillata. Dragons blood, Mastick, Parget, Oil of
Roses, and Oil of Myrtle, of each one ounce; Whites of three Eggs, Vinegar as
much as will suffice, and make an Unguent.

And this is the first dressing, or the first binding up; which is not to be
loosened (in the Summer time) before the second or third day; but in the
Winter, not before the fourth day at the soonest, unless in case of urgent
necessity.

And in the mean time the Member is to be placed in a direct middle posture or
figure, in Pillows stuffed with the hairs of Hearts, or Wheaten meal. The first
binding being loosened, and the first Provision taken away, again with the
White of an Egg, as before, the Powder stanching the blood is to be applied;
and the excremities of the bones to be covered with a piece of the dry
Liniment; and in the end the Wound to be bound up with some kind of Digestive.

And this Cure is so long to be continued, until there be now no cause of
further fear that any mischief may follow upon the Hemorrhage, and that the
Wound be now become Purulent. For then these Medicaments being laid aside, we
are to make use of Cleansers. Gulielmus Fabricius commends tins Unguent
following of the Juice of Smallage, not only for the Gangrene, but likewise for
other sordid, foul, and Malignant Ulcers:

Take the Juice of Smallage, of Water-Germander, of Waybred or Plantane, and of
Rue, of each two ounces; Honey of Roses strained one pound; boil them to the
Consistence of a Syrup: and afterward mingle therewith the meal of Lupines,
the Powder of round Aristolochy root, of Angelica root, of Swallow-wort, and of
Treacle, of each half an ounce, Aqua vitae one ounce; make an Unguent.

In the mean time we must do our endeavor that the Lips of the Wound may be
drawn together, and afterward that flesh may cover the bones, and nay be unto
them in stead of the Pillows. Paraeus and others saw together the lips of the
wound in the form of the letter X: but a Suture (which they call the dry Suture)
seems to be far more convenient; or else by a Glue, which is done after this
manner. A Linen Cloth of a convenient figure and bigness, moistened thoroughly
in a Glue of Astringent, Emplastick, and viscous Medicaments (such as are
Bolearmenick, Dragons blood, Gum Tragacanth, Sarcocol, Mastick, the White of an
Egg, and the like) is to be laid upon the place. As,

Take Mastick, Dragons blood, Bolearmenick, Sarcocol, and the finest Volatile
flour, of each half an ounce; Rosin of the Pine Tree two drams; mingle them
with the White of an Egg. Of this Linen Cloth let there be made Emplasters
which are to be applied unto the extremity of the Wound on both sides.

So soon as the Emplasters are become dry, so that they begin to stick too fast
unto the Skin, then we use to annex unto them little handles to hold by, of
Thread twice or thrice doubled; and with them we contract the lips; and this
may likewise be done in a suture that is more thin sewed.

And then at length we must do to the utmost of our endeavor, that the
excremities of the bones which were hurt by the touch of the Iron and the Air
may fall off. For which end, some there be that burn the utmost parts of them
with a red hot Iron; yet still taking great heed lest that the flesh, and other
of the sensible parts be hurt thereby. Others make use of the Emplaster of
Becony, and other Catagmatick or Fracture Medicaments. And so within thirty or
forty days whatsoever there is of the bone corrupted will fall off. If the
flesh be luxuriant or proud (as we sometimes term it) it is then to be
repressed and kept under by the Powder of Alum, and the like, and at length the
Cicatrice is to be brought over it. But whereas pains do in the mean time much
infest and disquiet the sick Person, and that there is cause to fear lest that
Convulsions arise thereupon; the Trunk or Stump of the part that has been cut
assunder, yea and the Neck likewise, and all the Spinal Marrow is to be
anointed with those Medicaments (that are otherwise also wont to be applied
unto affects of a Nervous Nature) made of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Rue,
Lavender, Dil, Camomile, St. John's wort, Bayberries, the Oil of Earthworms,
the Oil of a Fox, Turpentine, and the like.

We must not here pass by in silence the Sco^butick Gangrene, The Scorbutic
Gangrene.
touching which we have already spoken something in the third Book of our
Practice, Part 5. Sect. 2. Chap. 4. Which most usually begins about the
extreme part of the Foot, with black and purple spots; and a little after this
there appears from hence a crusty and Gangrenous Ulcer, dry, and yielding
forth neither the thin Excrement Sanies, nor yet the thicker, which we term
Pus; and then one or other of the Toes begins to die, and then there appear
red lines, and purple spots upon the juncture of the Foot, according to the
length of the Leg. I have my self seen some examples of this Disease. But both
this Gangrene and Sphacelus differ from that Gangrene and Sphacelus that are
both of them well and commonly known, and that in many things. For that Gangrene
that is so well and commonly known has its original for the most part from
Causes that are manifest and apparent; and there always flows forth of the
Member that is dead in such a like Sphacelus a stinking and waterish humor; the
Member becomes soft and putrid, and it sends forth from it a grievous and
noysom stench, like unto that of a dead Carcass; and it creeps much in a very
short time, and most commonly it soon destroys and kills the man that has it.
But now the Scorbutic Gangrene almost ever appears and invadeth the person
without any manifest cause, creeps forward but very gently and slowly, and
does not destroy the person therewith affected until after a long time: for I
knew a Nobleman that lived above three months, but a certain Schoolmaster I
saw that lived above six months notwithstanding this Malady. The part affected
with this Gangrene is altogether dry, so that there flows out of it nothing
at al; and when the corrupt part is taken away by the Iron, although a red
flesh offer it self unto the view, yet nevertheless that same red color is
withal somewhat dark and blackish; and the day following it likewise is even
found to be dead also; and there is here no stink at al perceived that
offends. And moreover, so soon as ever the Malady has first of al seized
upon one of the feet only, then presently after (without any manifest cause at
al) there begin to appear in the other Leg and Foot also certain spots and
blemishes of a red or purple color; and then likewise not long after this, one
or other of the Toes of that Foot becomes wan and leaden colored, and in a
very short time it is found to be quite dead: and at length most commonly the
party (as it befell that Noble person before mentioned) being taken either with
the Apoplexy, or with the Epilepsie, upon the first approach thereof dies.

And yet notwithstanding, this Malady sometimes invadeth suddenly; to wit, when
the peccant humors are by wrath, terror, or the like Cause, first disturbed,
and then afterward thrust down suddenly (and as it were in a moment) unto the
Toes; and first of al to some one of them only; after the very same manner as
the Erysipelas or Rosa is wont suddenly to arise: and this humor (in regard
that it has in it a very bad and destructive quality, or else has received it
from some affect of the mind) causes that part that it seizes upon instantly
to die: and hence it is that by some this kind of Gangrene and Sphacelus is in
special called Syderatio; whereas otherwise the Gangrene is wont in the general
also to be termed Syderatio. Now this said humor seizes upon the Tendons most
usually; from whence there arise most terrible and intolerable pains that
torment and grieve the sick person both day and night; which said Tendons, in
regard that they do not so easily and soon putrefie as does the flesh; hence it
is that this Gangrene likewise or repeth on so slowly, that sometimes (unto the
external view) it is a whole months space in overspreading one only joint, and
ere it seize upon another, albeit that within almost all the Tendous of the Foot
are already infected: and this Malady continues sometimes a quarter of a year
before it kill the person, and it is seldom or never cured, in regard that this
depraved humor has insinuated it self more deep than usually into the Tendons,
and therefore cannot be so easily taken away. So a certain Noble person (that
had otherwise a Cacochymical and foul body, and was subject unto the
Erysipelas) upon a fear and terror (Nature then suddenly thrusting down the
vicious humors unto the little Toe) was surprised with a Gangrene, which
afterward by little and little overspread likewise all the rest of the Toes,
and almos^ the whole Foor, with extreme great pain; up^ which (after the space
of three months) (...) died.

Of this kind was that Gangrene also, with which a certain Citizen here (about
thirty years of age) was taken in the month of January, 1633. He first of al
complained of a pain in his left Arm, near unto the Elbow; which he making
light of, the pain descended unto his Hand; and it was presently taken with a
cold Tumor or Swelling, and at length became suddenly overspread with a purple
color; so that now there appeared manifest signs and tokens of mortification,
and a Gangrene. Yet notwithstanding, upon the administering of fit and proper
Medicaments (of which we shall speak more hereafter) his Hand had its natural
color again restored unto it, and the swelling vanished away; so that there was
nothing further to be seen, but only in the very tip of the little Finger the
Scarf-skin appeared to be somewhat wrinkled; upon the opening of which here
flowed forth a little of an humor; and the Skin underneath appeared pale, and
so the very tip of the finger was taken with a Gangrene; which yet nevertheless
(without any diminution of the Joint) was cured. In the curing whereof we found
this one thing well worth our observation, that from the said finger most sharp
and exquisite pains were extended into the whole Hand, insomuch that the sick
person was even afraid to betake himself unto his bed; but that rest and sleep
he took was in the night time as he sat. When his finger likewise was handled
by the Surgeons, the pains that he felt were so great, that he could not
endure the least touch; the feet moreover swelled much, and his face was
something more swollen than usually.

Neither indeed will any man that is not a stranger unto what is done in the
practice of Physic admire that some vicious and depraved humor by Nature her
self thrust unto some Member should be able suddenly to mortify and deaden it.
Certain it is that a potential Cautery of Lie (out of which Soap is made) does
within the space of an hour, or at the utmost in two hours time, mortify that
part upon which it is imposed; whenas notwithstanding it is made only out of
the Salt of Woods, and of unslaked Lime. What wonder is it therefore, that some
humor of the same Nature, salt, sharp, and malignant, being now separated, and
acting a part by it self from the rest, by the which it was tempered and
qualified (as Hippocrates tells us in his Book of the Ancient Physic) should
effect somewhat like unto the former.

Of all those that have been affected with the Scorbutic Gangrene (of whom I
made mention before) no one ever recovered, besides that Citizen, that was
taken with a Gangrene in the little Finger of his left Hand; he himself being
(as I saw good cause to judge of him) a Scorbutic person. Now the Medicaments
by which he was cured are these that follow.

Take of the Apoplectick Water, and the Spirit of Juniper berries, of each two
ounces; the Spirit of Wormwood, and of Cherries, of each half an ounce; Sage
water, and Lavender water, of each one ounce; Mingle them.

This Water was oftentimes prepared; with the which the affected part was
washed, or else Linen Clothes moistened therein were laid upon the part.

Take Conserve Cochlear. two ounces and half; of Betony and Sage, of each one
ounce and half; of the temperate Cordial Species, and pleres archont. of each
one scruple; Rob. of Juniper two drams, Syrup of Betony one ounce, Make an
Electuary.

Take Conser. Cochlear. three ounces, of Sage two ounces, Species Dyaxyloaloes
one dram, the Candid Rinds of Citron half an ounce, Rob. Juniper, two drams;
with the Syrup of Betony make an Electuary.

Take Oil of Juniper berries one ounce, Oil of Earthworms two ounces, Oil of
Flowerdeluce, one ounce; Mingle them.

Take the Essence of Carduus Benedictus, and of Wormwood, of each two drams;
Cochlear. half an ounce, the Elixir of propriety one dram, the Spirit of Water
Cresses one scruple; mingle them.

Take of Fennel root, and Asparagus root, of each half an ounce; Pimpernel two
drams, the Herb Hearts Tongue one handful; Germander, and Groundpine or Herb
Ivy, and Dodder, of each half a handful; Anise and Fennel seeds, of each two
drams; Juniper berries two drams and half, the Flowers of Bugloss and
Liverwort, of each one pugil; Raisins cut small one ounce: boil them in Spring
Water unto seven or eight ounces: unto the straining ad of Sugar two ounces and
half: And then again let it boil once or twice, unto the Consistence of a
liquid Syrup; and then add of Cinnamom water half an ounce; and mingle them.

Take Asparagus Roots, and Fennel Roots, of each half an ounce; Pimpernel, and
Succory of each two drams and half; the Herb Maidenhair, Agrimony, Hearts
Tongues, Germander, of each half a handful; Anise seed, Columbines, of each two
drams; Borrage, and Bugloss flowers, of each half a pugil; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water, unto half a pint: unto the straining add of the
whitest Sugar two ounces; and again let them boil up once or twice; and make
hereof a liquid Syrup; unto which ad of Cinamom water half an ounce, and mingle
them.

Take the Trochisques of Capars, and of Rheubarb, of each one scruple and half;
Extract of Womwood, and Gentian, of each one scruple; Oil of Cinnamom two
d^ops; make Pills.

Take Trochisques of Rheubarb Capars, Lacca, of each two scruples; Extract of
Wormwood, and Gentian, of each one scruple; of Spleen-wort as much as will
suffice; and make Pills hereof.

Take Pills of Tartar with Scammony, and of Rheubarb, of each one scruple;
Extract of the Pills Aggregative half a scruple, Oil of CloveS one drop; with
Betony water make Pills.

Take the Elixir of propriety, with the Juice, one dram; Essent Cochlear. two
drams, of Germander, Spleenwort, and Wormwood, of each one dram, and mingle,
etc.

Take Laurel leaves, Betony, Sage, and Marjoram, of each two handfuls, to wash
the Hand withal.

Take Trochisques of Rheubarb, and Capars, of each one scruple, Extract of
Succory half a dram, Centaury the less, and Carauus Benedictus, of each half a
scruple; Make Pills forty five.

Take Leaves of Betony, Bay leaves, Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, of each two
handfuls; Flowers of Elder and Lavender, of each one handful; Staechados of
A^abi^ half an ounce; boil them in Wine to foment the Hand therewith.

Take of the Nerve Emplaster three ounces, destilled Oil of Sage one scruple,
of Marjoram half a scruple; Mingle them, and make an Emplaster.

Take the Elixir of propriety two scruples, Essent. Cochlear. and of Germander,
of each two drams, of Elecampane, and Lign Aloes, of each half a scruple,
Mingle them etc.

Take the Leaves of Laurel, and Betony, of each two handfuls; Marjoram, Sage,
Organy, of each one handful; Flowers of the Arabian Staechados half an ounce:
boil them in Wine for a fomentation of the Hand.

Take the opening Roots half an ounce, Agrimony half a handful, Leaves of the
choycest Seen one ounce, Mechoacan half an ounce, Ginger one dram and half;
boil them in Spring water: in four ounces of the straining dissolve half an
ounce of Manna, and then strain it again, adding thereto one ounce of Sugar,
and make a Syrup.

This Cataplasm was likewise made use of.

Take Bean meal one ounce, Powder of Water-Germander, Rue, Sage, Wormwood, of
each half an ounce, and make a Cataplasm.

The little Finger with that next unto it (the Ring-finger) was oftentimes
anointed with the Oil of Earthworms, which is made by putting the said
Earthworms washed into a Glass, and then enclosing the Glass in a Mass of
Dough, bake it in an Oven; and the Liquor that comes from these baked Worms
gather it together, and filtrate it.

But for the Curing of the Ulcer in the little Finger, after the Gangrene we
used this Unguent.

Take Oil of Bays, Honey, Turpentine, of each two drams; May Butter, Gum Elemi,
one dram: Mingle etc.

Another Cure.
A certain Noble Person having had his Foot wrung with his shoe, in that very
place where the hurt had bin there arose a black Pustule in the sole of the
right Foot. Which he not much regarding, there instantly followed a Gangrene,
which in that place seized upon the Flesh. Which so soon as it was observed,
the affected flesh was presently scarified; and the Pustule being cut with a
pair of Cizers, the Aegyptiack Unguent was imposed upon the part affected.
After this the Defensive of Vigo was applied unto the Foot; which is in this
manner prepared.

Take Oil of Roses Omphacine, and Myrtles, of each three ounces; the Juice of
Plantane and Nightshade, of each two ounces; boil them to the Consumption of
the Juyces, and then strain them.

Add of white Wax one ounce and half, Meal of Lentiles, Bean meal, and Barley
meal of each half an ounce; of all the Saunders, of each two drams and half;
Bolearmenick one ounce, the Berries and Leaves of Myrtle, of each one dram;
Mingle them, and make an Unguent, with the which let the part affected be
anointed.

Upon this Unguent there were imposed Linen Clothes well wet in the Water
following; and they were often renewed.

Take Barbers Ley two Quarts, of Lupines grossy beaten three handfuls; boil
them, until the Lupines become soft: let the Ley be strained; and in the
straining dissolve of Saffron two scruples; Mingle them.

The Scarification of the place affected, and the laying on of the Aegyptiack
Unguent (together with the Defensive) was thrice repeated the first day: the
Water that was likewise applied.

The day following the corrupt flesh was cut forth, and the same helps and
Remedies administered.

The third day the corrupted flesh being wholly removed, the following
Digestive was imposed.

Take of pure Honey two ounces, of Bean meal two drams, of Choice Myrrh half an
ounce, the Whites of two Eggs, Saffron six grains; Mingle them, and make an
Unguent.

And together with the foregoing Unguent there was likewise administered the
Emplaster of Vigo, such a one as this:

Take Bean meal, the Meal of the bitter Vetch Orobus, of Lentiles, of Lupines,
of each four ounces; Juice of Wormwood, six drams, common Salt half an ounce,
Oxymel simplex as much as will suffice; boil them over a gentle Fire, and make
an Emplaster The use of these Medicaments being for some days continued, the
sick person was thereby perfectly cured.

Hitherunto touching Ulcers in general; and particularly concerning the
Gangrene and Sphacelus, both that Species of them which we term Scorbutic, as
also those other that are so well and commonly known. It remains that in the
next place we speak something of what is oftentimes amiss in the Skin, Hair,
and Nails.

THE FIFTH BOOK, THE THIRD PART. Of the Vices of the Skin, Hair, and Nails.
SECT. I. Of the Vices of the Skin.
Chap. 1. Of the color of the Skin changed, (in general) and in special
touching that blackness that is contracted from the Sun.
NATURE being very sollicitous and careful in the preservation of the health of
Man's Body does always that which is for the best; and therefore she expels
the vicious humors that are heaped up in the body from the principal Members,
and the greater Vessels unto the more external parts, and the superficies of
the body; from whence there arise many kinds of Tumors, Tubercles, and
Pustules, as likewise diverse sorts of Ulcers; as also diverse kinds of spots and
blemishes, and changes of the color. Whereas therefore we have already treated
(in the first and second Part) of Tumors, Tubercles, Pustules, and Ulcers, (and
withal made mention there of the Measles, small Pox, and certain other spots and
blemishes) as there is is to be seen; we will now handle those things that
remain in this Part; and withal we will treat of the Vices, that is to say,
whatsoever is amiss in the Hairs and Nails.

The changes of the color of the Skin.
And in the first place indeed for what concerns the Vices and blemishes of
the Skin, the changes of its color are many and various. First they are
Universal, and of the whole body; as in the Cachexy, Scurvy, yellow Jaundice,
the white Fever of Virgins (commonly called the Green Sickness) touching which
we have elsewhere spoken. Secondly, they are particular, and of some one part
of the body; as in a Suggillation, Erysipelas, Gutta Rosacea, Impetigo, Lichen,
Vitiligines; touching al which we have already spoken in our handling of
Tumors; as also the blackness contracted from the burning of the Sun, those
spots and blemishes appearing in the faces of Women great with child; as those
they call Ephelides and Lentigines, which are spots and blemishes of a dark and
reddish color, that in their color and figure do very much resemble Lentil^s.
And moreover likewise those spots and blemishes which are contracted from the
very birth and infancy; touching which we are now to speak. And first of al,
among these blemishes we will speak something of that affect which they call
Ephelius, that is to say, heat-wheals, or small hard pushes in the face. Where
notwithstanding we must give you to understand (as a little before we told you
likewise) that many of the Tubercles, Spots, and Blemishes of this kind,
although they are now with us commonly and generally well known; yet
nevertheless by what names these like Affects were called by the Ancients is
not so well and sufficiently known. And this appears even out of Celsus, who
in his sixth Book, and Chap. 5. thus writes: The regarding of these Vari or
Pimples, Lenticulae or Freckles, and Ephelides, so as to cure them, is but a
mere folly and foppery (says he) but yet nevertheless it is likewise a thing
altogether impossible to take from Women the care they have of the beauty and
handsomness of their faces. Now then, of those that we mentioned before, the
Vari and Lenticulae are commonly known; although that species be somewhat more
rare which the Greeks call Phacos, since that kind is a Lenticula somewhat more
red, and more unequal. But at for the Ephelis, the most are generally ignorant,
as not well knowing what it is; it being indeed nothing else but a certain
roughness, and an hardness of an ill color. The rest of them are to be found no
where in the body, but only in the face; but the Lenticulae are wont likewise
to arise and appear in some other part. And I am altogether of opinion, that
even our very ordinary Women are sufficiently acquainted with these Affects;
which said Affects notwithstanding, viz. Vari, Lenticulae, and Ephelides, what
Affects they were with the Ancients is not sufficiently manifest. If the
Ephelis that Galen mentions in his seventh Book of the faculty of simple
Medicaments be written by the Greek Letter 'e, then without all doubt it has
its name from the Sun, so that they are certain spots contracted from the Sun.
But Celsus (unless it be an error and mistake of the book) writes the word
with the Greek, Ephelis, and says that it is a roughness and hardness of an
evil color; which well agrees not with those spots. Eustachius Rudius (in his
second Tract, second Book, and Chap. 4. of the Affects of the external parts)
says that the Greeks Ephelis is Panus; and that Panus indeed may infect any
part whatsoever of the body, especially the Groyns, the Abdomen, the Back, the
Neck, and the middle Region of the Breast: but for the most part nevertheless
(as he writes) it defiles the very Forehead it self. But in regard that
Celsus reckons up the Ephelis among those Affects that never appear but in the
Face, we have therefore determined above (in the first Part, and 29. Chapter)
that those broad spots that appear about the Groyns, Breast, Abdomen, Back, and
Neck, and dye the said parts with a certain kind of duskishness, that is one
while somewhat greenish, and another while something reddish, and as soon again
of a color inclining to black (and which are generally well known) are more
fitly to be referred unto the Alphus Niger or the black Alphus. And he (the
aforesaid Rudius) does likewise ill in calling the Ephelis by the name of
Panus; and his determining that Ephelis and Panus are one and the same Affect,
is altogether false: since that out of Celsus his fifth Book, Chap. 18. Pliny
his twenty four^h Book, Chap. 4, and 9. and likewise from other Physi^ians it
is very clear, that Panus is the Greeks Phygethlon; and that sometimes likewise
Phymata are comprehended under the name of Panus. But there are some others
also, that neglecting the Authority of the Ancients, call those spots in the
Face, especially in Women, by the name of Pani, Hippocrates in his Book of
Women that bear not Children, page 245. (in Foesius his Book) writes that this
kind of spots is called Ephelis; when he says, That those women that are with
child if they have a spot in their Face, as it were from the Suns burning, for
the most part bear female Children. Where for the most part is well added, in
regard that it is often observed also that Women great with Child, which have
born Males, have had their Faces defiled with these k nd of spots; so that
these spots may rather be said to be a sign and token of the Conception in
general, than particularly of the Sex that is conceived, whether it be Male or
Female: Whence it is, that the Germans likewise call it Kinds flecken.

But now, whereas there is a twofold Ephelis, one from causes external, another
from internal Causes; of the latter of these we intend to treat in the Chapter
following, but of the former we will speak in this present Chapter. And indeed
the first kind of these Ephelides is that well known Affect, Blackness from the
Sun.
to wit, that blackness (which the Germans call Sommerbradt) in the Face, the
Hands, and those other parts that are exposed unto the Sunbeams, contracted
from the heat of the Sun. And as well men as women are subject unto this affect;
but yet nevertheless more especially women, as having their Skin more tender,
and chiefly in the Spring time. For whereas in the Winter the Face was not
accustomed to much heat, if in the Spring it be suddenly exposed unto the
Sunbeams, the Skin that before was white now begins to wax red with a
certain kind of blackness.

The Affect is of it self known from the Cause foregoing. And the Face is not
only deformed with some certain spots, but the whole color thereof is changed.

But now this burning and blackness from the Sun may be prevented, Preservation
from it.
if the Suns Beams be turned away from the Face by Shades and other Coverings,
and the Hands kept covered with Gloves; or both the Face and Hands anointed
with the white o^ an Egg, shaken together with Rose Water, or with the Mucilage
of the Seeds of Quinces, or of Fleawort extracted with Rose Water, or Gum
Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water; or else let the face be anointed with the
Emulsion of the four greater cold seeds, or let it be anointed with this
Unguent.

Take Unguent Pomarum two drams; Ceruss dissolved in Rose Water one dram;
Mastick half a dram; the Mucilage of the seeds of Fleawort one ounce: Make
hereof a Liniment.

And of these kind of Medicaments there is need most especially in the Spring
time, when the tender Face can very hardly be sufficiently guarded from the
heat of the Sun, and of the Air.

The Cure.
But if the Face be already as it were burnt, and a blackness be contracted,
Nature indeed of her own accord is wont in process of time to change this
deformity (when it draws a new Scarf-skin upon the burnt place) if in the
mean time the Face be covered from the Beams of the Sun. But these delays
being for the most part tedious unto women, they must in all haste have their
pristine color again restored unto them by the help of Medicaments. And
commonly women are wont to cleanse their Faces with the Leaves of the Cherry
Tree while they are yet fresh and green. Others of them there are that use
Rose Water wherein Camphyre has been dissolved; and others of them make use
likewise of the Cherry-tree Gum dissolved in Vinegar, whereunto they put a
little Oat-meal.

And here likewise there is much use made of the Water of Bean flowers, of
Mallows, and white Lilies; and those that are made of the four greater cold
seeds destilled with Milk. Bitter Almonds are also here very useful. Or,

Take the juice of Plantane, and of Nightshade, of each one ounce: Litharge of
Gold, and of Silver, of each one dram: burnt Lead half an ounce: Tutty prepared
six drams: Camphyre half a dram: Oil of Roses and Wax as much as will suffice,
and make an Unguent.

Take Roots of white Lilies roasted under the Embers two drams: the Root of the
Herb Dragon-wort, and Solomon's Seal, and Melons seed, of each two drams: the
Mucilage of Fleawort seed one ounce: of the Citrine Unguent half an ounce, and
make an Unguent according to art.

Chap. 2. Of the Ephelides in Women with Child.
THere is another kind of these Ephelides that happens more especially unto
Women with Child; and it has its original from the Menstruous blood retained;
which (in regard that for the most part from the said retention it contracteth
a great deal of vitiousness) is wont to excite in Women great with Child diverse
symptoms, as likewise these spots in the Face bred from a vicious humor thrust
forth thither.

But now and then notwithstanding Virgins and Women that are not with Child
have these kind of spots breaking forth in their Faces, if in the time of their
monthly Menstruous flux they eat those kind of meats that (as they say) have in
them a power of coloring; such as are the Carrot Roots, and the red Beets, and
the like, which (as we are taught by Experience) do breed and bring forth these
kind of Spots.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Ephelides in Women with Child are known, in that they are dark and
duskish spots, appearing more especially in the Forehead, and deforming it, and
spreading themselves both in length and breadth; and oftentimes they equal in
length the palm of the hand, but they are void of al kind of roughness.

The Prognostic.
The Ephelides in Women are a sign of their Conception, (as we told you before
out of Hippocrates his Tract of Women that never have Children) and they are
seldom or never cured; and if happily they be taken away yet they soon return
again, and with some they continue even unto the time of their Delivery, and
after that they vanish, and in some they likewise continue after their
Delivery; and in some others they also vanish before they are delivered (when
the Child is now become strong and vigorous) like as do other symptoms that
usually infest Women with Child in the beginning of their Conception.

The Cure.
Indeed it is very requisite that the depraved humors (that are the Antecedent
Cause of this Affect, and are wont to nourish the same) should be evacuated;
but in regard that in Women with Child we may not safely make use of those
evacuations, we ought therefore to content our selves with Topical Medicaments.
And here there is to be commended the use of Bayberries, if their rinds be
taken off, and then they be beaten into a powder, and so mingled with Honey,
and made into the form of an Unguent, and the Face therewith anointed in a
Bath. Or,

Take Powder of Laurel Berries as much as you please, and with Mushrom Water
make it into the form of a Pultiss, with which let the Face be anointed in the
Bath. Or,

Take Camphyre one dram; Nitre two drams; Mingle them with Honey, and let the
Face be anointed with the said mixture.

The Emulsion likewise that is made of the Seeds of Hemp is very useful.

For the spots that are in the Faces of Maidens while their Courses are upon
them, and whilst they yet flow,

Take the Juice that is pressed forth of the root of Bugloss sliced, and with
it anoint the Spots.

Chap. 3. Of Lentigines, Pimples, or specks in the Face.
ANd hither belong likewise the Lentigines, which the Germans (from the color
of dry Leaves) call Summer strossen, Summer flecken, and Lauf flecken; and they
are spots in color resembling Lentiles, with the which (in Women especially)
the Face principally, and sometimes likewise the Hands, Arms, and upper part of
the Thorax being exposed unto the Air is aspersed and overspread, they sometimes
standing thicker, and sometimes thinner, like unto so many drops, as it were,
without any pain and trouble; in some appearing indeed only in the Summer time,
and vanishing again in the Winter; and in some likewise they keep their course
from year to year.

The Causes.
But now they have their original from adust burnt blood seizing upon the
Scarf-skin. And this happens more especially in ruddy bodies, that are of a
Choleric temperature, and especially in the Summer time when that vapor of the
blood is more burnt. And hence it is that in the Winter for the most part these
spots vanish, but then they return again and appear in the Summer. And they
break forth chiefly in those parts that are exposed unto the external Ambient
Air, the Face, the Neck, the Hands, and the superior part of the Thorax,
because that the Scarf-skin is more burnt by the Sun, and the Ambient Air
detaineth those burnt vapors in the Skin. Platerus is of opinion, that the
Juice that should nourish the hairs that are fixed in the Skin, being brought
unto the pores of the Skin do cause these spots. For this humor (says he)
being first of al assimilated by them, and agreeing somewhat with them in color
before they are put unto the Roots of them, if it be by them further dispersed
any whither else into the superficies and circumference of the pores, it then
produces those kind of spots, and that dark and duskish color, somewhat (more
or less) inclining unto that color of the hairs that it had gotten while it was
assimilated by them. Which diffusion of this Juice into the Pores proceeds
sometimes from the external heat overstrongly attracting it, and withal
dilating the Pores, if then the Juice nourishing the Hairs does not only affix
it self unto the roots of the Hairs, but diffusing it self further also, and
there subsisting, causes those Dusk, Dark, and Brown spots, more or less,
according to the diversity of the color of the Skin. But since that the Face
wants Hairs, it is not credible that the Juice ordained by Nature for the
nourishing of the Hair should breed such kind of spots: but for the breeding of
these like spots there suffices a portion of the adust blood, degenerating as
it were into a Melancholy humor. Platerus also is of opinion that the
overgreat Natural looseness of the Pores contributeth its furtherance, so that
even by reason of them the said Juice does not only nourish the Hairs, but
likewise produce these spots. But I had here rather assent with Eustachius
Rudius, who thinks rather that the Lentigines do arise from the thickness of
the Skin, and therefore because that the Cheeks are more thin than other parts,
therefore it is that although there come into them very many of these adust
vapors, yet notwithstanding they are not detained in them, but are from thence
gently evaporated; and so the Lentigines that are in them are but few: but
because the Skin of the Forehead is thicker, and that the vapors are not
easily received in it, but being once received are the more detained there,
therefore the Fore-heed does the more abound with these Lentigines or Dusky
spots.

Signs Diagnostick.
These Lentigines are easily known; because that they are Spots of the bigness
a of Lentile, of a dark, brown, and dusky color, dispersed up and down in many
drops as it were, standing close and thick together, and very familiar unto
such as are of a red Hair; and they annoy the Face, the Neck, the Hands, and
those parts that are exposed unto the Sun and the Air.

The Prognostic.
Those Lentigines as they have in them no danger at all, so for the most part
they vanish in the Winter: but yet notwithstanding in some bodies they always
return again in the Summer; and in some they are Annual, and return constantly
from year to year.

The Cure.
Galen for these Spots commends the Herb Costmary with Honey and Water, as
also the seed of the Cabbage. Bitter Almonds are likewise very useful, and so
is the Oil of Eggs likewise. But most effectual is the Water of great Figwort,
distilled out of that well known Plant: as also the Water drawn out of the
flowers of the spotted Satyrion; and lastly the Oil of Tartar by draining. O,

Take of Eldern flowers, and Bean flowers, of each a like proportion: pour in
unto them Goats Milk blood-warm. Let them stand for a days time in some cold
place; and afterward let them be destilled: and then, Take Bean meal as much
as you think fit; let it be moistened with the said water, and in the evening
let the Face be anointed with that mixture.

In the morning let the Face be washed with the water of Elder flowers, and
Bean flowers; unto which there may be added a little Camphyre dissolved in the
Spirit of Wine. Or,

Take Honey four ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, Powder of the Flower
deluce root two drams, Borax half an ounce; make an Unguent.

The Virgins Milk likewise (as it is called) is here very good; and it is thus
prepared.

Take of Litharge four ounces; boil it in three pints of the best Vinegar, unto
the wasting of a third part; when it is cooled, let it be strained through a
filtring bag; and afterward,

Take Sal Gem three drams; boil it in clear water unto the Consumption of a
third part; then strain it: after this,

Take of this Water two parts, and of the former Vinegar one part; and mingle
them. Or,

Take the Citron Unguent new made three ounces, of sweet Almonds thoroughly
bruised, and Bean meal, of each one dram; the bone of the Sepia fish, Hearts
horn, and Barley meal, of each two drams; let them be incorporated with Honey
and then well mingled together. Or,

Take the fresh flowers of Beans as many as you think fit; pour unto them a
sufficient quantity of Goats Milk: let them stand infusing a day and a night.
Afterward let them be strained, and squeezed hard; and into the straining let
new flowers be thrown in, and so let them stand infusing again for the space of
a day and a night, and then let them be strained: this must be five times
repeated. And then add of the soft pith of new Bread as much as will suffice,
that it may be made like unto a Pultise; and then adding thereto a little Goats
Milk, destil them: With this Water let the Face be washed in the morning and
evening.

There are certain things likewise very useful, that shall be propounded in
the following Chapter.

Chap. 4. Of Cosmetical, or Beautifying Medicaments.
BUt yet although we have hitherto in the precedent Chapters spoken touching
the taking away of diverse of these Skin-spots; Women notwithstanding (that
study little else but their beauty) are not herewith contented; but they
restlessly pursue after those things that procure unto their Faces a luster and
amiableness. For their sakes therefore we will add something also even of these
Cosmetick or beautifying Medicaments. Now these Medicaments are of two sorts;
some of them do only mend the obsolete, dark, and blackish color of the Face,
and render the Skin somewhat more bright and clear; (and these are by no means
to be disallowed of; since that they only restore unto Man or Woman that beauty
which either by the injury of the Air, or by any other Cause, they have lost
and been deprived of; and withal do truly and really produce a fair and stable
color; and these are called Cosmetick or be beautifying Medicaments:) but
others there are that are only Palliative, and these we call Face-sucusses,
because that unto the Natural color there is likewise added an adventitious
and acquired white or red color; and this is so painted on that continues if
for a while, and but for a while only, and deceives the Eyes of the Beholders.
We shall speak of the former sort of Medicaments alone. But as for the latter
sort of these Medicaments, in regard that we judge it neither honest nor pious
to make use of them, we will therefore say nothing at all of them, but pass them
over in silence. But now as for what concerns the former of these
Medicaments, it seems altogether a thing unreasonable to reject them, in
regard that they bring over the Face no Fucus, or counterfeit painted beauty,
but they only restore the Natural whiteness of the body, lost upon any Cause
whatsoever. And this is more especially allowed unto Women; who because that
they are in Wisdom, strength of Body, Fortitude, and in some certain other
things, much inferior unto Men, therefore in stead (of these as the Poet
Anacreon tells us) Nature on Women does bestow
A Comely form, and Beauteous hiew:
Instead of Lances, Targets, Shields,
Their Face a fair bright luster yields:
Which puts on Women such a Grace,
That Fire and Sword to them give place.


And Plato (in his Phaedrus) says, That of all things whatsoever Beauty is the
most excellent and Amiable, and there he calls a Beautiful Face, a Divine
Face, that is to say, a Face shining forth by reason of a kind form that is put
upon it. But the other is altogether to be rejected by Women; and Sr. Cyprian
writes very truly, in these words of his (in his second Tract, of the Habit of
Virgins) We ought not only (says he) to admonish Virgins, or Widows; but I
conceive, that even Married Women and all others whatsoever (in general) are to
be admonished, that the Handiwork and Image of God ought by no means to be
adulterated, by adding thereto any yellow color, or any black Powder, or any
kind of redness, or (in a word) any other Medicine that corrupts the Native
Lineaments. And a little after; They lay wicked hands (says he) upon the Work
of God, when as they go about to transfigure and reform that which he himself
has formed, as not knowing that all whatsoever is made and wrought is the work
of God, but whatsoever is Changed is the work of the Devil.

Now the Medicaments of the former sort are such as (almost all of them) do
very much scout and cleanse, by separating from the Skin that Juice that
deformeth the same with this brown and duskish color, and by alluring thereto a
new Juice that may procure unto it a bright and beautiful color. Unto which
there are sometimes added likewise certain Emollients, which have in them a
power to soften the Skin when it is hard, thick, and rough; they also make it
smoother, and more especially they cause an extraordinary softness in the Hands.

Milk will satisfy both these scopes, and especially Asses Milk, and Goats
Milk: Which Poppaea the Wife of the Emperor Nero being not ignorant of (a Woman
extremely proud and luxurious) she cause a five hundred Milch Asses always to
attend her whithersoever she went; and in a great Tub made purposely for her to
bathe in, she washed her whole body in the said Milk, that so it might be all
over freed from wrinkles, made tender and delicate, and preserved white; as
Pliny relates the story in his eleventh Book, Chap. 41. and Book 28. Chap. 12.

Cleansers are these; the Roots of the greater Dragon-wort, Solomon's Seal,
great Figwort, wild Cucumber, white Lilies, the Elder, bitter Almonds, Pines,
the four greater cold Seeds, French or Kidney Beans, Rice, Bean meal, the Meal
of Cicers, of Lupines, Starch, the White of an Egg, Milk, Camphyre, Salt, Oil
of Tartar, Frankincense, Myrrh, the Crumbs of white Bread, the Oily Nut Ben.

Of the Roots of Dragon-wort there is a certain Gersa made; which is nothing
else but the Dregs or Lees thereof, as they commonly call them.

And so also there may in the like manner be prepared such a like Faecula or
Gersa, out of the Roots of Solomon's Seal, and great Figwort. And out of the
Oily Nut Ben (commonly called Balanus Myrepsica) there is an Oil pressed forth,
that is called the Oil of Been.

And likewise out of diverse of these simples together that erewhile we
mentioned there are made many destilled Waters, and diverse Compositions. As,

Take Root of Solomon's Seal, Dragon-wort, great Figwort, of each one ounce and
half; of the Flowerdeluce one ounce, of Bean flower two ounces, Mastick one
ounce, Borax two drams; let them be destilled.

Take the soft Crumb of White Bread three pound thereof, the Whites of Eggs well
shaken together, twelve in number; Goats Milk two quarts; let them be
destilled. Or,

Take Rice one pound, let it be steeped in the Water of Bean flowers, until it
break; afterward add of choice Mastick six drams, Borax two drams; and then
destil them. Or,

Take the Pith or Crumb of White Bread one pound, Root of Solomon's Seal half a
pound, Goats Milk as much as will suffice; and let them be destilled. Or,

Take Flowers of the Elder, and of Bean flowers, of each a like proportion;
pour hereunto Goats Milk, and strain it; let them stand in a cold place for
eight days; and then destill them. When you use the Water,

Take of Beans hulled, beat them into a very fine Powder, and cast the same
into the said Water, and after this let the Face be washed with this Water, and
permitted to dry leisurely of it self. In the end dissolve Camphyre in the
Spirit of Wine, and mingle it with Eldern Water; and let the Face be washed
with this Water. Or,

Take Whites of Eggs, in number twenty four; Cinamom two drams, Asses Milk or
Goats milk, two Quarts, and destill them.

Emulsions likewise made of the four greater Cold Seeds, bitter Almonds, and
Pines, are here very useful.

There are also Decoctions made (with which the Face is to be washed) of Beans,
Cicers, Lupines, Rice. Or,

Take Roots of white Lilies, Solomon's Seal, Borrage, of each one ounce,
Mallows, Sope-wort, Parietary or Pellitory of the Wall, and Violets, of each
two pugils; Beans hulled one handful, Flowers of Mallows half a handful; make
a Decoction, with which let the Face be washed.

Liniments moreover and Unguents are made use of, among which are the Pomacea
or Pomata, as they are commonly called. The Oil of Talck is now adays much in
the mouths of many; and very much used in the Nurseries of great Women. But
this last seems rather to belong unto the Face-fucusses then unto the true
Cosmeticks, unless it be administered only to cleanse; and after the use thereof
(when they go abroad in public) washed off from the Face.

Medicaments that whiten the Hand.
But now the more Choice and delicate Women (that are unaccustomed to labor) do
not only administer certain Medicaments unto their Faces, but unto their Hands
likewise, that so they may become soft and white; and these Medicaments are
made of the Crumb of White Bread, the Meal of Barley, of Cicers, of Lupines,
and Honey, all which being well wrought together with Water, or else mingled
with soft Soap and Honey, they wash their Hands therewith. Or,

Take Meal of Cicers, of Beans, of sweet Almonds, of each two ounces; the Roots
of Flowerdeluce of Florence two drams, Honey and Rosewater of each as much as
will suffice; and Mingle them.

And here likewise the Pomatum Unguent is of much use.

Or else such a Soap may be made;

Take of Venice Soap one pound; let it be dissolved in Rose Water; add
thereunto the Powder of Flowerdeluce of Florence one ounce, the Meal of Cicers
one ounce and half; and mingle them.

There are likewise many other Medicaments (which we mentioned a little above)
for the making of the Face fair and clear; and they are here also very useful.

Many other things there are of this Nature, that we may see in Rondeletius, in
his Tract of Fucusses.

Of Mending and Beautifying foul and deformed Cicatrices.
What things they be that amend the deformed Cicatrice.
The rectifying and amending of deformed Cicatrices is not unfitly referred
unto the Cosmetick or Beautifying Medicaments. For when as upon the Solution of
continuity (either by reason of a Wound or an Ulcer) there is from the Juice
nourishing the Skin (for the uniting of the part) something generated that is
like unto the Skin, and styled by the name of a Cicatrice; this said Cicatrice
is indeed like unto the whole skin; and yet it is oftentimes differenced from
it in color, and many times likewise in figure; because that sometimes it
becomes more high and raised, and otherwhiles it is depressed and kept low,
and leaves as it were a pit, and so consequently a certain inequality or
unevenness, and thereby breeds a deformity; which in the progress of time is
wont to be somewhat changed, whilst that the Cicatrice is rendered day by day
more like still unto the Skin. Which if yet nevertheless we have a desire that
it may be speedily effected, it may then be done by some certain Medicaments;
such as are, first the Oil of Myrrh, which is made if the Yelk be taken out of
an Egg hard boiled, and then the Egg filled up with Myrrh, and put into a moist
place, until it be all dissolved into a Liquor; and this likewise may be
wrought by the destilled Oil of Myrrh. The moisture also that sweateth forth of
Eggs whiles they are in rosting is very useful for this purpose. The Oil
likewise of the Yelks of Eggs, the Fat of the Thymallus Fish, which they
commonly call Ascia; the Oil that is pressed forth of the Kernels of Peaches,
Oil of bitter Almonds, and Oil of Been. Or else an Unguent may be made of
Borax, Camphyre, and Man's fat, or of Litharge, and the Oil of Roses, and the
Oil of bitter Almonds mingled with Honey; or else an Unguent may be made of the
Juice or Root of wild Cucumber and Honey; and with this the Cicatrice may be
anointed for one day, but the day following with Milk; and this by turns from
day to day must for a while be continued. Or,

Take the Mucilage of Fenugreek seed, and of Fleawort, of each two drams; Oil
of Tartar by straining half an ounce; Oil of Roses one ounce; Ceruss, and
Borax, of each one dram, and mingle them. Or,

Take the Root of Dragon-wort, of Solomon's Seal, of each two drams; Bitter
Almonds, Peach Kernels, of each one dram; Egg-shels burnt half a dram;
Frankincense and choice Myrrh, of each one dram; Sugar Candy three drams; the
Mucilage of Fenugreek seed one ounce; Oil of the Yelks of Eggs, and Man's fat,
of each as much as will suffice: Mingle and make a Liniment.

But if the Cicatrice be deep, it is not so to be amended by Medicaments that
it may be made equal and even with the rest of the Skin; but the Cicatrice is
by Section, or else by some corroding Medicament to be taken away; and the
Cavity (as much as is requisite) is to be filled up with flesh, and afterward
a new Cicatrice is to be brought al over the part.

Cicatrices after the small Pox and Measles.
But most of al after the small pox and Meazles there are oftentimes very
frequently left behind (in the Face) unsightly and deformed Cicatrices, that
cause an exceeding great eyesore and il-favoredness; and thereupon (that they
may be amended) the help and assistance of the Physicians is oftentimes
implored.

But for the taking away of these Cicatrices, those Medicaments that we a
little before mentioned are very useful; and so are those likewise that have
been prescribed before in this present Chapter, for the making of the Face more
fair and clear. And for this (out of al these) there is more especially
commended the fat of the precious Fish Thymallus or the Ascia fish.

Forestus had happy success in the use of this that follows:

Take Oil of sweet Almonds an ounce and half: of white Lilies one ounce: the
Fat of a Capon, and Goats Fat, of each half an ounce: Sarcocol half a dram: the
powder of Bryony root, and Flowerdeluce, of each one scruple: Sugar thaberzet
one dram. Bruise what is to be bruised into a very fine powder, and pass them
through a very fine sieve, and then (if you so please) add thereto dissolved
Gums, and at length let them be mingled together in a Mortar, pouring thereupon
Rose Water, the Water of white Lilies, and of Beans, of each a sufficient
quantity; continually stirring them, and incorporating them together; then let
them by the stroking of the Hands be passed through a woollen Cloth, and there
will run forth a soft Unguent.

Chap. 5. Of those they call Mother Spots, or Blemishes.
THere is also another sort of Blemishes that is wont to defile and deform the
Skin, and this is derived from the very first original, and that which the
Infant has contracted even in the Mothers Womb; and hereupon they are called
Maternal, and original Blemishes, Spots, and Marks. Now these Spots are very
various and different, sometimes of a red color, and as soon again of a dark and
brown color, and oftentimes of neither of these two, but of some other color;
and it is also of this or that shape and figure; and sometimes in this, sometimes
in that part of the body.

The Causes.
There are some indeed that believe that these spots and blemishes are excited
in the body from a fortuitous and accidental concourse of the humors. But the
very truth is that such like things come not to pass by chance; but Experience
it self teaches us, that these spots depend upon the fancy and imagination of
the Mother, and that by it the Infant is thus marked as they speak. There is no
necessity for our heaping up of the several Authorities both of Philosophers
and Physicians, as touching this subject; neither is it requisite here to
recount even all the faults and things amiss in the conformation, that are
caused by occasion of the imagination. For it is well enough known unto al kind
of Women, that Infants have now and then had some certain spots resembling
Straw-berries, or Cherries; or else red spots like unto red Wine, or the Fire;
whenas upon the sight of such like objects by the Mother, the Imagination
makes an Impression of these like colors upon the Child. And I my self knew a
woman great with Child, who standing under a Mulberry Tree, there fell some of
the Mulberries upon her back; whereupon the Infant that she went withal had as
many excrescences in its back, resembling the shape and figure of Mulberries.
But now, how it comes to pass that the Imagination does this, I have at large
shown you in my Tract touching the Consent and Agreement of the Chemists with
Aristotle and the Galenists, Chap. 14. and in the fourth Book of our Practice,
Part 2. Sect. 4. Chap. 7. Which here to repeat I hold it altogether needless.

Prognostics.
1. This kind of Spots is very hard to Cure: and although it seem sometimes to
be a little obscured, yet it soon breaks forth again, in a manner as if it
were raw; and some there are that relate how that those spots that are
contracted by the occasion of Cherries, Strawberries, and Grapes, (at the time
when these Fruits are wont to be ripe) will appear, and as it were flourish
again.

2. If yet notwithstanding there be Medicaments administered immediately upon
the birth of the Child, they are sometimes taken away.

The Cure.
Women do commonly make use of the blood of the Secundine or Afterbirth for the
taking away of these Spots; rubbing and cleansing the said Spots therewith
while it is yet hot. And others likewise afterward make use of the Menstruous
blood.

There are yet not withstanding other cleansing Medicaments likewise (of the
which we have hitherunto spoken, and prescribed for the taking away of other
Face-spots) that may here be made use of: others administer the Mothers
fasting, spittle: and others require the often instilling of the Milk that is
drawn out of the Mothers Breasts upon the said spots and deformities. Which if
they suffice not, then we are to have recourse unto corroding and Caustic
Medicaments also, or unto the Manual operation, and the shaving of the
Scarf-skin likewise. It is also good for the Mother in the morning (for some
certain days continually) to chew Mustard seed, and with it to rub the spot.
And some there are that preserve that part of the Infants Navel that falls
off after the due knitting thereof, and this being dried, and afterward
moistened in the Water of the Herb Christopher they lay it upon the Spot thrice
a day, so long until the said spot be wholly vanished. There is here likewise
commended the destilled Water of Mountain Avens, if the Infant (so soon as it
comes forth of the Womb) be washed therewith; and the spots afterward washed
with the same Water.

Chap. 6, Of the Volatick or flitting spots of Infants.
THe German Practical Books (as we may see in the Practice of Gabelchomerus,
and in the Physical Dispensatory of Wittichius, and in others) make mention
(among Childrens Diseases) of a certain Affect that they call Denflug, which in
regard that I never saw it, I have therefore omitted, and not at al spoken of
it in my Tract of Infants Diseases. But because there are some that write than
they have seen it, we will therefore make mention thereof here in this place.
Now these describe this Affect, that they are certain flitting spots, of a red
or purple color, creeping up and down here and there in the Skin; which if they
touch upon any orifice (as suppose, the Mouth, the Nostrils, the Eyes, and the
Ears) and penetrate so far as that they reach even unto them, the Malady is
then mortal. And therefore that they may prevent this, they take Rose Water,
and mingle therewith a little Saffron, and with this they anoint all the said
Orifices (and the Spots themselves likewise) round about. Only they do not
anoint the body toward the Feet, that so by the Feet these spots may vanish.
Which spots (if any such there be) without al doubt they are a species of the
Erysipelas, and therefore we are not only to administer that Liniment unto the
orifices of the body, but we are likewise to make use of those Expulsive
Medicaments also that are otherwise wont to be used in the Erysipelas.

Chap. 7. Of those spots and blemishes that the Germans call Hepatick, or
Liver-spots.
AS I have often told you (and cannot but here again acquaint you with it)
there are many kinds of Tubercles and Spots (and these are also at this day
very commonly known every where in all Nations) which by what names they were
called by the Greeks or Latins we know not; whenas yet notwithstanding it is
no way credible that there were no such Affects as these among the Ancients;
for there were then rise in those times the same causes as now.

There is commonly known an Affect which the Germans call Leberflecke, without
al doubt, The Affect Leberflecke what it is.
in regard they believe that it has its original from the Liver, to wit, dark
and brownish spots, or such as of yellow become somewhat blackish, as broad as
the Palm of the Hand, seizing upon the Groyns especially, and the Breast, and
the Back, yea and sometimes also covering the whole Breast with a certain slight
roughness of the Skin that sends forth as it were scales, or branny scurf^
which yet notwithstanding do not stick and abide in one place alone, but are
dispersed hither and thither; and one while they vanish, another while they
break out and appear again. Reinerus Solenander (of all that I can remember)
does most plainly and clearly describe unto us these spots, in his Sect. 5.
Consultat. 11. but yet he gives them no name. And Platerus likewise seems to
make mention of these, when he writes, that there are some certain dark,
brownish, and dun spots, as broad as the palm of the hand, arising sometimes in
some certain parts of the body, and at some certain times only, and vanishing
also at some certain seasons. But he makes the matter somewhat obscure and
doubtful, in bidding us to seek for the cause, and for the Cure in the Lentigo.
For these Lentigines, and the spots we now speak of are different Affects, and
they have different Causes; as will further appear from those things that have
been already spoken of before in the third Chapter, touching the Lentigines,
and shall be more fully spoken of in this present Chapter. Whether these kind of
spots may not be referred unto the Vitiligo, and the black Alphus (as I think
that they well may) I leave it unto the judgment of the Reader. Our purpose is
here in this Chapter to explain and treat of this Subject, without either the
Greek or Latin name; for the German name is of al others the best known, as
are also the very spots themselves.

The Causes.
The Cause of these Spots is a humor very dry and Melancholy brought unto the
Skin, together with the aliment of the parts; or alse blood that is feculent,
full of dregs, and very thick; which when it cannot al of it be assimilated,
that of it that is excrementitious is thrust forth unto the Skin. But although
that more feculent blood may be generated from an overdry Liver; (from whence
it is that by the Germans it is called Leberflecke, that is to say,
Liver-spots:) yet nevertheless, seeing that the Liver does its office in its
sanguifying faculty, and breeds good blood, the Spleen without doubt is not
altogether free from fault. Whereupon I have observed that after those spots
(if they have continued long) Quartan Fevers have arisen. An unfit kind of
Diet, and such a course of life as is apt to breed a thick and feculent blood,
and a Melancholy humor, makes very much likewise for the generation of these
spots; touching which we have already spoken elsewhere.

Prognostics.
1. These very spots indeed have in themselves little or no danger; neither do
they breed any kind of trouble, or any deformity visible unto the eye, when
they arise in the Face and Hands, as the Lentigines, but in those places that
are covered which Clothes.

3. And yet notwithstanding, in regard of the Cause upon which they depend, and
the vicious Constitution of the Liver, and Spleen, they presage other Diseases:
and very frequently Tertian and Quartan Fevers follow these Spots.

3. Although those Spots may easily be taken away (as anon we shall show you)
yet nevertheless, unless the fault and imperfection of the blood and bowels
(from which the vicious blood is generated) be taken away, they again return
and flourish in a short time after.

The Cure.
Since therefore these kind of Spots being taken away may again return, unless
the Cause upon which they depend be likewise taken away, the vicious humor is
therefore to be evacuated by Medicaments that are made of the Roots of
Polypody, Succory, Borrage, Spleenwort, Dodder, Maidenhair, Egrimony, the
Leaves of Seen, Rheubarb, Jalap. And this is sometimes to be repeated: and if
there be occasion, a Vein may likewise be opened.

But then in regard that these Purgers do evacuate only those humors that are
collected in the Veins, but do not prevent the generation of the said humors;
we must therefore more especially do the utmost of our endeavor that the
vicious Constitution of the Liver and Spleen (upon which the breeding of these
humors does depend) may be amended: and this may be performed by a good and
wholesome diet, by the which that dry constitution of the Liver and Spleen may by
degrees be restored unto a better condition. And therefore we are to prescribe
Meats of a good Juice, such as Goats flesh, Veal, Lamb, Pullets, Eggs, and the
like, Barley, Wheat, Apples thoroughly ripe,, Prunes, Raisins, Almonds. But the
Patient must avoid meats that are thick, salt, and sharp, and generally al
meats of an il juice, such as are flesh that is smoke-dried, and the like. For
the Constitution of the Bowels being by the use of good meats reduced unto a
better estate and condition, the vicious humors will no more be generated, but
only a good and temperate blood.

But as for what concerns Topics; it will be very good in the morning to rub
those parts that are thus defiled and deformed with spots. But first of al,
before the Patients going into the Bath, it will not be amiss to take the Water,
or the Syrup of Fumitory, with a little Treacle. After his sweat let the place
be anointed with Mustard seed with warm water reduced into the form of a
Pultiss; which may be there left to continue so long, even until that a heat
and a certain pricking be felt and perceived in the part; and afterward let it
be washed with warm Water. Or else let it be anointed with this Mass.

Take White Soap half a pound, let it be sliced and dried; and afterward add
of Mustard seed one dram and half; the meal of Beans and Lupines, of each two
ounces; the soft Crumb of white Bread one ounce; with the juice of Fumitory or
the sharp-pointed Dock, mingle, and use it.

Chap. 8. Of the Itch.
ALthough that the Itch may be joined together with many other Affects, as
Scabs, the Impetigo, Leprosy, and the like; so that these being taken away,
this very Affect is likewise removed; yet notwithstanding it sometimes singly
and alone vexes and troubles persons; and so troublesome it is, that the party
thus affected is often enforced to implore the help and assistance even of the
Physician also; and of this we intend to treat here in this Chapter.

Now the Itch is a pain that is excited from a thin and sharp excrement
sticking between the Scarf-skin and the Skin it self. For albeit while the
place of the Itch be scratched, there is perceived a certain seeming pleasure;
yet nevertheless this pleasure does not belong to the Nature of the Itch, but
it follows only upon the scratching, whilst that the parts that were gnawn by
a sharp matter do suddenly return unto their natural state, and their wonted
smoothness. For like as there is a pain excited from that sudden motion unto a
preternatural state; so in like manner there is a certain pleasure felt from
this sudden motion and return unto their Natural state. Now the truth is, the
Itch it self cease after scratching, because that the matter which was the
cause of the Itching is evacuated; and because also that the solution of
Continuity that exciteth the pain, is again brought unto an Union and
quietness, if the scratching be any thing strong.

The Causes.
The nearest cause of the Itch is a salt Excrement that is biting and sharp; to
wit, either mere pure Choler, or else black Choler, commonly called Melancholy;
or else a salt phlegm. Which excrement albeit that it be present also in the
scabby Affect, yet in the Itch it is more thin, and insinuates it self through
the least particles. But it sticks between the true skin and the scarf-skin,
and thereupon by its acrimony it goadeth (as I may so say) and pricketh the
sensible particles in the skin, and provokes them unto scratching. And indeed
like as the Nature of the excremens it self makes much for the sticking of the
said Excrement in the Skin (this Excrement although it be thin, yet having in
it a certain kind of clamminess and glewishness, by the which it sticks very
close and pertinaciously unto the parts;) so does likewise the thickness of the
skin it self, by reason of which it cannot exhale.

But now that excrement is collected by reason of the heat and dryness of the
Liver, the use of sharp meats, and many Spices. And hence it is that old men
(those especially of them that in their youth had a hot Liver, and such of them
as then used a hot kind of Diet in their meat and drink) are in their old age
so sensible of the Itch, and at length come to be troubled with scabbiness. See
further hereof in Galen his second Book of the Causes of Symptoms, and the
sixth Chapter.

The Differences.
Now according to the variety of the humor, and the nature of the places
affected, there is a certain difference likewise of the Itch. For look how the
matter is more or less sharp, so the Itch that is excited is more or less
contumacious and troublesome. And sometimes there is felt an itching in the skin
of the whole body; and sometimes in some parts only.

Prognostics.
1. The Itch is for the most part the forerunner of Scabbiness shortly to
follow. For if the Itch be of any long continuance, there is then at the length
collected a greater abundance of the matter* and this receiving a putridness is
rendered more sharp, and it corrodeth the Scarf-kin, and exciteth Pustules.

2. By how much the worse the humor is that exciteth the Itch, by so much the
worse is the malady also. To wit, the Itch that is excited from burnt blood, or
Choler, is sooner ended and gone: but that which proceeds from salt slegm
lasts longer; and longest of all that which has its original from burnt
Melancholy.

3. The Itch in which there is great pleasure taken in the scratching thereof,
is evil, because that it arises from a sharp Choler.

4. The Itch in old people is seldom cured, especially in those that are
decrepit. For since that old age is fit for the treasuring up of these salt
humors, that disposition of the body is hardly changed, and brought unto a
better state. And yet notwithstanding if diligence and care be shown, it is
sometimes healed. And Mercurialis (in his Tract of the Diseases of the skin,
Chap. 3.) relates that Leonellus Pius (a man fourscore years old) was freed
from an extraordinary great Itch by the benefit of Medicaments.

5. Hippocrates (in Coacis) writes that the Itch in those that have
Consumptions (if it succeed the suppression and binding of the Belly) is not
only dangerous, but deadly. For by reason of the trouble and disquiet of the
Itch, those in Consumptions can neither sleep, nor take any restr; whereupon
there is little or no Conconction, and therefore they have their death hastened
upon them.

The Cure.
The Itch (seeing that it is a pain) if it be extraordinary great and vehement,
and cause watchfulness, thereby decaying the strength, shows that mitigation
by Anodynes is to be procured; but the Cause that it depends upon calls for
evacuation. And indeed the next Cause (since that it is a sals humor sticking
in the Skin) this is likewise to be evacuated from the Skin. And in regard that
this said next cause is nourished by a like humor contained in the Veins,
therefore this is likewise to be evacuated. And because that this humor is
generated from a distemper, and vicious disposition of the Bowels, it is
therefore to be anointed: and so the generating of such like humors is to be
prevented.

Those Moisteners take away the Itch that mitigate the sharp matter that is the
Cause of the Itch. Now those things that evacuate these excrementitious humors
from the Skin, are those Medicaments, that Cleanse, Mollify, and make thin.
Purgers take away the Antecedent Cause. Alterers amend the vicious disposition
of the Bowels; but more especially a good course of Dier.

And therefore in the first place the Salt, Nitrous, and sharp humor is to be
prepared and evacuated. The humor is prepared by such Medicaments as have in
them a power of Cooling and Moistening; and such as withal attenuate the Thick
Clammy humor; such as are Succo^y, Endive, Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Hope,
Maidenhair, Asparagus Roots, Polypody, Mother of Time, and Syrups made out of
these; and more especially that o^ Hops, Fumitory, Succory, the Byzantine
Syrup, and the Syrup of Maidenhair.

Now the Humors are evacuated by the Leaves of Seen, Polypody, black Hellebor,
Jalap, the compound Syrup of Polypody, the Electuary Dracatholicon, Confection
of Hamech, Extract of black Hellebor, the Melanagoge Excract. The forms o^
these are elsewhere propounded, and so they are also in the Chapter of the
Scabs.

And sometimes also Venesection (if the Age and strength will bear it) is to be
instituted: and because that it often falls out, that either the
Haemorrhoids, or the Courses suppressed and kept it may afford matter and
occasion unto this Evil; it will therefore not be amiss to provoke and draw
forth these Haemorrhoids, or Courses.

But for the tempering and allaying the heat of these Adust humors, as also of
the Bowels themselves, there is nothing that does it sooner then the Whey of
Goats Milk; which may be given from one pint to three. But it will be better for
use if there be added some Juice or Syrup of Fumitory. But that which more
especially corrects the distemper of the Bowels, and makes for the
generating of good blood, is a fit and proper Course of Diet. Lee the Air be
temperate, inclining unto cold and moist: and the Meats of a good Juice, of an
easy Concoction, and that are not easily corrupted, these may be altered with
Borrage, Endive, and especially Lettice; which last procures also sleep which
in this Affect is very requisite and useful. But all such meats as are Sharp,
Salt, Bitter, Sour, Sweet, Fat, and most of all fried meats, are to be shunned
and avoided.

As touching Topics, for the mitigating, and moderating of the Itch it self,
and for the tempering of the humors Acrimony, and likewise for discussing of
the humors, a Bath of sweet Water made blood-warm is of singular use; in the
which the sick Person may sit for half an hour (or a whole hour) in the morning
fasting; because that it does at once temper the heat and dryness of the
Bowels, and withal rarefie the Pores. But the Medicinal Baths (to wit, those
of Sulphur, etc.) are more useful in the stronger discussing of the matter; and
it will not be amiss (by turns) one while to make use of a Bath of sweet
blood-warm Water, and another while of that that is salt and sulphury. For so
by this means both the Itch shall be mitigated, the Pores loosned, and the
excrements in the Skin Cleansed away and evacuated. But for discussion we may
likewise make use of either common Oil, or Oil of sweet Almonds with Salt and
Sulphur; as also Oleum Costinum, or Oil of bitter Costus. Or else the body may
be washed with the Decoction of Smallage, Parietary, the sharp Dock root, the
Seed of the bitter Vetch Orobus, Lupines, White Cicers, Bran. Or,

Take Lupine meal three ounces, Sulphur two ounces; mingle them with Vinegar,
and anoint the body therewith. Or,

Take Litharge, Sulphur, Turpentine, of each one ounce and half; the Juice of
Mallows, and Parietary, of each one ounce; Oil of Cinnamom as much as you think
fit, and mingle them.

But then after the use of such like things as have been mentioned, the sick
Person must make use of a blood-warm Bath of sweet Water.

More hereof may be seen in the first Part, Chap. 27. touching Scabbiness;
since that most of those Medicaments that Cure the Scabs, and especially the
dry Scabbiness, they are likewise useful in the Itch.

Chap. 9. Of the ill and offensive Smell.
ANd lastly, among the Affects of the Skin, we must not pass over in silence
that stinking and offensive smell that is sometimes wont to breathe forth out of
the external parts of the body through the Skin; and to be very offensive, not
only to the Bystanders, but unto the Person himself also, whosoever he be that
is troubled therewith. For the body of man, whiles it continues in its right
state smells not at all, neither does it send forth any favor that may by any
one be perceived. For every living Creature (whatever it be) does breathe forth
some kind of Smell proper unto its own kind, as Theophrastus teaches us in his
Book of Smells; and this he proves by experience; by which we see that Dogs
find out and follow their Masters footsteps, by the help they have from this
smell; and wild Beasts likewise do the same in seeking their Prey. But yet
nevertheless if any smell shall be perceived to come from any one, this is a
thing that is preternatural, as being beyond and besides Natures Intent. And as
for what Plutarch writes (in the life of Alexander the Great) that the body of
the said Alexander sent forth a sweet and pleasant smell, this is a thing very
rare; unless happily it come more from the Clothes, then the body.

But that ill and stinking smells do oftentimes proceed from Man's body, is a
thing well known by frequent observation. Now the places from whence the
offensive smell comes, are the Mouth, the Armpits, the Privy Parts, but more
especially the Feet. But that the Ears and the Nosethrils likewise do sometimes
stink, this proceeds from the Ulcers that are in them. Yet sometimes
notwithstanding, there exhaleth forth a stinking and offensive smell even out of
the whole body of him that is thus affected: as for the stink of the Mouth, we
have already spoken thereof, in Book 2. Part 1. Chap. 19.

But now it is not our Intent, here (in the general) to dispute of the Nature
of smells, what it is, and likewise by what means the sweet or uns^vory very
smell is generated; in regard this may be known from Philosophical and Physical
Discourses. In this place it is sufficient that we know, that this offensive
smell and stink proceeds from a superfluous humidity putrefying, and exhaling
such a like vapor.

Hircus
The stinking smell of the Armpits is called Hircus. Avicen (Septima quinti,
Tract. 3. Chap. 23.) tells us, That there are some who assert that the
Remainders of the Seed that were superfluous in Generation, and brought into
this place, are the cause of this stinking and offensive smell. Which Opinion
although that Avicen rejectech it, and that by others the cause of this smell is
said to be the astriction of the pores of the Skin in that place, by reason of
which the vapors cannot freely breathe through and exhale: yet notwithstanding,
this constriction or shutting up of the Pores is not sufficient; for if it were
so, then this Affect should be most familiar unto old people. And this opinion
albeit thus rejected by Avicen, does not in any thing seem to be absurd. For we
know well that this Affect is most familiar unto Virgins that are marriageable,
if at any time they grow hot with motion. And that the Testicles, and the Seed
have in them a full power of imprinting such an offensive and stinking smell
upon the blood, we may sufficiently know it from Goats, and other living
Creatures that are gelded. Yet nevertheless this feat smell is most especially
familiar unto those that have very moist bodies, because that moisture is most
obnoxious unto putridness. For although that all the blood do not putrefie, yet
notwithstanding about the Emunctories the excrementitious vapors are apt and
very ready to receive the putridness.

The offensive smell of the privy parts in some.
And for the very same cause the privy parts of many yields the like
offensive strong smell,by reason of excrementitious humors, which from the Liver
and the Veins are thrust forth unto the Emunctories that are seated in the
Groyns, from which stinking vapors do exhale.

Stinking Feet.
The Feet likewise of some have a very feat and strong smell,and truly be said
to stink. For whereas Nature is wont to thrust forth the excrementitious humors
unto these external parts, the Feet being so covered and shod that the vapors
exhaling from them cannot freely expire and breathe forth, they then and there
receive a putridness, and from thence that stink is contracted. And lastly (but
this is very rare) the whole body stinketh (unless this smell arise from sweat,
as most frequently it does) and that strong Feat smell (stinking you may call it)
that is sometimes ascribed unto the whole body, is properly the smell of the
Armpits. And yet notwithstanding Martial (as we find it extant in his sixth
Book) has this Epigram upon Thais.

Thais stinks worse than Fullers Pot ere stunk, that lay
Fur'd up to the brim, but newly burst, in the midst of the way:
Worse then the lustful Goat new come from's Mate ere stank;
Worse then the Dogs skin stayed beyond great Tibers bank:
Worse then the Abortive Chick that is found in rotten Eggs;
Worse then the Tankard marred with Corrupt Sauce, and Dreggs.
This Cheat to damp her poisonous stink with sweet Perfumes,
Whenas she is stripped, and takes the Bath, she then assumes
Psilothra, Perfumes, Ointments, or lies hid with Chalk,
And thus by shifts she keeps her stink from common Talk.
When sh' has used all her thousand Arts, and thinks all well,
Yet still she stinks, and Thais does like Thais smell.
Prognostics.
1. This strong and stinking smell is loathsome, and very offensive to the
Standers by, and such as is very unfit for Conversing with others; and it
oftentimes rendereth the Wife unacceptable and unpleasing in the Eyes of her
Husband.

2. And yet notwithstanding this stinking smell is a sure sign of an overmoist
Body, and a Body wherein there are many moist Excrements heaped; and this the
body is very easily obnoxious unto in Fevers and other Diseases arising from
putridness.

The Cure.
The Cure respects either the stink it self (that may be palliated and
covered by a sweet smell) on the very cause of it; and this is the true Cure.
And therefore the bodies of them that are thus troubled, are in a convenient
manner, by Venesection (if need require) and Purgation to be evacuated, and its
overgreat humidity to be dried up. And here more especially there is commended
Aloes Rosate, which dries the body, and powerfully preserves it from
putridness.

Let the Diet likewise be so ordered that it may tend toward dryness, and
resist putridness. And therefore let his Meats be sauced with Vinegar, the
juice of citrons, and oranges, Rose Water, and Rose vinegar. But there must be
an abstinence from meats that are easily corrupted; such as are Cucumbers,
Melons, Musk Melons, Figs, and the like. The overmuch use of Fish, especially
the softer sort thereof likewise to be avoided. The Exercises of the body let
them also not be neglected: neither let the sleep be excessive. Afterward we
are well to take notice from what part the stink exhaleth, and accordingly that
part is to be cleansed and washed with the Decoction of Barley, Scabious,
Flowerdeluce Root, Aloes, Myrrh, Guajacum wood, Citron Rind, Saunders,
Aspalathus or Thorny bush; and after this a Cerote is to be imposed of Styrax
Calamite, Benzoin, Cinnamom, Cloves, Myrrh, and Aloes, incorporated, and made
into a mash with Rosin, and the Oil of Lavender.

But seeing that (before such time also at the Cause be quite taken away) the
said stink is troublesome and offensive unto al persons that come near; it may
therefore be obscured by sweet smells, and thereby be both depressed and
palliated. The Armpits therefore and the Groyns (as there shall be need) may be
anointed with some sweet smelling Liniment or Unguent) made of the Flowerdeluce
Root of Florence, Cinnamom, Lign Aloes, Cloves, Gallia Moschata, Styrax
Calamite, Oil of Lavender, or Balsam of the Citron, Cloves, Cinnamom, or many
of these mingled together, adding thereto Musk, and Ambar, if it seem good unto
you so to do. Under the Armpits there may likewise be born sweet scented bals,
or an Ambar Pomander. The said stinking and offensive smell is easily taken
away, if the Feet be every day washed with Water or Ley, in which Bay Leaves,
the Leaves of Organy, and Sage, the flowers of Rosemary, Roses, Camomile, and
Flowerdeluce root are boiled; or else the Feet may be washed in Wine in which
Alum has been dissolved.

After the washing we may likewise administer those Remedies that the Greeks
call Diapasmata; which (as Pliny writes in his 13. B. chap. 2.) consist of
odoriserous things that are dry; and they are the sprinklings of some dry
Medicament that is made into a fine powder; with the which we are to rub the
Feet, and to sprinkle some thereof betwixt the Toes. As,

Take Bay Leaves, and Organy, of each one ounce; Flowers of red Roses, the
Florentine Flowerdeluce Root, and Cypress root, of each half an ounce; Bean
meal, and Lupine meal, of each two ounces; Salt dried one ounce: Make a Powder.

The same course is to be taken if the whole body send forth a stinking smell.
And then frequent use must be made of Baths of the sweet smelling Herbs a
little before mentioned. And if the said offensive stink cannot otherwise be
obscured and palliated, we are then to make use of perfumed Garments, sweet
Bals, Balsams, and the like. But it is better to take away the Cause of the
offensive smell, than to go about by sweet scents and perfumes to obscure and
palliate it; since that perfumes unless they be very strong, they mingle
themselves with the stink, and are but as it were a vehicle unto it, and so
cause the smell to be the more unsavory. Whereas the truth is, that he that
smells of nothing at al, smells best of al.

There is extant in the Physical Epistles of that famous Physician Georgius
Horstius, Book 2. Sect. 10. a very memorable History of a stinking and
offensive smell proceeding from the whole body: where Dr. Sigismund Snitzerus
writes unto Dr. Andreas Libavius, that a certain Augustane Virgin (seventeen
years of age) was sent unto Bamberg, and there put into the Monastery of the
holy Sepulcher, that so she might live as a Recluse and Nun of the said Order.
And that she was no sooner entered into that Monastery, but she sent forth a
stinking smell (not unlike unto that of a dead putrefying Carcass) greatly
offensive and displeasing unto the rest of the Nuns; whether she kept them
company in their common meeting place, or else kept her self close and mewed up
in her own Cell; for even here also they smelt her as they passed by: but a
diligent enquiry and search being made into the cause thereof, he came (as he
writes) at length to understand that this stink of hers proceeded not from any
thing amiss in her Mouth, Stomach, Womb, or any other particular part of the
Body, but from the general habit, temper, and constitution of the whole body.
Yet nevertheless Libavius (in his Epistle wherein he returns an answer) does
not admit of this said proper Constitution and temperament of the whole Body; in
regard that to render the reason thereof, is beyond the reach and power of any
man living; but he rather thinks that something happening from without brought
upon her that alteration of her substance, and so caused this offensive smell.
And he conceives indeed, that this distemper was contracted in the Womb from
the pollution of the blood, and the corrupted seed; and that it did consist and
was nourished in the Womb of the Mother: or that this Maiden (being then but an
Embryo in the Womb of the Mother, while it yet lay therein) suffered something
from the nauseousness and vomiting of the Mother, and from affrightment
befalling her, or from some grievous Affect that she lay under. He conceives
moreover, that the Mother might be affrighted and terrified upon the sight of
some Sepulcher, or that she happened to come in place where they were anointing
some dead body; or that she took conceit, and a loathing from the putrid and
stinking Excrements that flow from such as lie in childbed; or else that she
was some way or other greatly affected by these and the like accidents. You may
read more hereof in the alleged Epistle of Libavius.

And another Example of the stink of the whole body the same Libavius has in
the following Epistle, where he writes, that he well knew a certain young woman,
that after she was married, and living in Wedlock, (while she had her Courses)
had such a stink coming from her, as never Jakes had worse; and that during
this time her Husband lived very discontentedly, as one much afflicted
therewith.

THE FIFTH BOOK, THE THIRD PART. SECT. II. Of things amiss in the Hair and
Nails.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature of the Hairs.
AFter the faults of the Skin, we will (and that not unfitly) subjoyn those
things that are amiss in the Hair. For the Hair is fixed in the Skin; neither
is it any where else to be found but in the Skin. Neither indeed are the Vices
of the Hair to be passed over in silence, in regard that even these are
(although ignoble, yet) parts of the body. For as no man can well deny, That the
Nails, the Hoofs, and Horns of al living Creatures, and likewise that the
Feathers in Birds are parts of their body; and that none can well say that a
Peacocks Tail, and all the various Feathers in Birds that are of so many several
colors; I say, as none can well affirm that these Feathers affording so great
variety are a thing merely excrementitious, and not parts of their body: so
likewise it is in no wise to be denied, that the Hairs are also a part of the
body. And this we are sufficiently taught by the conformation of them, by their
various figure, and their different colors. The same is likewise proved by the
use of them, and so also by their diseases; touching which we shall speak
hereafter; and especially that we call Plica Polonica. And lastly, That very
effective and conformative power that the Hair has as well as other parts, (as
we shall by and by show you) clearly demonstrateth the truth of this. And the
growing of the Hairs again after their being cut, does not in the least prove
that they therefore are no parts. For both the Nails, and the Hoofs, the Claws
of Lobsters, and in certain bruit Beasts the Horns, after they are shed and
fallen off, yet they grow forth again; and so do likewise the Teeth in Men and
Women.

We are indeed vulgarly (but erroneously) taught, That Hairs are generated when
from the heat of our bodies fuliginous, and thick vapors are out of the third
Concoction elevated in the parts of our body, and are driven unto the pores of
the Skin; in the straight passages whereof whiles they stick, they are there
conglutinated, until at the length the pore being filled up, other vapors
coming underneath drive it forward; and these vapors are likewise followed
close by other vapors, and after them by more, and so in the end they are
thrust forth out of the pore, and the hair is formed; which afterward (the like
vapors succeeding, and thrusting forth the hair) and agglutinating themselves
unto the root thereof it thence comes to be prolonged.

But now if the Hair should be generated in this manner, The breeding of the
Hair.
a reason could not then be given why hair should not alike be bred in all parts
of the body; and in those parts where they are bred, why there should be in
some places more store thereof, in some less; and why some of them are always
growing, when others grow not at al. In the Neck and Face there grow no hairs
naturally, but in the Head and Cheeks there are great abundance of them; as
also in the privy Parts, in the Armpits, Eyelids, and above the Eyelids on the
Eyebrows. The hair in the head and beard is ever growing, and is continually
lengthened out; but those hairs that are in the Eyelids ever keep at one and
the same length, and moreover they evermore remain straight. And furthermore no
cause could at al be given, wherefore men only should have Beards, and that
women should not likewise have them; whenas notwithstanding women have on their
heads most usually the longer hair. Moreover, the hair is by Aristotle (in his
third Book of the History of living Creature, Chap. 12.) distinguished into
that which is bred toegther with us (such as is the hair of the head, eyelids,
and eyebrows) and that that is afterward bred, to wit, such as at length
arises in process of time as age comes on: of which there could no cause at al
be rendered, if (according to the vulgar opinion) the hairs had their original
out of those vapors that break forth.

And therefore there is some other cause of the hairs original to be sought
for; in the discovery of which Galen has also been very curious, and taken
great pains; insomuch that he here takes occasion (which otherwise he does but
very seldom) to make mention of the wisdom, power, and goodness of Almighty
God, the Author and Framer of al things; and he has here endeavored to examine
his Omnipotency and Wisdom in this particular, and to confute Moses, as we may
see in his eleventh Book of the use of the Parts, Chap. 14.

But if we seriously weigh the matter, we cannot by any means grant that the
hairs are bred only from the excrements, or the vapors exhaling out of the
body, and sticking in some certain places; but we are rather to determine that
they are generated from the formative (we may term it the pilifique or
hair-breeding) faculty, for the causes a little before mentioned. And that the
hairs are generated, not only from some kind of fuliginous vapors, but from a
matter that is far more solid, and nearly allied unto the matter of the Nails,
and Horns, we are taught even by this, that the hairs are not easily corrupted,
but are (even after death) preserved a long while whole and entire. Touching
which Gabriel de Zerbis relates a History (in his Book of the Anatomy of Man's
Body, in the Title of the Anatomy of the Hair, fol. 15.) in these very words:
At Rome we both saw and touched (says he) the dead body of a Woman buried in
the way called Appia (just opposite unto the why where Cicero was buried: and
therefore it was the conjecture of the most, that this Carcass was the dead
body of Tulliola the dearly beloved Daughter of the said Cicero, as it might be
understood by the Inscription: this Carcass was taken out of the Grave, wherein
by means of great store of Myrrh, and some Mummy likewise, it is believed that
it had been preserved from corruption, from the time of Cicero, even unto the
time of Pope Sixtus the fourth; being near upon one thousand five hundred
years. In this Carcass there was good store of Hair, adorned, and tied up with
a Golden Fillet; as it was then the Custom to bury those of her age. This
Carcass (having been also generally viewed by sundry Spectators, and almost by all the people as well as by my self) was from thence removed and brought to
Rome, where in three days time (the means that preserved it being now far
distant from it) it putrefied, and was soon resolved into its first principles,
and became mingled with the Earthy Element wherein it lay. And so altogether in
the same manner, like as the Nails in Men and Women, the hoofs and horns in
four-footed Beasts, the painted and variously colored Feathers in Birds are
produced by the Formative faculty; and if they chance to fall off they are again
renewed in the same manner; even so likewise the hairs are generated by the
formative or pilifick faculty that is by the Creator implanted in some certain
parts; and hence also it is that there oftentimes arises such a great variety
of colors in the hair. For (as we have already said) the hair in the head and
beard is from day to day augmented and lengthened; but it is not so in the hair
that is in the Eyelids and Eyebrows, which for the most part evermore keeps
at one and the same length. Moreover the hairs in the Eyelids stand always
straight forward; and if either their length be increased, or their
straightness incurvated, they then hinder the sight, and cause an
inconvenience. Men have beards, Women have none: the Creator, to wit, having
altogether destined these hairs unto a certain use; and therefore he has given
this pilifique or hair-breeding faculty unto some parts, and not unto other
some; which said faculty forms the hairs, for their certain quantity, figure,
and color. In Mankind and Animals there grows no hair under the feet; the
Hare alone excepted, which (as Aristotle testifies in the third Book of his
History of living Creatures, Chap. 12.) has hair growing under the feet. And
this moreover argues that the hair in Animals proceeds from the formative
faculty; to wit, for that by the strength and force of Imagination the form and
color of the hair may be changed, as out of the 30. Chapter of Genesis, in the
History of Jacob sufficiently appears.

The matter of the Hair (as of al other parts of the body) is the blood, The
matter of the Hair.
as likewise Adrianus Spigelius (in his fifth Book of the Fabric of Man's Body,
Chap. 10) has determined; and this also appears plainly in the Affect we call
Plica Polonica, in the which if the hairs be cut, there issues blood out of
them; but this blood is of the meaner and more ignoble sort. For Nature does
the part, and discharges the office of a good and provident Hous-keeper,
(distributing unto each particular person in the Family what properly belongs
unto him) and with the best and purest part of the blood she nourishes the
more noble and worthy parts of the body, distributing the residue unto the
ignoble and less principal parts, to wit, into the Nails and Hairs in Mankind;
and in Bruits, into the Hairs, Hoofs, Horns, and Feathers: of which we have
already likewise spoken, in the third Book of our Institutions, Part 1. Sect.
2. Chap. 3. But although it be true that the Hairs proceed from the more
ignoble part of the blood, yet notwithstanding it is unctuous, and (if we may
so speak with the Chemists) very Oily, and Sulphurous as it were (as appears
by the burning of them) as having I know not what kind of near alliance with
the seed; and from hence it is that such as are lustful and salacious are
likewise hairy; and those on the other side that are not inclined unto Venery
are smooth and without hair; and hence it is that Eunuchs and effeminate
Persons produce no Beard; and those that are excessive and immoderate in the
use of Venus are soon bald; and on the contrary, Eunuchs are never bald.

The use of the Hair.
From al which we may likewise easily collect what the use of the Hair is. For
certain it is that they have their peculiar and proper uses; since that the
Hairs on the Head are (as it were) the Natural Covering thereof; the Hairs in
the Eyelids do after their manner conduce unto and further the sight; and when
they are pulled forth or fall off of themselves, it much prejudiceth and
hinders the sight; the Hair of the Head, and the Beard, in men especially,
serves as a great ornament unto Man, and they render him more venerable (as it
were) in the account of others. But now in regard that the Hair under the
Armpits, in the privy parts, and in the Thighs, is given us by Nature neither
for a Covering, nor yet for an ornament, therefore we may conclude that Nature
in the production of these Hairs sought some further end, and intended some
other use; to wit, that hereby in the generating of these Hairs the more
ignoble part of the blood may be consumed: from whence likewise it is, that in
some they grow forth and appear more abundantly, and in others more sparingly;
as Infants also are (in most parts of their body) altogether void of Hair;
which notwithstanding are afterward generated in them as they increase in
years, the matter of the Hair being more and more heaped up together.

Chap. 11. Of things amiss in the Hair; and first, of Baldness and want of a
Beard.
ANd therefore, since that the Hairs are generated from the formative or
Hair-breeding faculty, they have their Natural Constitution, which consists
in their Natural magnitude, and store, figure and color; which said
Constitution when once it is lost, they are then subject unto many different
Vices; which if you please to call Diseases, I will not gainsay you. And indeed
the first Vice is in the defect of them; and this is either Natural, and such
as happens unto very many according to their age; or else it is
preternatural. The first of these is termed Baldness; of the second sort, are,
the Shedding or Falling off of the Hair, the Alopecia, and Ophiasis. There is
indeed in all these Vices of the Hair a falling off of the Hair from the part
(whatever it be) where formerly it was growing; and so (in the general) all
these Vices may be comprehended under the name of Defluvium or falling off: but
use has so far prevailed, that the name Defluvium or falling off is (in
special) taken for a certain Species of the shedding of the Hair, as we shall
hereafter show you.

As for Baldness, in the first place; look what Patos (that is to say, the
falling down of the Leaves) is in Trees, the like is baldness in Animals, yea
also in the very Trees themselves: whereupon Aristotle in his sixth Book of the
generation of Animals, and Chap. 3. writes: Men (says he) of all living
Creatures are mostly subject unto baldness, and they evidently become so sooner
then any other Creature whatsoever. Which kind of Affect is in a manner
general. For of Plants likewise, some of them have allwaies green Leaves,
others of them lose their Leaves. The like Affect is baldness in those men unto
whom it happens that they should be Bald. For whenas by little and little
(some now, some then) both the Leaves, and the Feathers, and the Hairs all off;
when this same Affect shall happen universally, then it receives these words,
Baldness, falling of the Leaf, and shedding of the Feathers. And Columella in
his fourth Book of Husbandry, Chap. 33. says that the young and tender Chestnut
Tree that is infested by Mice and Moles, does oftentimes become bald. Now
baldness in a man, is a certain smoothness, Baldness what it is.
or defect of Hair in the fore part of the Head, taking its original from the
want of Aliment. And this most commonly chances naturally in the progress of
years; but yet nevertheless unto some it happens preternaturally; which is
thereupon to be accounted preternatural and vicious.

The Causes.
Touching the Causes of Baldness, Physicians do indeed very much differ in
their Opinions. But if we well weigh the manner how Hairs are generated in the
Head, the business in Controversy will not seem at all difficult. For whereas
both the matter and the Aliment is sent and supplied unto the Hairs from the
Brain more especially; therefore we say indeed, that the defect of the
necessary Aliment is the nearest cause of this shedding or falling off of the
Hair: yet nevertheless this Affect proceeds oftentimes from the Constitution
of the Brain; to wit, if it become more dry then is meet. Hippocrates tells us
the same, in the sixth of his Epidem. Comment. 3. Tit. 1. where he thus
writes; the Consumption of the Brain, and by reason thereof baldness; etc.
Where (as Galen tells us in his Comment. upon the place) by the Consumption of
the Brain, that diminution thereof is to be understood, that happens unto old
men from its extraordinary dryness. For if the Brain once become extremely dry,
then there will be nothing superfluous therein remaining that may suffice for
the nourishing of the Hairs. And Aristotle teaches us the same, who (in his
fifth Book of the Generation of living Creatures, Chap. 3.) writes, that
baldness is caused from the scarcity of the moist heat and fatness, that is to
say of the moist Aliment. For there is in old People an excrementitious
humidity, that is rather too much abounding, then any want thereof. And indeed,
as we have already said, baldness is natural unto the most, because that in the
progress of their years (and as old age comes on) the Brain in every one
becomes more dry then is meet: but yet unto some this baldness happens in
their Youth and green years, to wit, unto those that from some preternatural or
violent cause have their Brains overdried before the time; which Causes may be
many. The Chief and most principal of them al is the immoderate use of Venus,
that powerfully dries the Brain. Whereupon it is that before the use of Venus
none grows bald; Neither are Eunuchs bald at all (in the sixth Sect. of the
Aphorisms, Aphor. 28.) in regard they lose not, neither cast forth any Seed;
and so the like may be said of Youths, and until they attain unto ripeness of
years. Women likewise are seldom or never bald (and yet nevertheless Albertus
Magnus testifies that he saw two Women that were bald; in his nineteenth Book
of Animals, Chap. 6.) in regard that their Constitution is naturally more
moist; and therefore the Brain also in them is not so easily and soon dried;
and because that Women eject not such store of Seed as the Men do. The Brain is
likewise overmuch (and oversoon) dried by too much Watching, Study, and Cares.

As for that opinion of Actaurius, who in the first Book of his Method, Chap.
5. assigns overmuch humidity for the Cause of baldness, if any one has a
mind to reconcile it with the opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, and Aristotle, he
cannot more fitly explain it, then by saying that the defect of Alimental
humidity is indeed the Cause of Baldness; and yet notwithstanding that
excrementitious humidity causes that this baldness happens so much the
sooner and more easily: after the very same manner that Leaves of Trees fall off
indeed by reason of the want of necessary Aliment; and yet nevertheless they
fall off sooner and faster, if any adventitious and Accidental humidity (Rain,
or the like) happen.

Signs Diagnostick.
The very Truth is, that baldness of self appears sufficiendy unto the Eyes.
But yet nevertheless in what respect it differs from the other species of the
falling away of the Hairs, we shall now explain unto you. This Baldness we now
speak of differs from the Apolecia, and the Ophiasis or Area, in this, that
these Vices are fleeting from place to place, neither (in them) do the Hairs
fall off from any certain parts of the Head; whereas baldness happens evermore
in the forepart of the Head. But from the falling off of the Hair, in special
so called, this baldness differs, because that in the shedding and falling of
the Hair, the Hair al generally (or at least, the greater part of them, here
and there, up and down throughout the whole Head) fall off; but in baldness this
falling of the Hair is only in the fore part of the Head.

Prognostics.
1. Baldness indeed in it self brings no danger at all (but that it causes
that the Head lies the more open to be hurt by the external injuries of the
Air; and that it is as it were the forerunner and sign of the hastening of our
Mortal Nature toward her dissolution) and yet notwithstanding it causes a
great deformity and unsightliness (especially if it happen early, in the time
of Youth) and that that is resented and disliked by the most of those that
behold it: and it is reported, that Ca^us Julius Caesar the Emperor (famous
both for his learning, and likewise for his warlike exploits) could so il brook
and bear the baldness wherewith he was affected, that after his making trial
of very many Remedies to no purpose, it was at length granted unto him by the
Senate, that he might perpetually wear the Laurel: who if he were now at this
day living, might easily cover his baldness with a Coveting of Hair made of
other men's Hair (we in England call it a Perriwig) which is now adays in very
great and common use.

2. But that baldness that arises either from old age, or immaturely in the
time of Youth, will admit of no Cure; like as neither does the shedding of the
Teeth in such as have attained unto their full growth, since that the defect of
that Alimentary humidity cannot by any means be restored.

3. Those that are Bald have not the Varices (viz. the crooked swollen Veins in
the Hipps, etc.) very great: but those that during their baldness have these
Varices coming upon them, these again recover their Hair; as Hippocrates tells
us in the sixth of his Aphorisms, Aphor. 34. But this Aphorism is false, as
Galen in his Commentary, teaches us: since that we are none of us ignorant
that Baldness is an incurable Affection; and that it is likewise false, that
great Varices never happen unto those that are bald; and also that upon the
arising of the Varices the baldness cease: unless happily (as some will have it)
he call that Calvitium or baldness, that Physicians term Madarosis, that is, the
falling off of the Hair. For this indeed in regard that it has its Original
from vicious humors (like as that we call Ophiasis and Alopecia) these very
deprived humor being translated into the Thighs may cause the Varices, and so
the man may possibly recover and receive his Hair again. For if there were at
first a loss of the Hair by reason of their roots being corrupted by the said
vicious humors; then good ground there is to believe that this Hair will again
now return unto its Natural state, upon the translation of the aforesaid
humors unto some other place.

The Cure.
But although that baldness when it is arrived at its height can no ways be
cured: yet nevertheless in regard that baldness does both exceedingly
incommodate the health, and cause deformity; we must therefore do our endeavor
all that may be, to prevent and retard it. Which can by no other means be done,
than by repairing the aliment of the hair that begins to fail, and
attracting it unto the skin of the head. And therefore we must do our utmost
that the fat and hot humidity by which the hairs are nourished may be preserved
and drawn unto the skin. There are some likewise that add moderate astringents,
if the skin be become thin through the heat of the head. But whenas baldness
does arise from the defect of Aliment; and whenas by reason of dryness the
pores and passages of the skin are closed and altogether shut up, there is no
need at al of Astringents; for if they be administered, then the Aliment that
flows unto the hairs will be altogether repressed.

Now what kind of Medicaments they are that correct the distemper of the head,
and the dryness of the brain, we have already shown you in the first Book of
our Practice, Part 1. Chap. 4. But that the Aliment may be attracted unto the
roots of the hairs, frictions are to be first used before the Medicaments;
which yet notwithstanding ought, to be moderate, that they may only attract the
Aliment, and not discuss it. But these Medicaments ought to be hot, and so
attracting, with a moderate astriction, by which the Aliment may be drawn unto
the roots of the hair, and there detained. Dioscorides in his first Book, Chap.
110. and Galen in his seventh Book of the faculty of Simples,. Cistus, commend
Ladanum; and yet more in case of the falling of the hair, than in baldness: yet
nevertheless very many there are that use the same likewise for baldness, and
especially the Oil thereof, which they prepare in this manner:

Take of the best Ladanum cut into small pieces one pound; pour thereunto of
Rose water six ounces; Oil of sweet Almonds four ounces; boil them together,
and strain it often, until it be clear. Or let the Ladanum be dissolved in the
Oil of Mastick, and then strained. It is very good likewise to wash the head
with the Decoction of Fenugreek. See more of these Medicaments for this use in
Galen his first Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the places,
Chap. 1. And we shall also mention some more of them in the following Chapter.

The Diet.
And first of al, a right Course and Order of Diet conduces very much unto the
retarding of baldness. Let the meats therefore that the Patient eats be of a
good juice and nourishment, (that is to say, such as affords a fat juice) and
of easy concoction. Let him abstain from meats that are salt, sharp, sour, and
austere (such as are most of the Summer Fruits) that yield but little aliment,
and that also very fluid. Let his drink likewise be such as yields a good
juice. But let him abstain from strong and old Wine, having in it a power to
dry overmuch. Venery is especially hurtful in this Affect. Watchings, griefs,
cares, and the anxieties of the mind are also hurtful in this Affect.

The want of a Beard.
We said before that the Beard was an Ornament unto a Man; and therefore if
this be wanting in Men, it causes a very great deformity. Now this may fail
either altogether, as in Eunuchs, and certain others that are womanish and have
altogether effeminate bodies: or else it breaks forth very slowly, or grows
not so thick as it is wont. Al which happen, either from a defect of the
matter, or else by reason of the thickness of the Skin out of which it is to
break forth; or from such a Constitution as hinders the appearing and growth
of a Beard.

Now whereas the want of a Beard in men of that age wherein Beards are wont to
bud and grow forth, does breed some kind of unseemliness and deformity; and
that such as are at their full age (that they may hereby procure unto themselves
both gravity, and respect from others) do much desire and endeavor after a
Beard; it is therefore very usual upon this very account to call in the help and
assistance of the Physician. But the truth is, the event seldom answers the
desire, or at least but very slowly, to wit, when Nature of her own accord
attempteth the production thereof.

But yet nevertheless I think it not amiss here to give you a Medicament or
two, for the aforesaid purpose: and more you shall have in the Chapter following.

Take Oil in which Southernwood has been boiled two ounces; the ashes of Bees
or Wasps one dram; Mous-tirds one scruple; (Honey one ounce; Ladanum three
drams; Bears fat as much as will suffice: Make a Liniment. Or,

Boil Mugwort in Oil, and let the place be anointed with the Oil; which makes
very much for the forwarding of the slow growth of the Beard. Of,

Take Powder of the seed of Nightshade as much as you please, and Oil of Eggs a
sufficient quantity: mingle them, etc.

Or let the place be often washed with the Decoction of Southernwood,
Maidenhair, Golden Maidenhair, Rosemary, and the Reed root; and afterward let
it be anointed with the Unguent that is made of Ladanum.

And if it be true (as some there are that think it is) that these Medicaments
that even now we named, and those that we shall hereafter further mention do not
al of them generate hairs only by their manifest qualities, and by taking away
the Causes of the falling off of the hair; but that they likewise produce hair
by some occult quality that is in them; such like Medicaments are therefore
especially to take place in the production of a Beard, not where there has
been a shedding or falling off of the hairs of the Beard, but where they never
as yet grew.

It is also well known, that it much conduces unto the speedy growing of the
Beard, if the first soft hairy down upon the Chin be often shaved off; by which
means the Aliment is the more abundantly allured and drawn unto the Roots of
the hair.

For the furthering and hastening of the Beard, these following Medicaments are
likewise commended.

Take Oil of Dill, Oil of Spike, of each five ounces; the tender Sprigs of
Southernwood two handfuls; Squils three drams; the best Wine three ounces; let
them boil until the Wine be consumed, and then use it. Or,

Take Oil of Garden Pinks, and sweet smelling Spike, of each three ounces; Oil
of Roses four ounces; of Cloves one dram; of Ladanum two drams; sweet smelling
Wine two ounces. Let them boil al of them unto the consumption of the Wine. Add
of Musk one scruple, and mingle them.

Chap. 3. Of the shedding of the Hair.
ALthough (as we have already said) al shedding of the Hair may be termed a
Defluvium or falling off: yet nevertheless use and custom have so far
prevailed, that the shedding of the Hair here and there in the Head (in all or
most parts thereof) is in special termed a Defluvium or falling of the Hair; so
that they fall not only in one place, but either they al fall off throughout the
whole head, or at least they most of them fall away in most parts of the Head.

The Causes.
There is not one Cause alone of this Defluvium of the Hair, but the Causes are
many; to wit, Either the want of Aliment, or the pravity of the humors
corroding the roots of the hair, or the thinness of the skin, not admitting the
aliment of the hair. The two former Causes have their place in those that are
Phthifical; in whom if the hair fall off, this comes to pass (as Galen tells us
in his Comment. Aphotism 10. Sect. 5.) because there is here both the greatest
defect of Aliment, and sometimes also the corruption of the humors. The same
happens for the most part in malignant Fevers, such especially of them in
which (the Brain being withal affected) the sick persons are seized on by a
Delirye or Dotage. For even in these Fevers also the sick parties are greatly
extenuated, and there is wanting unto the body a necessary aliment, and the
depraved humors likewise lie gnawing at the roots of the hair, and eat them
asunder. The hair also falls off in those that have the French Disease, by
reason of the pravity of the humors; which sometimes happens likewise unto
those that have drunk poison: and it is reported for a truth, That whosoever
touches the Salamander his hairs will shed and fall away. Bun sometimes also the
hair falls off by reason of the thinness of the skin; and this happens unto
Women, and especially in the Summer time. And hence it is, that those who
travel out of Germany into Italy, or other hot Regions, find now and then this
shedding of their hair; for by the heat of the Ambient Air the Skin is made
thin; and it chances also that the matter out of which the hair ought to be
generated does withal transpire.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Defluvium or falling of the hair that is in special so called, is easily
known by the continual shedding of the hair. But it is distinguished from
baldness, the Alopecia, and Ophiasis, because that in Baldness the hair falls
off in the fore part of the head only; but in Alopecia and Ophiasis the hair
falls from al parts of the head, and the head alone; but then in this Defluvium
(the Affect we now speak of) the hairs fall off in all parts of the body equally,
one while more, and another while fewer of them. But from what cause it is that
they fall off, may be known from the causes that went before. For if there went
before any sickness that was in it self apt to consume the aliment of the Body,
it is then credible that the shedding of the hair proceeds from the scarcity
of the Aliment. But if vicious, malignant, and depraved humors excite and cause
any disease, it is then an argument that the falling of the hair proceeds
likewise from the pravity of the humors. If lastly, there went before causes
rarefying the skin, it is then probable, that the said Defluvium of the hair
proceeds from the thinness of the Skin.

Prognostics.
1. Among al other the species of the shedding of the hair, this Defluvium in
special so called is most easily cured; unless the cause be such as is not to
be removed. For the skin has not as yet contracted any preternatural
disposition that is difficultly cured. And therefore it is that the Defluvium
or falling of the hair that happens after acure and malignant Fevers is
easily cured; when the Fever being healed, there is an Aliment again supplied
unto the body; and the hair that is already fallen off is for the most part
restored without the use of any Medicaments.

2. But in the Consumption such a defect of the Aliment, and such a vice of the
humors cannot by any means be amended. And therefore in this case there is not
only no cure to be had for this shedding of the hair, but the sick persons die
also. And therefore in such as are in Consumptions the falling of the hair is a
sure and certain sign of Death approaching; as in the fiftth of the Aphorisms,
Aphor. 11.

3. If the hair fall off by reason of the skins thinness, it may then by the use
of thickness be restored without any great difficulty.

The Cure.
The shedding of the hair is cured by taking away the cause upon which if
depends. If therefore the hairs fall away from the scarcity and want of
Aliment, it shows us, that we must use our endeavor that there may be
sufficient aliment bred in the body, and that that which is bred may be drawn
unto the skin of the head. If this Defluvium be from the depraved humors, and
these be supplied from al parts of the body, they are then to be evacuated; but
if they lie only at the roots of the hair, they are then to be discussed. If
these humors be of a poisonous Nature (as in the French Disease) we ought then
to meet with and oppose that poison. If the Affect proceed from the thinness of
the skin, the skin is then to be thickened.

If therefore this Defluvium or falling of the hair arise from the want of
Aliment, we ought then especially to take care that by appointing a due and
meet course of Diet there may be generated sufficient store of good blood. But
for the drawing of this unto the place affected, frictions are more especially
to be made use of. Yea indeed, almost before the use of any Topics, the
frictions or rubbing of the head are to be administered, as Galen teaches us in
his first Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to the places, Chap.
2. For Friction does both attract the Aliment unto the head, and also
strengthen and thicken the skin.

If this falling of the hair proceed from the pravity of the humors, then
universal purgations (if need require) being first premised, the head is often
to be rubbed, and discussives are to be administered; but yet let the Discussers
be moderate (especially if there be a concurrence of an abundant aliment) left
that by the excessive and overmuch use of them the aliment be likewise
dissipated, and the skin rendered over thin: and therefore Ladanum is very
fitly mingled together with the Unguents.

If the Defluvium depend wholly upon the thinness of the skin, then we ought to
apply those things that condense and thicken the skin, Galen commends
especially Ladanum, the Oil of Mastick, and the Oil of Myrtle mingled together.
Or else let Ladanum be dissolved in Wine, and so made use of.

And Ladanum is also very fitly administered in almost every falling off of the
hair. But in regard that it is of too thick consistence in it self to be
anointed with, it is therefore to be dissolved in something that is liquid (Wine
or Oil) and indeed such an Oil is to be made choice of that may satisfy and
answer the cause.

But seeing that Unguents and Oils are troublesome unto many, who will not endure
that their heads should be anointed with Ointments or Oils; therefore for these
we must provide Lotions for the head (that please them better) which are to be
made or Southernwood, Maidenhair, Golden Maidenhair, Mastick, Roses, Rosemary,
Ladanum.

And we must here again repeat what we gave you notice of about the end of the
foregoing Chapter, to wit, That there are some who appoint (and not without
good reason) such kind of Medicaments to be made (for the recovery of the hair)
that do not only by a manifest quality take away the cause of the shedding of
the hair, but such as also by an occult and peculiar faculty do conduce unto
the breeding of hair; and such as these are only known by experience. And these
are, all the Capillary Herbs, Southernwood, Reed root, sharp-dock root, the root
of the greater Bur, Asarabacca, Ladanum, Honey (and Water destilled from it)
Bees beaten together with the Honey-combs, or the powder and ashes of them, a^
also of Wasps, Flies, Moles, Mice, the Land Urchin, Bears fat, and Serpents
fat. Of which there are made many Compositions. As for instance,

Take the Rind of the Reed root burnt, Bees ashes, of each two drams;
Southernwood burnt one dram; Ladanum two drains; Honey half an ounce; Oil of
sweet Almonds, and Bears fat, of each as much as will suffice, and make a
Liniment.

For the shedding of the hair after sicknesses, this following is found to be
good.

Take Maidenhair, Southernwood, Golden Maidenhair, of each half a handful; the
Leaves of Myrtle, of Roses, and of Wormwood, of each two pugils: boil them in a
sufficient quantity of common Oil and red Wine, until the Wine be wasted, then
strain and squeeze them hard.

Take of the aforesaid Oil four ounces; Ladanum one ounce; Mastick half an
ounce, and mingle them according to art. Or,

Take Root of the Bur-dock six ounces; Maidenhair three handfuls; Southernwood
one handful. Pour thereunto as much white Wine as will suffice; and let them be
destilled in a bladder: Unto what is thus destilled, if you please you may add
the Water of Honey.

Or else let the Roots of the Bur-dock be boiled in Ley, and the head washed
therewith.

Chap. 4. Of Alopecia, and Ophiasis.
Alopecia:
THat which is called Alopecia and Ophiasis is a peculiar kind of the falling of
the Hair. Alopecia is so termed from Foxes; because that this kind of shedding
of the Hair is familiar unto them. But Ophiasis is so called from its figure,
Ophiasis:
because that the bald and smooth parts, destitute of their Hair, and writhed,
seem like unto Serpents. It is common unto both these Affects, that in them the
Hairs fall off areatim (as they term it) and hence it is likewise that this
Malady is in the general called Area. And Celsus in one and the same Chapter
treats of Area, Area:
Alopecia, and Ophiasis. Now the name of Area is imposed upon this Affect from
Country Garden-plats. For as there the Beds or quarters are distinct, and in
certain places only; and as these Beds when they are void of Plants are Naked
and bare; so it is likewise in these Areae; for here in certain places the Skin
appears smooth, bare, and slippery. These Affects differ only in their
figure. For Alopecia has no certain figure, but (as Celsus says) is dilated
under any kind of figure. But the Ophiasis creeps up and down writhingly like
unto a Serpent; and one while being extended from the hinder part of the Head
it creeps along on both sides the Head even unto the Ears, the breadth almost
of two fingers; and as soon again being carried beyond the Ears it creeps
forward Serpent-like even unto the very Forehead it self. And moreover there is
in the Ophiasis far more hurt and danger in the Cause thereof; so that not only
the roots of the Hair, but even the Skin it self also is eaten and gnawn
through, to wit, as far as the roots of the Hair reach. The definition of
Alopecia and Ophiasis:
And so Alopecia and Ophiasis may be thus defined, that they are a falling off
of the Hair after the aforesaid manner, areatim, having its Original from a
corrupt and depraved humor gnawing assunder the roots of the Hair.

The Author of the Book of Medicaments soon provided, refers the Alopecia
and Ophiasis unto those Affections that vitiate and mar the Color of the
Hair. But we are to know that this is not proper unto the said Areal falling
off of the Hair; but that this change of Color in the Hair does either precede
the Alopecia and Ophiasis (to wit, when from a vicious Nutriment the Hair first
becomes white, but afterward they fall off) or else the colors of the Hair
are changed after the Alopecia and Ophiasis. For when after the Areae Hairs are
again bred, they are then either white, or yellow; like as it is in Horses,
after that the hair is fallen off by reason of some Ulcer caused by attrition
or gauling, there is wont in the place thereof to appear and grow again white
hairs; which happens from a vicious Nutriment, and the weakness of the Skin.
And of this Celsus gives us notice, in his sixth Book, Chapter 1. to wit, that
the Ophiasis is extended unto the Hair of the Head alone, but that Alopecia may
be extended even unto the very Beard also.

The Causes.
The Cause of both these Maladies is a depraved and sharp humor of (eating
assunder the roots the Hair) of whatsoever kind it he. But for the most part
notwithstanding this Malady i^ caused by a salt phlegm, adust, or putrified.
Whereupon Galen in his Book of the differences of Symptoms, and Chap. 4.
writes, that these Vices follow a depraved Nutrition of the Skin of the Head.
But that one while the Alopecia, and another while the Ophiasis is excited; and
that the Hairs do sometimes constitute a strait and direct Area, and sometimes
that that is winding and writhed, the Cause of this is the great abundance, and
the quality of the matter. For if there be an extraordinary great store
thereof, and it be likewise thin, then it equally and alike eats through the
Hair in the more and greater places; but if the Matter be less, and mingled
with a thick humor, then there follows an unequal and writhed Defluvium or
shedding of the Hair; because that the humors being unequal and mingled do not
flow right forward, but creeping along obliquely they gnaw assunder the hair.

The more remote Causes are the heat of the Liver and Head, and especially the
fault of the first and second Concoction, by reason whereof salt and sharp
humors are generated; which although it may happen in every age, yet
nevertheless it happens more especially in Childhood and Youth; and it
follows the Affects, Tinea, Achores, and Favi, by reason of the Causes that
we mentioned in the Diseases of Children.

And sometimes likewise External and Malignant Causes make very much for the
generating of this Disease: among which Galen in his first Book of the
Composit. of Medicam. according to the places, Chap. 2. reckons up Mushroms,
because that they make very much for the generating of vicious and corrupt
humors. And hither likewise belongs the poison of the French Disease, in
regard that this also eats through the roots of the hair; which other poisons
may likewise do.

Signs Diagnostick.
We have already before told you in what respects this falling of the Hair
differs from baldness, and that shedding of the Hair that we call Defluvium.
But Alopecia differs and is known from Ophiasis by the very figure of the
Area, and because that in the Alopecia the hair only falls off, without any
hurt as all of the Skin. But in the Ophiasis there is not only a falling off of
the hair, but likewise an excoriation of the Skin. And the very color of the
skin is also changed; and in some it appears more whitish, in some more pale,
and in others more black; and if it be pricked, there flows forth a serous
whitish blood. Touching the difference between Alopecia and Ophiasis, Celsus in
his sixth Book, and Chap. 4. has these words: That Area (says he) that is
termed Alopecia is dilated under all kind of Figures; and it happens in the
hair of the Head, and in the Beard. But that which from the likeness of a
Serpent is called Ophiasis, begins from the binder part of the Head, and is
not extended above two fingers in length; it Creeps on both sides the Head
even unto the Ears: and in some unto their Foreheads also: the former of these
in all Ages, but this latter only in Infants.

But Alopecia and Ophiasis differ from Tinea, in this, because that in Ophiasis
the Excoriation of the Skin is superficial; and when it is cured, the hair
grows again. But in Tinea the excoriation and Ulceration is more deep; and
the skin is oftentimes so corrupted, that the hair never grows again.

As for what concerns the signs of the Causes, the Skin it self shows what
kind of humor it is that offends: which that it may be the more exactly
known, the hair that remains behind is to be shaven away, and the Skin to be
gently rubbed: there are other signs also that will instruct and teach us what
kind of humor it is that abounds in the body. The hairs likewise that grow
anew, by the various color that they have (according to the Nature of the
peccant humor) will show us what humor is the Cause of this Malady.

Prognostics.
1. Alopecia and Ophiasis although they bring not much danger along with them,
yet nevertheless they cause a great deformity: and among the Romans those
Slaves that were disfigured by the said Area, and especially by the Alopecia,
were sold at a far lower rate then other Slaves. And in our days also, these
Areae (in regard that they cause a suspicion of the French Pox) are therefore
accounted very disgraceful unto him that is affected therewith.

2. But whether the Ophiasis, or the Alopecia, may be soonest and most easily
cured it is a great question among Authors; and they herein much differ. Celsus
and Avenzoar are of Opinion that Ophiasis is more easily cured then Alopecia.
And on the Contrary, Alexander in his first Book, Chap. 2. and Serapio in his
first Book, Chap. 1. teach us that the Alopecia is more easily cured then
Ophiasis. But Celsus seems to speak only of the Alopecia of Infants; which in
the course of years and change of age is of it self oftentimes cured. But if
Alopecia and Ophiasis be such as are grown to maturity, or likewise in one and
the same age be compared the one with the other, then the Ophiasis seems to
be altogether the more difficult to be cured, in regard that it has its
original from a matter more thick and far worse then the former, and such as
does not only eat assunder the roots of the hairs, but likewise even the very
Skin it self; which is never done in the Alopecia.

3. Yet notwithstanding by how much the longer either of these Maladies has
been and continued, by so much the more difficult is the Cure thereof; and by
how much the less while they have continued, by so much the more easily are
they cured.

4. If by Rubbing the place become red, there is then hope of Cure; the sooner
it is thus, the more easy the Cure: but if it wax not red at all, then there
remains no hope at all of any Cure.

5. That kind of Areae is also the worst that has made the Skin thick, and
somewhat fat, and slick or slippery in all the parts affected.

6. Alopecia and Ophiasis that proceed from the Leprosy are altogether
incurable; and that that has its original from the French Disease is not to be
Cured until the Disease it self be Cured.

7. There then shines forth some hope of a Cure to follow, when the excremities
of the Areae that are nearest unto the remaining hairs do again begin to send
forth other hair. For then those parts that are nigh unto the sound have the
less receded from their Natural State, and so consequently will the sooner
again return unto their Natural State, and begin to produce hair.

The Cure.
If a Vicious humor abound in the whole body, this is first of all to be
evacuated, for otherwise it will continually cherish the Malady, by fomenting
the matter thereof. And so if the French Disease be Joined therewith, this is
first to be cured; in regard that the Areae cannot be taken away, unless this
be first removed. As likewise the distemper of the Bowels upon which the
breeding of the vicious humors does very much depend, is to be corrected. And
the antecedent Cause being taken away, the Containing Cause of the Areae is
then to be removed; which Galen does by Repressers and Digestives; but we ought
withal to do our endeavor, that the skin may be restored unto its natural
temper.

And therefore in the first place the whole body is to be purged by fit and
proper Medicaments, according to the Nature of the peccant humor. And moreover
Galen for the particular evacuation of the head, administreth Apophlegmatisms
also, which we have elsewhere explained.

But for the matter which is yet in its flux, and in the beginning thereof,
before the Areae are yet made, Galen makes use likewise of Repellers. And the
same likewise we are taught by Avicen; where he tells in that the Medicaments
in the Alopecia ought likewise by a moderate astriction to corroborate the skin
of the head; for in the seventh part of his fourth Book, Tract. 1. Chap. 6. he
says thus: And it is requisite that there be in those Medicaments a comforting
and strengthening, thereby to prevent and hinder in the head the reception of
malignant matter. But otherwise, and if the Alopecia and Ophiasis be already
present, Repelling Medicaments have then no place; even as likewise they have
no place in Scabies or Scabbiness.

But if the Areae be already made, and the matter impacted into the skin, we
ought then to use Digestives. Now these are hot, of thin parts, and not greatly
drying. For if we make use of those things that dry overmuch, not only the
vicious humors, but even the very aliment of the hair will be then discussed.
Yea, since that in the Areae confirmed the distemper of the skin is hot and
dry; therefore cold and moist Medicaments are to be mingled with the rest.

But now these Medicaments that take away the nighest cause of this Malady, are
termed Metasyncritica; of the preparing of which Galen teaches in his first
Book of the Composition of Medicaments according to their places, Chap. 2. and
in his fourteenth Book of the Method of Physic, Chap. 12. To wit, in the first
place, if there yet remain any hairs that are corrupted, these are to be
plucked out either with the Volsella (an Instrument purposely made to pull out
hairs) or they are to be drawn forth with a Dropacism, or else the place may be
shaven with a Razor. And then afterward let the head be washed with a Ley in
which Maidenhair, Golden Maidenhair, Southernwood, and the like Plants have
been boiled. After the washing, let the place be rubbed with a Linen cloth
(that is not over moist, nor yet over dry) until the skin begin to be red: when
this is done, then let Topics be administered. Now such like Medicaments are,
Mustard seed, Cresses, white Lily Roots, which (as it is said) will likewise
restore those hairs that burnt places have been deprived of by fire or
scalding; Rocket seed, Nitro, Oil of Bays, liquid Pitch, Sulphur, the powder
and ashes of Southernwood, the Root of Sowbread, and Hellebor, the seed of
Stavesacre, and Doves dung; and (these being the strongest and most powerful of
al) Thapsia and Euphorbium. Which aforesaid Medicaments notwithstanding by how
much the newer and fresher they are, by so much the sharper they are also; and
the older they be, the more they lay aside their sharpness and tartness. But
out of these such of them are to be made choice of that are proper and
convenient unto each of these Affects; and these are also rightly to be
administered. For those Medicaments that were by us even now mentioned, they are
not al of them fit for all kinds of Areae, or at al times, or after any manner
administered, or in all ages; but unto each of these there are such Medicaments
as are fit and proper; and each of these Medicaments have likewise their due
time and manner of use: and unto the Malady when it first begins, (and being
yet but small) the weaker sort of them are to be administered; but if the Malady
be inveterate, then the stronger sort of them: and unto the softer bodies (such
as are the bodies of Children and Women) the weaker Medicaments; but unto such
as are at their full age, and unto Men, the stronger sort of Medicaments are to
be applied.

Galen acquaints us with diverse Compositions that had been examined by long
Experience, and approved of (in his first Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 1.) to wit, Those of Heras, Crito,
Orestinus, Ortho the Sicilian, Cleopatra, Archigenes, Asclepias, Dionysodorus,
Soranus, and others.

Galen himself commends this following:

Take Leaves of the Greek Reed burnt half an ounce; the Vrchin burnt one dram;
Moufedung two drams: bruise and mingle them well with Vinegar, and so anoint the
place therewith. Or,

Take ashes of the burnt Reed, Goats hair burnt, Maidenhair, Bears fat, liquid
Pitch, Rosin of the Cedar, of each alike: and this he calls the admirable
Remedy. Or,

Take House Mice burnt, a piece of linen Cloth burnt, Horse Teeth burnt, Bears
Fat, the Marrow of a Heart, the rind of the Reed, equal parts of al; Honey as
much as will suffice; and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Euph^rbium, Thapsia, Oil of Bays, of each two drams; live Sulphur, both
the Hellebors, of each one dram; Add Wax six drams; which may be moistened with
Oil of Bays, or old Oil, or liquid Pitch, and mingle them together: And this
Medicament is of al other the strongest, and therefore most convenient for the
Malady when it is become inveterate.

In the Malady that is more mild it will be sufficient to use a Medicament made
of Southernwood, or the roots of the Reed burnt, mixed and incorporated with old
Oil, Oil of Bays, or liquid Pitch. Or,

Take Rocket seed, Cresses, Nitre, equal parts of them al, and let them be
mingled with Oil of Bays, or liquid Pitch.

This that follows is yet more mild, and therefore fit for Women and Children.

Take Southernwood, the ashes of the Root and Rind of the Reed, Frankincense,
of each of these equal parts; Bears Fat, and Oil of bitter Almonds, of each as
much as will suffice, and make a Liniment.

But if it be needful to make it stronger, then add thereto Spuma Maris, live
Sulphur, Bulls Gall, Rocket seed, Nitre, or even Thaplia also. Or,

Take Mustard seed, Thapsia, the seed of Cresses, equal parts of them al; when
you have beaten them into a very fine powder, then add Oil of Bays, and Rosin,
of each alike, as much as will suffice; and at the fire make hereof an
Emplaster according to art.

Such like Medicaments (good store of them) are likewise extant, and in diverse
places here and there, in the Writings of Valescus de Taranta, Rondeletius,
Vallerius, Trincavellius, and other Practical Physicians.

And this is likewise in the use of the stronger sort of Medicaments to be
observed, that in the beginning, the more liquid and softer Medicaments, and
such as are tempered by the mixture of Oils (that somewhat abate the force of
the stronger Medicaments) may be administered; and after the use of the first
Medicament we are to look what alteration it has made in the part affected;
and afterward (as need shall require) the strength thereof is either to be
augmented or abated. Now whether or no there be any alteration made may be
discovered by this especially, if we take notice, and well observe, whether the
skin after the use of the Medicament be made ever a whit the redder, or no; or
whether it were made red by a light and gentle, or else by a stronger friction.
For we ought to be very cautious, that the skin be not burnt through by the too
often repeated use of the stronger Medicaments. And as touching the use of
Compound Medicaments, you are likewise to take this advice, to wit, That if the
hair be altogether shaven off, it will be then more convenient to apply
Medicaments of a more solid form, such as are Emplasters: but if the hair be
not shaven away, then those Medicaments that are liquid and soft, such as are
Liniments and Unguents.

But then the weaker Topical Medicaments are to be continued unto the head both
day and night, that so they may exercise and put forth their strength and
virtue. But if the Medicaments be of the stronger sort, they are then to be
detained upon the head so long, until there appear to be some alteration in the
skin caused by them, and that there begin to arise some kind of pain. And
therefore in the use of the stronger, the place affected is daily once or twice
to be viewed, and if the Medicaments have strongly affected the place, we are
then to return to the milder sort of them; and the place is to be anointed with
Goose Fat, Oil of Dill, or the like Anodyne Medicament. For if the stronger
Medicaments be too long kept upon the skin, it will burn the same. And
Christophorus a Vega writes, that he had ^^en very many who by the use of
Medicaments that were overstrong were thereby brought unto a perpetual
baldness, and continued beardless unto their dying day.

The Diet.
A good and due course of Diet makes very much also for the curing of the said
Alopecia and Ophiasis; which let it be such as that good blood may be thereby
bred, and the increase of bad humors prevented. And therefore let the Patients
meat be of a good juice, that may bring the depraved humors unto a benign and
good temper. Let the Patient abstain from Wine, before his body be purged,
because that Wine carries the bad humors that are detained in the body along
with it into the Veins. But when the body shall be sufficiently purged, then the
Patient may drink that Wine that is temperate and a little sweet, seeing that
it nourishes well, and breeds good blood. Let the Air in which he breaths
be hot.

Chap. 5. Of Tinea, or Worms eating off the roots of the Hair.
AMong those Affects in the which the Hairs fall off, that Affect is by no means
to be passed over in silence, in the which the hairs indeed, not whole, but in
pieces (or piecemeal, as we say) fall off, being eaten through and consumed by
certain Worms. There are but very few Authors that make mention of this Affect;
neither (as it seems) was it known unto Platerus (though otherwise a most
experienced Physician) whom we find thus writing; There are some (says he) who
affirm that the hairs of the head and beard have been gnawn and eaten asunder
by certain Worms so small that they could hardly be discerned. But yet
nevertheless it is an Affect that is commonly known with us; and I my self have
often seen it, and it has been offered unto me to Cure. Our Germans call it
Haarmilben oder Milen. And this kind of small Worms that are scarcely visible to
the Eye (and which whether they have in them any life or not, we cannot
discover but only by their motion) are bred in Cheese, Honey, (if there be but
a little bread added thereto) old Wax, Prunes, and dried Cherries, and diverse
other things besides. And without doubt this species of little Worms is of the
same kind with those that (as Aristotle writes) are the least sort of al
Worms, and that they breed in old Wax, and in Wood; and in his fifth Book of
the History of living Creatures, Chap. 32. he calls them Acari. A Latin word
there is none other for it, unless we think good to call it Tinea; because that
like as Garments are eaten by the moth; so are the hairs likewise by these
Worms, being bred in the hair.

The Causes.
As Lice and other kind of Vermin have their certain matter out of which they
are bred (all kind of Vermin being not generated from al kind of matter) which
cannot possibly be known but by experience: even so likewise this kind of small
Worms is bred (as we have said) in Wax, Honey, old Cheese, Cherries, and dried
Prunes; as also in the hair of the Head, and oftentimes in the Beard. But
without doubt they have their original from a certain excremetitious humor,
that together with the Aliment of the hair, penetrateth into the said hairs;
and there being cherished by the heat of the Head it converteth into little
Worms, that afterward sticking unto the hair (for from whence they are
generated from thence they seek their nourishment) they corrode the same, so
that they fall off piecemeal.

Signs Diagnostick.
This Affect is sufficiently manifest of it self. For the hairs are made
shotter, and unequal; some of them being more, and some less Curtaild. These
little Worms stick in the extremities of the said hairs; and there they from
day to day corrode and decurtail them: but whether or no they stick likewise in
the midst of the hairs, for this we must Consult the Sight, and take an exact
view of the hair thus affected. The color likewise of the hair (if it be black)
is changed; and by reason of those little Worms sticking unto them, it becomes
(in some certain places) as it were of the color of Ashes

The Prognostic.
The truth is that this Affect has in it no danger at all; and yet
nevertheless it causes a very great deformity, and unfightliness, especially
in the Beard, by making the hairs unequal; some of them being shorter, and some
longer; and the Beard it self seems foul, sluttish, and Nasty. This Affect is
also hard to be cured.

The Cure.
For the Cure hereof there will be need of those Medicaments that Clean^e away
these small Worms; and that digest, and discuss the matter from whence they are
generated. Neither does it seem from the purpose, that we purge the whole body,
since that these Worms arise from a vicious humor mingled together with the
aliment of the hair.

Take of Broom one ounce, Myrrh two drams, Vinegar as much as will suffice;
boil it a little; and let the hair be Cleansed with the straining. Or,

Take Nettle seed pulverized, let it be macerated in Vinegar, and the hairs well
wet with the same.

The Decoction likewise of Fenugreek and Scabious made with Ley is very useful
in this Case; and so are also Squils, with the Leaves of Myrtle and Sage boiled
in Oil. Or,

Take Garlic, Centaury the less, equal parts of both; boil them in Vinegar;
and add thereto the Gall of a Bull. Or,

Take the grearer Nettle; boil it in Ley, and wash the Head therewith. Or,

Take Southernwood, Root of Avens, and Wormwood; boil them in Vinegar and
Spring Water, as much of the one as the other, and let the hair be washed with
the Decoction thereof.

Chap. 6. Of the Cleaving of the Hair.
ANd sometimes likewise the hairs on the Head, and in the Beard, are cloven and
divided; so that those that before were single and but one now seem and appear
to be cleft into two. Which Vice of the Hair happens without doubt from some
sharp humor, cleaving the Hair in the ends of them. But now, since that this
Vice breeds tome kind of deformity, it is therefore to be amended. Which is
done, if that part which remains be anointed about the ends of them with the
Gall of a Bull and be afterward again washed with the Decoction of the
Capillary Herbs, Southernwood, the Reed, and the like.

Chap. 7. Of hoariness in the Head and Beard.
FOr a Man in old age to become gray and hoary in his Head and Beard, is a
thing altogether Natural: but yet sometimes nevertheless it so happens, that
immaturely, and oversoon, ho^riness appears in some before their old age, yea
indeed before they are come to be Men. And furthermore Hoariness comes on and
appears leisurely and by degrees.

But yet it is observed, that some persons have suddenly and all on an Instant
become white and hoary. And to this purpose, Scaliger in his Exercitation 312.
relates a History of something that happened under Franciscus Gonzaga. This
Gonzaga having committed and imprisoned a near Kinsman of his in a strong
Castle, upon suspicion of treachery in him, thereby to reserve him until he
were questioned and punished according to his demerits; news was brought him
next morning, that his Kinsman was suddenly become all over white and hoary.
And the like we read in Lemnius in his second Book, Chap. 2. of Complexions:
and in Hadrianus Junius, in his Comment. upon the Hair: In Ludovicus Vives his
Scipio's Dream; and in Coelius Rhodiginus, in the third Book of Ancient
Reading, Chap. 24. and in the thirteenth Book, Chap. 17. And Cuspinian relates
many Histories of such as suddenly out of fear became gray and hoary; and so
does Johannes Schenkius relate the like, in the first Book of his Observat. And
of this kind of hoariness it is (that comes immaturely and before its due
time) that I am here in this place to treat. For this Affect (in regard that it
both depriveth a man of his Natural beauty, and likewise betokens that the
health is not right, and as it ought to be; it is therefore not without good
cause made the subject of the Physicians care and pains. As for that grayness,
whiteness, and hoariness that chances unto men and women in their old age, and
is a Natural ornament of their old age, to endeavor to cover and hide this with
fucusses and other artificial paintings, is altogether whorish, and an Argument
of a light, wanton, and luxurious mind.

The Causes.
It is not to be doubted that natural hoariness does proceed from the change
and alteration of the temperament of the body, and the blood that nourishes
the hair. But here we are to enquire how it comes to pass that there should be
sometimes such a change as this in the blood and aliment, in those that are yet
in their youth and green years. Aristotle (in his fifth Book of the Generation
of living Creatures, Chap. 5.) writes, That the Aliment that produces these
white and hoary hairs (when it is not concocted) does rot and putrefie, and so
becomes a white hoariness; because that the filthy snottiness of them being
rotten is almost white. And so he deduceth this hoariness from the defect of
Native heat; which when it cannot concoct the humors, these humors being
deserted by their natural heat are then the more attempted by an external and
adventitious heat, and so they become putrefied; from which putridness they are
made white. Galen seems to follow the opinion of Aristotle; when he tells us
in his second Book of Temperaments, Chap. 5. That the hairs are made white,
because that the aliment whereby they are nourished is as it were the shot of
phlegm, which in space of time putrefieth. And that which Aristotle calls
putridness he terms Situs, and we call it filth, snor, or snivel: this being
such a kind of affection as happens unto Bread in the Dog days, which we
therefore call finnowed or hoary Bread. And for this cause likewise it is (as
he writes) that men are more apt to grow hoary in their Temples, because that
the fore part of the head is (by reason of its dryness) more prone to baldness;
but the Temples, by reason of their humidity, and consequently upon the
generating of snot and filth from the putrefying of the aforesaid humidity, are
more apt and prone unto hoariness. The Opinion of Galen in this one thing only
seems to differ from that of Aristotle, to wit, That Aristotle speaks only
in the general, without making mention of any one particular humor; whereas
Galen writes that hoariness proceeds from the putridness of phlegm alone. And
here it is altogether more safe, by phlegm, to understand any simple crude
humor, then phlegm properly so called; and that any crudity rather than that
putridness only which is so called, may be the cause of hoariness. To wit,
(that we may in a word or two propound our opinion touching this very thing in
controversy, of which others have so largely discoursed) seeing that the hairs
(as we said before) are not generated and nourished from vapors, or excrements
elevated in the form and likeness of vapors, but rather from the blood, as al
other parts are, it is without al dispute, that the blood that is generated in
old age is not so fresh, flourishing, and temperate, as in youth; but that as
the body is now hastening toward death, so the blood also that is therein bred
is nothing so good as formerly; which is clearly shown and manifested even by
the change and decay of that fresh and lively color of the body, and that
witheredness that befalls men and women in their old age. And therefore we
are not to wonder, that (seeing the blood that nourishes the hair is now
become far worse than before) the color of the hair should likewise be changed;
neither that the hairs (that retain their own natural conformation and
nutrition even until a man's death) should only from some filth and snot (that
is wont to happen unto those things that putresie) suffer any such like thing
as that we now speak of. But now that in Vitiligo and Leuca this color is
preternaturally changed, it is doubtless from this, That in the said Affects
there is not supplied unto the hair so good an aliment, but such as is full of
excrements, and especially phlegmatic excrements. But in such as are hoary
before their time, in these no doubt there is a fault and something amiss even
in the very humors; and if not in the whole body, yet at least in the head and
temper of the brain. Neither is it impossible but that these who are thus hoary
in their youth or middle age may come to be thus affected, and to suffer what
we are now speaking of, either by reason of the Seed, or some disposition in
the Testicles; and we have already told you before, that evermore the Seed and
the Testicles do make very much in the change of the color of the hair. And
again, since that the Passions and Affects of the mind (especially fear and
terror) may possibly effect such notable changes in the humors, and that they
may likewise greatly affect the brain; it is therefore no wonder that in a
short time hoariness should be produced from that change that is made in the
humors. For if from a small Cloud, or the Air, or a hurtful Wind blowing upon
Trees, the color of their Leaves may be changed, and the Leaves m^^ thereupon
wither, (the Tree it self, and other parts thereof remaining safe and
untouched; it is not impossible also; but that the color of the hairs (as of
the most ignoble parts of out body) may likewise be changed from some humor, or
spirit suddenly invading and seizing upon them. And this may be also confirmed
even by that which Hollerius (in his first Perioche) writes, to wit, That the
hairs have suddenly been turned white and hoary by the vapor of Hydrarge.

Signs Diagnostick.
The change of the color of the hair into whiteness or hoariness is
sufficiently manifest of it self; neither is there any need of signs to
discover it. And if in the declining age the hair grow hoary, it is no more
than what is natural; and this change is made but slowly, as coming by degrees,
as age increases. Bur if this happen before old age, although it be but
slowly, yet it is preternatural; but it is much more preternatural, if a man or
woman become hoary al on a sudden.

Prognostics.
1. That hoariness that is natural (as happening in old age) can no way be
amended; as neither likewise can the witheredness in old age: yea indeed it
ought not so much as to be attempted by the Physician; since that the hoary
head is rather an ornament unto those that are old, than any thing of which
they should be ashamed.

2. But that which is preternatural, as it ought to be corrected (in regard
that it signifies some kind of preternatural affect and vicious disposition
(in the brain more especially) so it also may be amended; since that if the
said vicious disposition be amended, the color of the hair will likewise be
changed.

3. That hoariness that is from the Vitiligo (a kind of Leprosy) is upon the
curing of the said Disease likewise amended.

The Cure.
The hoariness that is incident unto old age (as we have already told you)
cannot any ways he amended; neither indeed ought it to be palliated and hid
with any artificial fucus; and he that shall attempt any such thing may
deservedly be laughed at; touching whom Martial (in the fifth Book of his
Epigrams) thus: Thou seemst, Lentinus, by thy died hairs young again,
And soon art made a Crow that wast erewhile a Swan.
Thou can not al deceive, for Proserpine well knows
Thy hoary head; and will discover thy false shows.


But that hoari^^ that is caused by Vitiligo and Alphus is taken away upon the
removal of the said Diseases; and especially if Medicaments that prolong the
hai^^ ^^ministred. For then new hair growing up from the good aliment, those
old hoary hairs will be soon abolished.

But if immaturely and before the due time this hoariness threaten, or suddenly
invade any person (whether man or woman) the better to preserve from it, and to
cure it if present, we must do our best endeavor that good blood may be
produced in the whole body (and especially in the head) that may supply unto the
hair a good and fit aliment; and withal the vicious humors (if there are any
such present) are to be evacuated. Neither ought the particular evacuation of
the head (by Ste^nutatories and Er^hines) to be omitted. And after this we are
to make use of those Medicaments that strengthen the Native heat of the body,
and more especially the brain; touching which we have already spoken in their
proper place.

The Arabians commend this Confection:

Take of the black Myrobalans without their Kernels five ounces; Ginger, Ammi,
(or Bishops weed) of each ten drams: let them be thoroughly moistened with
Butter; and then add Sugar of Penidies to the quantity of the one half: give
often of this Medicament one dram.

Topics.
As for what concerns Topics, Galen indeed (in his first Book of the
Composition of Medicaments according to the places, Chap. 3.) propounds
Medicaments that are hot, and of thin parts, when he had a purpose to discuss
and scatter the snotty filth, and to dry up the superfluous humidities in the
skin. But unless that there afterward flow thereto such a like aliment that may
again generate hair of the Natural color, such Medicaments as these will avail
but little. Others there are therefore that make use only of those Medicaments
that dye and make black the hair, In doing of which notwithstanding we are well
to heed and weigh what honesty will allow of; and withal we are to take heed
that by no means we bring any hurt unto the Brain. For these Medicaments that
make black having most of them an astringent power, and being withal cold, are
very apt to produce the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, deep and profound sleep, Catarrhs,
and the like Maladies; and this Galen tells us he has seen and observed to
befall some certain Women in his time.

But now among these like Medicaments. Galen prefers Cadmia or Brass Oar,
before all the other; in regard that by this Medicament the hai^s are made
black, the rottenness and filthy snot is discussed, and the il disposition of
the head amended. The Oil of Costus is also commended, and so is the Oil of
Coloquintida, or bitter Gourd, of Nightshade, and of Mustard seed.

Some few hours after the anointing, let the head be washed with a Ley of the
ashes of Beans, Nutshels, in which Litharge has been boiled; or with a Ley in
which the Pulp of Coloquintida (so much commended by all) has been boiled.
There is likewise commended the Oil of wild Olives, Myrobalans of all the sorts
(which are said to retard and hinder hoariness, both inwardly taken, and
outwardly applied) Gals, Acacia, Fenugreek, Henbane seed, Ladanum, the juice of
Walnut shells while they are green, the Leaves of Capars, and likewise the Roots
of them, boiled with Milk, mashed, and then in the form of* Cataplasm applied
for a nights time; the rind of the holm root boiled unto a softness, and
imposed; Sage, and Copperas.

Now these kind of Medicaments are to be continued; and albeit they appear not
to do any good at once or twice using, yet nevertheless we are not to desist
from the use of them, but we are still to persevere, and continue in the same.
Touching these kind of Tinctures, this is likewise to be taken notice of, That
if you will have them stable and lasting, it will be very fit that a Lotion of
the head be premised, that is made with such a like Decoction that both gives
a beginning unto the Tincture, and that likewise causes that it continue firm;
like as Cloth-Dyers when they intend to dye a piece of black Cloth, they first
put upon it a red color with Madder, or a Sky color with Woad. And therefore
let the hairs that are to be dyed be first washed with a Ley in which Roch Alum
has been dissolved. And in the choice of Medicaments, we are likewise to
endeavor, that such like Medicaments may be chosen that are no ways unpleasing
in their smell, but rather such as are sweet and pleasant.

This following is sound to be sure and certain, and by much use approved of.

Take Ley half a ^^int, boil in it Litharge of Gold four ounces: In this
Decoction let a Sponge be well wet, and let the hoary haits be thoroughly
moistened with the said Decoction, by the space of a quarter of an hour in a
warm place. And then let the head whiles it is wet be forthwith covered for one
hour with a Linen Cloth: and afterward let the hair and the head be washed
with a simple Ley, and not with that which is overstrong: and this is to be
done twice a week.

He writes that the Mercurial Medicament that follows will within one month
(and often in less time also) make black all the hair.

Take black Myrobalans one ounce, black Raisins two ounces; astringent Wine
three pints; boil them in a double Vessel by a gentle fire, to the consumption
of two thirds; then add of the juice of green Walnut Rinds half a pound, Sumach
and Acacia, of each one ounce, Cloves one ounce and half, Musk one scruple:
boil them again in a double Vessel for half a day. Let the hairs be anointed
with this Medicament about night, and then let the head be covered with a black
woollen cloth: and in the morning following let it be washed with Wine in which
black Myrobalans have heen boiled. And Avicen writes that if Cloves be added
unto these kind of Medicaments, they will sufficiently dye the hairs, and
prevent the Brains being hurt by the Tincture. Or,

Take Leaves of the Vine, and the Rinds of the Vine Roots, and Parietary: Boil
them in Water, and afterward add Alum, Galls, and Vitriol; and so mingle
them. Or,

Take Green Nuts in the mouth of June, and bruise them small; and mingle
therewith Alum half a pound; and in a new pot pour in unto them of Oil three
pints; and let them stand digesting twenty days; let them be afterward
strained, and the head anointed with the Oil, Or.

Take the Coloquintida Apple; make a hole through it, and take forth the seeds,
and fill it up with Oil of Bays and the seed of Henbane; let them stand for
one whole night, and then let the Oil be pressed forth, with the which the hair
may be anointed. Or,

Take of Ley sive measure, Litharge two ouncer; Sage leaves two handfuls; boil
them to the consumption of the fourth part, and make a Lotion for the head. Or,

Take Tartar one ounce, Litharge half an ounce, Juice of Sage as much as will
suffice; mingle them in a Leaden Mortar, and make an Unguent; with which (using
it with a Leaden Comb) let the hairs be anointed. But here to add any more
Medicaments is not worth the while, in regard that there are many more of them
every where extant.

But now these Medicament that make black the hair are not only made use of for
the covering and hiding of hoariness; but in out Germany a black color of the
hair is greatly desired and endeavored after by some certain of our noble
Virgins; either that they may seem to have somewhat Exotic, strange, and
foreign; or else that they may be differenced from the vulgar and Plebeian
young Maidens, unto whom the yellow or golden color of the hair is most
acceptable, and in most account, And thus every one has something or other fair
in his own eye, and high in his own account, although not so in another. And
therefore these Virgins seem to me to do just as that Blackmoor did that lived
in the Court of a certain German Prince, who often seeing in the Women's Ward a
white Virgin, and withal a black Whelp, he would tell the Virgin that she was
not fair and beautiful, but rather that the black Whelp was beautiful and fair;
and so (as Julius Caesar Scaliger says) Black seems most fair
To those that are.


But more right is the Judgment of the other Virgins, What things they are that
make the hair yellow.
that seek and endeavor after a yellow or golden color of the hair. Now this
yellow color of the hair may be gained, it the hairs be washed, and likewise
their Hair-laces well wet in that Water or Ley in which the flowers of Broom, or
of the yellowish Mullein, of the Citron-color'd Staechas or Cassidony, of
Camomile, Citron rind, the Cowcumber root, and the root of Gentian, have been
infused. And likewise Lupines boiled in Water make the hair yellow; and so also
does the Water and Oil of Honey. And they commonly likewise use (for the
Combing of the hair) the Ley that is made of the Ashes of Vine shoots; which
will be somewhat more efficacious, if there be infused therein the Leaves of
Citrine Staechas, or of Mullein. But there are more of these like Medicaments
every where to be found.

Chap. 8. Of the Scurfiness, and Dandriff of the Head.
NEither are we here to pass over those Vices, which indeed happen not unto the
hairs; and yet nevertheless they are about the hair and in the Skin that is
covered with hair, and wherein it grows; and of this sort are Phthiriasis or
the Lousie Evil, and Furfuratio Scurf and Dandriff, like unto Bran. But having
already spoken touching Phthiriasis, in the fourth Book of the Diseases of
Infants, Chap. 5. It now remains that we treat of the Furfuratio, or the
Dandrif of the Head, Beard, and Eyebrows.

This Furfuratio (which the Greeks call Pityriasis, Scurf and Dandrif.
and which is by the Latins called likewise Porrigo) is an Affect, wherein
when there is any scratching there falls down out of the Skin of the Head
something very like unto Bran; and indeed most usually from the Skin that is
under the very hairs themselves; and sometimes also from the Beard, and the
Eyebrows.

The Causes.
The Cause of this Affect are humors that are serous or wheyish, and also
Ichores or thin Excrements (not only such as are phlegmatic, but such as are
Choleric also) elevated unto the Head together with that humor that yields
and supplieth matter unto the hairs; and hence it is that this furfuration or
scurfiness does appear only in those places of the head that have hair upon
them: for this matter seeking a passage forth through the Pores of the Skin,
the thinner parts of them are discussed, but the more thick and Clammy parts
stick in the Skin and about the hairs, and there they pass into a matter that
is like unto Bran, or Scales. The antecedent Causes are all those that may any
way generate th^^^ serous humors in the Head. But now the matter (...) attracted
and drawn unto the Head, in those especially that have a hot Brain.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Affect it self sufficiently manifests and discovers it self when the
Head is Scratcht, Rubbed, or Combed; for then there fall down certain small scales
resembling Bran.

The Prognostic.
This Affect has no danger at all Joined with it; yea by some it is accounted
for a very good Sign of a sound Brain, expelling and driving forth the
excrements from it self; and yet nevertheless it causes some kind of deformity
and much trouble.

The Cure.
The vicious humors if they abound in the body are to be evacuated, and care
taken that they may no more be generated.

But unto the Head it self Discussive Medicaments are to be administered. There
are some likewise that therewith mingle some certain Astringents, that the part
affected may be strengthened, lest that it easily receive the humor that
flows thereunto. But then it is to be feared, lest that the transpiration in
the Head be hindered, and the excrements therein contained excite far worse and
more grievous Maladies.

And therefore as Galen in his first Book of the Composit. of Medicaments
according to the places, Chap. 5. teaches us, the Head is to be washed with
the Decoction of Fenugreek, the Juice of Beets, and Nitre. Or else it is to be
Cleansed with the Decoction of Melon Seed, the meal of Cicers, Lupines, and
Beans. Or else let it be washed with the Decoction of Cicers and Melons, adding
thereto a little Vinegar. When the Head is washing, in stead of Soap, bitter
Almonds bruised may be made use of.

If the Malady be confirmed, and will not yield, let the Head be first washed
with the Medicaments but just now mentioned; and after this let it be rubbed
with a course Cloth, and then anointed with this following Unguent.

Take Green Hyssop, Ducks fat, of each half an ounce; the pulp of Coloquintida,
Oleum Cherrinum (or the Oil of Wall-flowers) of each one ounce; Thapsia two
drams, Ladanum two ounces; and make an Unguent.

Or else let the Head be washed with the Decoction of Beets, and the lesser
Centaury, adding thereto Vinegar and Honey. Or,

Take Marshmallow roots, the Leaves of Beets of each one handful; Pulp of
Coloquintida half an ounce, Nitre two drams; boil all in a sufficient quantity
of Water, to the Consumption of the fourth part; and in the end add of Wine one
pint.

After the Washing let the Head be anointed with the following Unguent.

Take Copperas, and the Gall of a Bull, of each one dram and half; Nitre and
Sulphur, of each two drams; Oil of Roses two ounces; Mingle them over a gentle
fire, and adding thereto a sufficient quantity of Wax, make a soft Unguent.

You may see more of these Medicaments in the place before alleged out of
Galen, and likewise in Paulus Aegineta, and Alexander Trallianus.

Chap. 9. Of Plica Polonica.
ANd lastly, among the Vices of the hair, we must not in silence pass over that
which although indeed not known in all places, yet nevertheless may very well be
accounted the chief of them all. It is called Plica, to wit, because that in it
the hairs are wholly entangled one within another; and by the Polonians
Gvvodzicc, that is, a Club; and by the Roxolani it is termed Koltun, which
signifies a little Stake or small Post; whereupon it is also by some called
Helotis. Others call it the Disease of the Locks; the Germans Wichtelzopffe,
because they superstitiously conceived, that such like Locks of hair were
entwisted by Infants dying unbaptized (for these by the Ancients were called
Wichteln) as likewise, Mareuflecht, Marenwirckung, Marenlocht,
Schrottlinszopffe, Indlezoppffe, because they were thought to be knit and
twisted by some Incubus in the likeness of a Jew.

This Disease is very familiar, and as it were Epidemical, especially unto the
Polonians; insomuch that Necessity enforces them to ask the advice, and to
implore the assistance of the Physicians of Padua. I had rather therefore give
you the History hereof, in the very words of these Physicians, then in mine
own. Now therefore thus writes D. Laurentius Starnigelius (Rector of the
University of Zamoscium, and Professor of Rhetoric) unto the Physicians
Profesors of the University of Padua, the last day of October, in the year 1599.

Excellent and Worthy Sirs, our most dear and greatly to be respected Friends;
IN regard of that near and Intimate acquaintance that we gained (during our
Converse and abode in the lowest Sarmatia) with you most Excellent and Noble
Doctors, by reason of that common bond and tie which the best of Arts had knit
between us and your Excellencies; I the Rector of the lately erected University
at Zamoscium held my self bound to write unto you (my Noble and ever honored
Friends, famous indeed and renowned, not only by the antiquity and eminency of
the most Noble University of Padua, but also far more enabled and dignified by
your Learning and Practice. The Cause of this my writing unto you was given me
by the Novelty of a Disease among us, and the extreme difficulty of Curing
thereof. My request is, that you the most Eminent Professors of the University
of Padua would both please to read this my Epistle, according to your wonted
Candor and Courtesy; and likewise when you have read the same, that you would
vouchsafe friendly to write back unto me your Advice and Judgment; of what
nature and quality you conceive the Disease to be, what Precepts you think fit
to be given touching the same, and what kind of Medicaments you Judge most
expedient for the removing of the same. The Case stands thus: Betwixt Hungaria
and Pocutium (a Province of the Kindom of Polonia) which are distinguished the
one from the other by Mountains, out of which there break forth diverse Rivers,
it so happened, that very many both Men and Women had one or two Locks growing
forth on their Heads, entwisted and infolded within themselves inwardly, and
entangled together with the hairs nigh unto them, the Lock hereby becoming
exceeding very thick: and then indeed it was nothing at all troublesome. But now
this same Disease has begun to Creep further, and flees up and down
throughout the whole Kingdom of Polonia, to the great disquiet and torment of
all sorts of People. It infringeth the Bones; looseneth the Limbs; infesteth
the Vertebrae of the Limbs; makes the members round like a Globe, and writheth
them back; it causes them that are affected therewith to bunchout; it pours
forth Lice, and so fills the Head with fresh supplies of these said Lice
following one after the other, that it can by no means be s^eed of them. If
these Entangled Locks be shaven off, that humor and the poison thereof sheds
forth into the body, and then (as we wrote before) extremely tortureth the
persons thus affected; it disquieteth and troubles the Head, Feet, Hands, all
the Limbs, all the Joints, and in a word, all the parts of the body. And it is
found by experience, that such as have shaven off these bundles of hairs so
closely entwisted within themselves, that these have soon after been taken in
their Eyes; or else have been most grievously tortured with Defluxions unto the
other parts of the body. If we attempt to Cure the Party by the usual purging
Medicaments the affected Person is the worse for them; and the tormenting pain
rages so much the more; because that the said purgation is not able to master
and expel the Noxious offensive humors, but only stirs them abroad, and thereby
scatters and disperseth them throughout the whole body: for (after purging)
those that are afflicted with this Pest are so exceedingly tormented with a
burning pain of all their Members, that nothing can possibly be added unto the
sharpness and bitterness of the Torture. Women for the most part are taken
herewith; and likewise those men that are inclined unto the French Disease, as
also the Children begotten by them that are infected with the said Disease: and
those likewise who by Repercussive Medicaments have driven back and repressed
the Porrigo of the head (which the vulgar call Tinea:) and moreover, such Women
as in the time of their Monthly Courses are not sufficiently purged. Of which
Women some of them there have been that in their young and most vigorous age,
having had no more than a show of their Courses, but withal an extrao^dinary
flux of blood from the Nose, these in their declining age (this flux at the
Nose ceasing) have fallen into this very disease of the entangled Locks. Some
there have been (though very few) who having been for some years tortured and
afflicted with this kind of Disease, and not at al shaven their heads; and
having undergone all the vexation, nastiness, and filthy deformity of this
disease (not without extraordinary great trouble, and a most intolerable
nauseousness) have at length recovered, upon the falling off of these virulent
entangled Locks; but yet nevertheless the greatnest part of them perished. Many
kinds of Medicaments have been sought for, and made trial of, but as yet there
has been found none that would effect the Cure. The force likewise and nature
of the Disease, and the cause thereof, have been sought for; but as yet there
indeed appears nothing of certainty, touching what we have sought for. The
Country Boors give out that they have found great relief by carrying tied about
them an Vrchin pulled in pieces: and for the total abolition of the said
affect, they make themselves a meat of the said Vrchin it self; but yet we find
that even in this there is not any thing much available. They furthermore
provide themselves of a Decoction made of the Leaves of Bears-breech, with the
which when they wash their heads, the locks we mentioned before break forth,
and withal great store of Lice. This Affect communicates with that fuliginous
and sooty exhalation out of which the hairs are bred; and it seems to have
some affinity with the affect Tinea; and by its excruciating and racking the
bones, with the French pox; by the great abundance of Lice, with the
Phthiriasis; by the pain of the Joints, with the Gout Arthritis; and by the
miserable contraction of the Members that it causes, it seems to have some
near alliance with the Spasm. That I may add no more (most worthy and renowned
Professors) your Excellencies well skilled, and most expert in this kind of Art,
will easily collect, how necessary this deliberation is, and with how great a
benefit you shall oblige unto you the whole most vast Kingdom of Polonia, when by
your deep Wisdoms and Skill you shall have discovered and found out a present
Remedy for this kind of Pestilent Malady, with the which it is generally vexed
and disquieted in a most violent manner; and when you have found out an
expedient Remedy, if you then please to communicate it unto us by your Letters.
Many there have been who (as the first Authors and Inventors of various
Medicines) live yet even unto this very day in perpetual praise; the glory and
renown of this Medicine found out by your excellent and magnifique Wisdoms,
shall be properly your own, shall make you famous, and shall for ever flourish in
succeeding ages. I expect from you your most friendly and courteous Answer: but
if I have not sufficiently (neither yet in fit and proper words, and such as
were requisite) expressed the quality and condition of this Disease, I desire
of your Excellencies, that you would herein excuse me, a man wholly conversant
in another kind of Art. I have presented you with a certain Adumbration of this
Disease, and in a manner shadowed forth unto you this Malady; the more interior
Nature and hidden parts thereof your excellent Wisdoms by the sharp and quick
sight of your knowledge will easily search into, and contemplate.

I bid your Excellencies heartily farewell: From Zamoscium, this last day of the
month of October, in the Year one thousand five hundred ninety nine.

And yet notwithstanding there are others that tell us how that this Disease is
very common and familiar even in other Regions also. For in the Observations of
Schenckius we may likewise see, that this Disease was known also unto the
Brisgoi, and Alsatians. For thus Schenckius writes in the first Book of his
Medicinal Observations, Observat. 13. There is (says he) with us at this day
to be observed a certain most horrid, uncombed, and most intricate kind of
hairie Tufts, both in the head and beard, no whit strange and unusual unto
ours; but altogether unknown unto the Ancient Physicians of former times, in
what Age soever they lived: with which such as are affected, you may see them
have hanging down (from the rest of the hair of their head and beard) even unto
the shoulders, breast, and sometimes also even unto the very Navel, very long
tufts and bushes of hair, wonderfully intricate, oftentimes a finger thick,
exceeding dreadful to look upon, and much resembling the Gorgont head. Which
tufts of hair they suffer to grow in a sloven-like and regardless fashion, for
some superstitious ends inducing them thereunto; neither will they at al suffer
it to be cut, neither at any time to be parted and severed with the Comb, being
altogether persuaded that the most grievous Fomenters of the diseases of the
head (that is to say, the matter of the Apoplexy, Palsy, Madness, and
especially the pertinacious Cephalalgie, and the like Diseases) are wholly, or
at least in great part consumed in nourishing these tufts of hair. And thus
being lead either by Superstition or the long and exact observation of other
men, they will admit of any thing, rather than the kembing or cutting short of
these bushy locks of hair, as a thing altogether ominous and deadly; and having
made their Essays both of Experiment, and History, they stiffly maintain their
own Opinion. But those of them that would be accounted more neat and spruce
hide these their deformed tufts of hair (those of their heads within their
hats, but those of their beards rolled up together under something they
purposely wear upon their breasts) that so they may not be seen. But there are
likewise others of them, who (although it be even in the public Assemblies)
cannot possibly conceal these monstrous and deformed bushes of matted and
entangled hair, if they would never so fain; neither would they, if they could.
So that it is a thing so well settled and resolved on (without the least doubt or
scruple) in the minds both of those that wear these horrid and strange
entangled locks, and likewise of al those that behold them, that even in their
public Assemblies, without any the least shame or disgrace, and as a thing
altogether necessary for the sustaining of life, they expose them to open view.
And some certain of them there are (as we have already told you) that during
their whole life do in this manner nourish and cherish these their ugly locks,
hoping that thereby they may possibly be preserved from al other dangerous and
difficult diseases that continually threaten them. The vulgar likewise, if they
chance to light into the company of any thus affected, they then presently
suspect them to be diseased with some hidden, undiscernable, and some one or
other difficult Malady of the head. In which thing whether their Superstition
convince their Experience, or their Experience exceed and surpass their
Superstition, I will not at present trouble my self to judge thereof. Only this
indeed I conceive fit to tell you, That as I incline very much unto the vulgar
Opinion; so (that I may conceal nothing) I think also, that the Seminary of
these kind of Diseases is not from thence so much argued as nourished, and that
by this means it may be prevented that they invade not; as we are likewise
further taught by the received Opinion of Physicians, touching the Causes of
the generation of Hair, the Events, and the Cures; there accrewing also (for
our further assurance) the common and constant attestation of the vulgar, and
which at this day passes (as from hand to hand) among them. I have not as yet
found that this vice of the hair is sufficiently known unto other the
Europeans; neither is it known in the most parts of Germany: but unto all the
Brisgoi, Alsatians, Dutch, and in many Tracts near unto the River Rhine, it is
in a manner Epidemical; and generally well known likewise unto the people where
I live. I my self knew here above thirty Citizens (of whom some are even yet
living) that were famous and remarkable for this kind of hair. The common
people call it Marenfletcht, Maren wiirkung, ynd Schrottlinszopff, as if we
should say, The contorsions or writhings of the hairs, or the locks, and hairy
tufts of the Incubi; for they conceit that the Incubi and Fauni (as the
Ancients called them) draw forth these hairs in the night time by sucking them.
Others there are that name them Marenlock, that is to say, the locks and tufts
of Swine, because they now and then observe some long tufts (like unto the
former) growing out of the neck of these Swine, and hanging down very low.

As for Histories, there are two that in special he reckons up, the one out
of Johan. Stadlerus, a Physician; the other out of Moccius; and both of them he
relates in their own words. The first is this. Thou bring unto my
remembrance that noble person Casparus of Horstein, Brother unto the
Commendator Sigismund in Alsatia, and Provincial in Burgundy, lately deceased;
whom when the Commendator on a time sharply reprehended by reason of his
uncombed, writhed, and entangled beard, which (horrid and frightful as it was)
he ware before him; and withal threatening to remove him from his Table (a man
of about fifty years of age) unless he would cut it off; he then answered, that
he would more willingly be deprived of his Diet, and freely depart the Court,
rather than want his entangled and altogether Gorgonean Beard. This happened in
the year of Christ 1564. when from Friburg I went to Alschusa for fear of the
Plague. Thus much out of Stadlerus.

The other History is thus related: Of late (says Moccius) one rashly cutting
off these Locks of an old woman, she died within the space of three days. For
they cry up this as a thing very fatal, even unto such oftentimes as for want
of good advice have frivolously been hurt: although there are likewise some
that tell us another tale. For we know the man who was well acquainted with a
certain Countess, that having such a monstrous head of hair would often cause
it to be cut, even unto the neck. This out of Moccius; and thus far Schenckius.

I have heard from a certain Captain of Horse, that this Malady is likewise not
unknown unto the Hungarians; and that in Hungary not only Men, but even the
Horses also are subject unto this kind of Disease; and that he himself brought
out of Hungary as far as Dresda a Horse that had such a Plica or entangled Lock
of Hair, hanging down unto the very feet.

Unto the aforesaid Epistle of the Rector of the University of Zamoscium,
Hercules Saxonia answers in a peculiar Book, which he entituleth, de Plica,
or, of the monstrous entangled and writhed Hair. Johannes Thomas Minadous has
likewise published the Consultation they had at Padua (touching this sad
Affect) on the 15. of the Calends of January, in the year 1599. and he
inscribeth it, de Helotide. Rodericus a Fonseca has published likewise a
Consultation touching this same Disease; the which we find in the first Tome of
his Consultations, Consult. 1. Al which are to be seen in these before
mentioned Authors. But now whether or no the Polonians received any
considerable benefit by these Consultations of the Italians, I leave it unto
themselves to judge. I think that to be a very Ingenuous Confession, which that
most eminent and famous man Dr. Johannes Prevotius, principal Professor of
Physic in the University of Padua makes in that Letter of Advice and Counsel
which he wrote unto the Illustrious and most generous Lord, Nicolaus Sapieha
chief Standard Bearer unto the great Dukedom of Lituania, and Earl of Coden,
etc. (I shall anon give you the whole Letter at large) where he thus writes: The
Nature of this poison (says he) is altogether unknown; so that (as it seems to
me) it was truly spoken by that illustrious person, who said in my hearing,
that the Boors inhabiting within his Territories had sound out more of the
original of this Plica, the progress and the Cure thereof, than any of those
Authors that had written concerning it, of which there has been never a one of
them that as yet has had the fortune to restore unto perfect health any one
that has been afflicted with the said Plica. The Physic Professors of Padua
have indeed made trial there of very many Remedies, but al to no purpose. The
same aforesaid Noble person (Count of Coden) himself told me, that a certain
Padua Physician induced thereunto (as it were) by the signature and shape of
the Disease (for they that are affected with the true and perfect Plica seem in
a manner to have Serpents hanging down from their heads, and as it were the
head of the Monster Gorgon) prescribed him some Vipers to eat, but without any
success at al. And that another of them had provided him a Psilothrum Ointment
to use instead of the usual Ley, persuading him to condescend unto the cutting
off of his hair, promising him an artificial covering for his head; but that
being advised to the contrary by a German (a student in Physic) unto whom this
Disease was not altogether unknown, and one who well understood the danger that
was like to follow upon the rooting out al his hair, he therefore refused it.
But although I dare not arrogate unto my self a perfect knowledge of this
Disease; and albeit that in no case we cannot attain unto the perfect and exact
knowledge of Diseases that depend upon an occult and secret Cause; yet
nevertheless what I know touching the Nature of this Disease (by means of my
converse with the Noble Earl before mentioned, who was afflicted therewith) and
what I conceive touching the Cause thereof, I will here briefly acquaint you
with, that in so doing I may give a further occasion and encouragement unto
such as live in those Regions where this Disease is commonly and familiarly
known, to publish what is come to their knowledge touching this Disease.

It seems not to me to be any new Disease. For although it has hitherto been
unknown unto the people of Italy, and most of the European Regions; yet
nevertheless, I see no reason at al, why it should not be common and frequent
in Polonia many Ages past as well as now; since that the causes that produce the
same at this day might then be present as well as now; only that there were then
wanting Physicians that might inquire into, and acquaint us with what they knew
touching the Nature of this Disease.

Now as for the Nature of it, we are first to take notice of this; to wit, that
this Disease (as for what concerns the name thereof) is known indeed from the
intricateness and intangling of the hairs: yet notwithstanding that the said
Plica is only somewhat that is Critical as it were, arising from the expulsion
of the vicious matter out of the body; and that the said Plica brings no
danger at al along with it unto the affected person, who oftentimes bears it
about with him al his whole life, without any the least damage. But that which
most of al threateneth danger unto the diseased party is that vicious humor
which yet sticking fast in the body exciteth those most grievous symptoms that
have been before recounted in the History of this Disease; which cease al of
them afterward, so soon as the matter is thrust forth unto the hair.

And moreover, this is further to be added unto the History, That in such as
are thus affected, especially if the Disease proceed unto the height, not only
the hairs are vitiated, but the nails also, and more especially in the feet,
but most of al in the great Toes thereof, which become rough, long, and black,
like unto the horn of a Goat; and this I observed in the before mentioned noble
Lord Nicolaus Sapieha; and I have heard that the very same has also befallen
unto others.

But now this Vice is not without cause referred unto and reckoned among
Diseases, in regard that the hairs are not wholly to be excluded out of the
number of the parts, And it is to be referred unto the Diseases of
Conformation, seeing that the hairs neither retain that figure that they ought
naturally to have, neither do they every of them appear single and severed, as
they should, but are variously complicated among themselves, and entwisted one
within the other, so that of many hairs there is made one long, thick,
entangled, and frightful lock. And yet notwithstanding that the Distemper of
the hairs is likewise changed cannot be denied, in regard that there flows
unto them a preternatural humor, and such like hairs as these when they are cut
pour forth blood.

As touching the Causes thereof, in the first place, these things that are
commonly believed and by tradition pass from hand to hand, touching the pains
that is taken by the Incubi, Infants not baptized, and other Spirits besides;
in the weaving of the long, ugly and frightful Locks there is none but may
easily perceive that they are merely fabulous and superstitious. But that this
vice of the hair, as well as many other Diseases, may sometimes proceed from
Witchcraft and Enchantment, appears even by the Observation of Christophorus
Rumbaumus, Doctor and Professor of Physic, and my fellow Citizen, which
Hercules Saxonia reports to be Extant in the Observations of Johannes
Schenckius the Elder, in the seventh Book, in these very words of Rumbaumus. In
the year 1590. while I was a long time bestowing my pains (though all in vain)
in the Cure of a Man's Wife (who out of the Lees of Beer artificially destilled
Brandy Wine at U^atislavia) being newly brought to bed and by reason of a great
and sudden affrightment upon occasion of a lamentable sire burning the next
adjoining houses, taken with an Inflammation of the Lungs, upon the retention
of her Courses, Secundine, and what should afterward have come from her, and
this Inflammation (through her own carelessness) terminating in an Impostume of
the Lungs, and the Consumption: a certain Emperick (an old Woman) came unto
her, and offering her pains promised present help: Which she would by no means
admit of: Whereupon the Emperical old Woman growing much enraged, and uttering
many threatening words, she causes her to be shut out of doors; and then
presently (as she was wont) she falls a washing and Cleansing away the filth of
her Head (having first Combed, plaited, and dressed up her hair somewhat long,
as her custom was) with warm ordinary Spring water. But upon the very first
pouring on of the water all the Locks of one side of the Head, as it were all
besmeared with Birdlime, become on a sudden so intricate and entangled that
afterward (as long as she lived) they could by no means, wit, or device, be
extricated and severed as formerly; but continued thus in long entangled Locks,
very frightful to behold, even unto her dying day. And this we conceive to be
wrought merely by Witchcraft.

But I think this to be very rare; and that this Vice proceeds from some
internal Cause we are taught even by this, that in those places Bruits likewise
are taken with this affect. But now what kind of humor that is, we shall find
it very difficult to explain. Very many there are (and indeed the most) who
refer the Cause of this malady unto a certain viscid and slimy humor. But these
fall short of the truth. For in many bodies, and many Regions likewise, these
viscid Clammy humors are generated, which yet notwithstanding produce no such
Disease. For neither may these pains of the Limbs, Convulsions, and other
Symptoms, be referred only unto a viscid humor; neither can any reason be
rendered, why this matter should be thrust forth only unto the hairs, and unto
no other parts. But what the Nature of this humor is, the nourishing of our
body and the generating of other Diseases, may in some measure instruct us. For
although all the parts are nourished by the blood; yet nevertheless, as diverse
Plants do from the same Earth attract (each one of them) that Aliment that is
proper and familiar unto them, as Hippocrates testifies, in his Book de Nature.
human. Text. 31. even so likewise one of the same Mass of blood contained in
the Veins, every one of the parts attracteth unto it self that Nutriment that
is most familiar unto it. It happens moreover that if the blood be less pure,
that excrementitious aliment is carried more unto one part then unto another.
And this is plainly to be seen even in the Joynt-Gout (Arthritis) where that
same serous wheyish matter, salt, and tartareous (or call it how you please) is
carried more unto the Joints, then to the fleshy parts. A proof of this we have
likewise from the stone Osteocolla (which is very fitly administered in the
fractures of the Bones) where we find that the very bones themselves attract
unto them the said Stone; so that it is by experience found, that from the
overmuch use thereof there have grown forth Callous substances extraordinary
great, and unsightly: of which see Gulielmus Fubricius, in his first Century,
and Observat. 91. And therefore I am of Opinion, that in those places where
this Disease is Epidemical, the fault is in the Genius of the place, and in the
Waters, which flow down from the mountains of Hungary into Polonia; (and in
Bisgoia, if this Disease be likewise familiar in that Region, from the Alps:)
which supplieth unto the hair an abundant Nutriment, but unto al other parts of
the body such an aliment as is altogether unuseful, and which is worse, very
hurtful; which when Nature expels) unto the hairs, the rest of the body is
thereby freed from all other grief whatsoever, and the hairs alone become
vicious. And I am the more confirmed in this my Opinion by what was related
unto me by the aforesaid Illustrious Lord Count Nicolaus Sapieha; that he knew
a Boor in Polonia, that by bathing Cured such as were troubled with this
Disease; by the use of which the first seven days the sick persons became very
hairy all their body over, the hairs breaking forth in all parts; which (upon
continuing the use of the same Bath for seven days more) fell off again, and
so the Diseased persons recovered their health. And indeed that some Waters
have in them an extraordinary and admirable virtues will every where appear
unto us in the Writers of Natural History. So in the Alps, Styria, and
Carinthia, by the fault of the Water, the Tumors, Bronchocelae and Strumae (we
call this last, being a swelling in the Neck, the Kings Evil; the former being a
swelling in the throat) are Natural and as it were bred together with the
Inhabitants, the vicious matter being thrust forth unto the Glandules in the
Neck, and into no other places.

And yet nevertheless, I would not have it thought that I do hereby altogether
exclude the Air, which it must be confessed has likewise a very great power in
altering our bodies; and it causes that in these, or those Regions and bodies,
these or those humors are generated. Although it be likewise true that the said
Air has not this power from it self, but that it receives the same from whose
vapors that are lift up and raised from the Waters, and out of the Earth which
the Water washes upon, and passes through. And for this reason it is, that
this Malady is not general and Universal throughout the whole Kingdom of
Polonia, but only familiar unto some certain places thereof, in regard that it
always spreads and rages there, and yet is not from thence dispersed into
any other Regions; and this Disease Hercules Saxonia acknowledges to be
Endemick; but he will by no means have it to be Epidemick; as we may see in the
tenth Book of his Practice of Physic, and Chap. 7. of Plica. But we have
already told you (in the second Book of our Institutions, Part 1. Chap. 11.)
that he did not well understand, and therefore could not rightly describe unto
us the Nature of a Disease Epidemick and Endemick.

Now the said Matter is carried unto the hair, not (as some would have it) in
the form of vapors, but together with the blood it self; which as it is of all
other parts, so it is likewise the Nutriment of the hairs, as we told above in
the tenth Chapter. Which appears even from hence, that the hairs in the
Plica, if at any time they be cut, they yield forth blood. That
(notwithstanding what has been said) there are now and then some certain
persons even in the near neighboring Regions that are likewise troubled with
this Disease, this may possibly proceed, either from the natural near allied
Genius of that place; or else from the Parents. For look as Arthritical persons
beget the like; so also it is not impossible, but that those which are affected
with the Plica may transfuse into their Issue a vicious disposition unto the
generating of the same Disease; and Experience teaches us the truth of this.
The Son of the aforesaid Lord, Count Sapieha, when he was six years of age, had
at the first some few entangled Locks of hair among the hairs on his head; and
the same has also happened unto others. I knew a Soldier (an old man) that
had a Plica in the hinder part of his Head; who being demanded as touching the
Cause of the Disease (for he was a German and horn at Thuringia) replied, that
this Disease was hereditary unto him; for his Mother (as he said) had seven of
these Plica's, two Else long, all her life long, even unto her dying day. The
same Man related this likewise for a truth, that being a Soldier in Hungary,
and taken prisoner by the Turks, his Master (according to the custom of that
Nation) caused all his hair, and withal this Plica of his, to be cut off; and
that he thereupon became blind: but that having by an Interpreter, acquainted
his Master with the Cause of this his blindness, and obtained of him that his
hair might be suffered to grow forth again, he afterward recovered his sight.

Signs Diagnosticks.
There is no need at all, that we add any more Signs; since that there will
appear signs sufficient from the History of this Disease before re^i^ed. But
that we may in few words give you the Causes of those things that happen in
this Disease; in the first place, if that said matter of this Disease (whether
it he malignant, or whether it be simply unfit for the nourishing of all other
the p^^ts besides the hairs) be abundantly heaped up ^n the Veins, it is then
by Nature (unto whe^n i^ is burthensom) thrust forth from the more Noble unto
the Exterior parts; whereupon the bones are much damnified and diminished, the
Joints loosned, the Head, Feet, and Hands, and all the Limbs and Joints
infested with pain, Convulsions excited, and the Members contracted. But it
Nature be so strong as to get the Mastery, the at length thrusts forth the
said matter unto the hairs, and more especially those of the Head, with the
which this Matter has a very near alliance (as in such as are Arthritical, the
Cause of the Gout Arthritis has with the Joints) whereupon Dandrif like unto
Bran and Lice are abundantly generated in the Head, and from the overgreat
store and luxuriancy of the Matter the very hairs are Complicated and entangled
within themselves, so that they cannot be separated by any Art or Labor; and
being Cut they likewise pou^ forth Blood.

Prognostics.
1. This very Malady, unless the matter be thrust forth unto the hair, is
sufficiently dangerous; so that there are most grievous pains and Symptoms
excited, almost in all the parts whereunto the matter is thrust forth, as we
told you but even now.

2. But if Nature doing rightly as she should, and as it were by a Crisis
thrust forth this matter unto the hairs, then indeed this Vice of the hair that
we are treating of is excited, but the Party is altogether preserved free from
other Maladies; since that Nature is wont to thrust forth unto the hair
whatsoever there remains of this like vicious matter in the body; and many
with such like Plica's live very healthful all their life long.

3. But if such Plica's be at any time rashly cut off, blindness, and other
most grievous M^^^dies are from thence excited. Neither is this a Fables but
experience it self often teaches us the truth hereof; as the Example even of
that Soldier of whom we made mention before in the Causes may sufficiently
instruct us. And this happens not (as many conjecture) because that these
Plica's being Cut, the Head is thereby exposed unto the cold Air, (for this may
easily be prevented by a hat, or some other covering put upon it) but because
the place into which Nature was wont to thrust forth the vicious humors is
taken away, and a passage forth denied unto the matter, and the Evacuation
thereof hindered. And the same happens here, as in old inveterate Ulcers: for
these may not be healed without extreme danger, unless the body be first well
purged and cleansed; and like as issues also, after they have for a while been
permitted to run, are not without much peril to be stopped.

4. If nevertheless there be no more of this vicious matter left remaining in
the body, then after some time those very Plicae fall off of their own accord;
and therefore also there remaining now no more of the said matter in the body,
which I confests is a thing very hard to know, it may be safe enough (without
any danger at al) to cut off these Plicae with the rest of the hair.

The Cure.
I conceive that the perfect Cure of this Disease is altogether unknown. Which
without doubt proceeds from this, that in those places of Polonia where this
disease is Epidemical, there have hitherto lived but very few Physicians that
were able to compose an artificial Method out of those things they might come
to know from the vulgar, touching this Disease, and the Cure thereof.

This in the first place is certain, That Purgations and letting blood avail
but little in this Disease; yea, that they are oftentimes hurtful. For so the
Rector of the University of Zamoscium writes unto the Physicians of Padua: If
we attempt (says he) to cure this Disease with the usual Purgations, it makes
it but so much the worse, and to rage so much the more; in regard that the
Purgation is not able to overcome and master the noxious humors, but only to
disperse them throughout the whole body when they are thus moved: for those that
are affected with this pestilent Disease do thereupon burn with so great a pain
of al their Members, that nothing more sharp can possibly be added unto the
sharpness and bitterness of their torments. And the same is confirmed by
Hercules Saxonia, who in the place alleged, out of the Epistle of a certain
noble Matron, a Polonian (who was troubled with this Disease) writes, That the
said Matron upon the opening of a Vein in the Arm, was immediately taken with
most extreme and intolerable pains in the same Arm, together with oedematous
Tumor: and likewise that for the very same reason, a Vein being opened in the
Feet, there were most sharp and bitter pains excited in both her Thighs, as low
as the Ankles. The sanne Hercules Saxonia in the same place, writes, That a
certain famous and eminent Captain, a Polonian ( Joachimus de Ociesno by name)
told him, that he had seen many that were blind, and some that were lame, and
others other wise affected, who having had Purgations administered unto them in
the beginning, fell into these Affects. And the very same happens also in the
Scurvy; the Symptoms whereof are for the most part exasperated by the use of
Purgets.

It will therefore be the safest course (still taking Experience for our Guide)
to use the utmost of our endeavor that the said vicious matter may with all
possible speed be drawn forth unto the hairs, whither it is now tending. In
which it will be likewise our safest course again to follow the guidance of
Experience; by which it manifestly appears, that those Lotions that are made
of the Plant we commonly call Beats-breech, is very available and successful in
this case.

I confess indeed it is altogether unknown unto me, whether the same may be
performed by inward Medicaments. But yet the very mentioning of Bears-breech
brings unto my remembrance a certain Drink (no doubt at the first brought
thither out of Polonia) that was much in use in my Country, in the City
Vratislavia, and it is made of Bears-breech: the vulgar call it by the common
Polonian name Barsiez, or as the Germans pronounce it Barkech; which those that
are Feverish, and especially the great Drinkers after their excessive Cups the
day before, use in their broths, and in their ordinary Drink, to assuage their
chirst. Now it is made in this manner. The Leaves of Bears-breech dried are
boiled in a sufficient quantity of Water; that the Decoction may get only a
yellow, and not a purple color. Unto the Decoction there is added a little
Leaven, or Bre^d twice baked, made of the Pounder of Bears-^^ch, with the sour
Leaven of fine white Bread ^^d then for some certain days set in a warm place,
where it gets a boiling heat and fermentation, until such time as it has
contracted a cast somewhat tart and sour. But now whether or no this kind of
Drink has a power of doing any thing toward the expulsion of the matter in
this Disease, we are to consult with Experience. And it is their part who live
in those places to make public those Medicaments that use has taught them to
be fit and profitable, that so al their Experiences being conferred together,
there may at the length be composed a Method of Curing this Disease.

But in regard that the Plica has some symptoms common with the Scurvy (such
as are the pains of the Limbs, Cramps, and the like) and that the aforesaid
illustrious Count, Nicolaus Sapieha, was affected with both those Diseases, I
think it not amiss therefore here to place the History of his Disease; which
will add some light unto what we but even now spoke touching the Plica; and to
what we have likewise before, in the third Book of our Practice, written
concerning the Scurvy.

The History of the Disease of that Generous and Illustrious Lord, Count
Nicolaus Sapieha, Earl of Coden, Chief Standard Bearer of the great Dukedom of
Lituania, etc.
This Illustrious Count (without doubt) contracted this his Disease of the
Plica, in his own Country, from the same common cause from whence the vulgar
have it: but as for the Scurvy, he got it from the many Errors by him committed
in his Diet, during his various and troublesome Journeys throughout almost al
Europe, and from the Quartan Fever that followed upon the same. For when in
the heat of Summer (as himself related the story unto me) he had traveled over
the Pyrenean Mountains, out of France into Spain; and in this his Journey had
drunk good store of Wine (out of bladders) that was corrupt, and full of Vermin,
the Autumn following in Spain he fell into a Quartan Ague. The long continuance
whereof having made him impatient, and being quite tired out with the
tediousness of a Methodical Cure, he committed himself unto a certain Soldier
for Cure: who took some certain Cups of the strongest Spanish Wine; and into
the same he pu^s the powder of al sorts of sweet Spices; and this Wine he gave
him to drink, not only to satiety, but even to Ebriety, until he had made him
almost drunk; by which be kindles within him a continual Fever, which indeed
lasted not long, and quite took away the Quartan; but yet nevertheless
imprinted such a Dyscrasie in his Bowels, and humors, that shortly after the
Scurvy followed thereupon. With which being grievously afflicted at home in his
own Country, and yet notwithstanding so that he could not well tell what the
disease was, he made a Journey unto Padua, and there he committed himself for
Cure unto the most Eminen. Physicians of that University. But yet he recovered
not that health and strength that he had expected, and hoped for; and thereupon
he is sent back again home into his own Country, with this following
Consilium, which we may term, a Direction, Advice, or Counsel.

The Advice of that most Famous and Eminent Doctor, Johannes Prevotius, Chief
Professor of Physic in the University of Padua.
TOuching the manifold Diseases that this Noble person lies under, it is
neither my purpose at large to treat of them (since that I am not ignorant that
they have already been discoursed of by some of the most Eminent Physicians in
their long and learned Disputes:) neither indeed will either the state and
condition of mine own health (not yet sufficiently confirmed) permit the same;
nor likewise the health and safety so much desired by this illustrious person,
for whom I conceive that help and assistance is far more requisite than word
and tedious Discourses. I shall therefore with all brevity state and determine
the whole case, and inge^^^ly declare unto you my Opinion touching the same; not
that I may interpose my Judgment in opposition unto the Opinion of these grave
and learned men; but that I may in some measure gratify the request of this
eminent person, and (if I may any ways possibly be serviceable unto him in
procuring his health) that I may not in the least, be wanting in the discharge
of the Duty and Office of a Christian. It seems therefore unto me, that this
illustrious Lord is disaffected with a twofold kind of Diseases; the one of
them most manifest, depending upon Causes that are commonly known and
confessed: the other occult and secret, the Causes whereof are as yet obscure;
neither seem they hitherto to be sufficiently expressed by any. There is
manifestly appearing a Catarrh of matter that is thick, tenacious, white,
oftentimes insipid and tastless (and very rarely sharp and biting) flowing and
falling down unto the parts of the mouth, and sometimes also unto the stomach.
There is moreover an exetraordinary pain of the lower belly, returning afresh
after long intervals and Cassations, with an astriction and costiveness of the
belly, and a certain grievous and painful sense of extension and stretching
about the Region of the Navel, of the Hypochondria, especially the left, and
sometimes also of the Loins; which indeed is wont in great part to cease upon
the plentiful Evacuation of the Wind, and a snotty kind of Excrement that comes
from him. To these we may add the Nephritick distemper, and want of rest and
sleep; this latter being indeed very familiar and frequent with him, for he
usually passes many whole nights together without sleep; and the former, to
wit, the distemper of the Kidneys, has now of a long time sorely troubled him,
with a redness and heat of his Urine, and excretion of sand and gravel with his
water. The causes of al which Maladies it is most manifest that they are
derived from the evil constitution of the internal Bowels, and the excrements
of several sorts from thence arising. For the Brain being overmoist (not
without much weakness of the innate hear, contracted by reason of a great wound
he received in it at Paris) engendereth much phlegm, there being added unto all this, in a special manner, the consent of the natural bowels; sometimes the
Liver by its heat elevating many vapors; and sometimes the stomach naturally
cold, and affected likewise with an Adventitious humidity, corrupting with a
more crude juice the aliment of the whole body, and filling the head; and then
withal the Spleen and obstructed Mesentery sending upwards many fumes. So that
the phlegm heaped up in the head partly by its great plenty, and its own weight,
makes it self a way and passage unto the parts lying underneath; and partly
thrust forth by the strength and act of the expulsive faculty it rusheth unto
the mouth and stomach, looseneth the teeth in the Gums, and besides exciteth
and causes very much trouble and pain in the swallowing. The same (being much
increased in the stomach, by reason, of its own proper distemper) causes in
him the loss of his Appertite; and from the agitation and weakness of the heart
it produces extreme windiness; as also a pain of the Intestines, with a
Costiveness of the belly, by reason especially of the hindered contraction of
the transverse fibers distended by windiness, by which said Contraction the
descent of the Dreggs is very much furthered. But the hotter habit of the adust
blood, and both the Cholers, arising from the Liver and the obstructed places,
greatly disturbeth his sleep, especially in the night time; by which it comes
to pass that from the ret^^ing of the Spirits and the blood unto the internal
parts the Evaporations become so much the greater. Neither it is any wonder at
all that sometimes likewise there is kindled a Fever, not only an every day
Fever by reason of the vehemence of the pain, but also a Periodical Fever
resembling the Nature of a spurious Tertian, in regard that the obstructions
being sometimes augmented, great store of excrements (and those very different
one from the other) of al sorts, mi^gled together one with another, are very
easily corrupted. And moreover also the small sand and gravel may very well
happen to grow together from this manifold filth communicated unto the over hot
Kidneys, and there retained, by the wasting of the more thin parts by the ex
raordinary great heat; and the Nephritick pain may likewise be generated by the
abundant matter impacted in the Uterers, and not having an easy and speedy
motion.

But of the occult and hidden Diseases, some of them are simply such; touching
the existence whereof we may very well doubt: and others of them are occult only
in regard of their Essence and Nature; since that it is not in the least to be
controverted, whether or no this illustrious Lord be afflicted with them; a
truth so obvious and manifest. Simply occult is that Witchcraft, of which this
illustrious person has very rational and probable grounds to suspect that it
has been practiced upon him; in regard that (as he relates) there have been
often found in his bed strange and admirable Magical Figures, of Bones, of Wax,
and of other matter; as also such like Signs and Characters as Enchanters and
Wizards are wont to abuse in destroying those they bewitch: and in regard
likewise that he had most powerful and most implacable Enemies, by whom he
doubts not but that his ruin and destruction has by all kinds of wiles,
wicked arts, and inventions, been attempted. Since therefore it is confessed by all that by Witchcraft bodies may in a various manner be changed; and that
thereby there often happen the very same effects that are wont to follow
likewise upon the natural motions of the humor in the body ill affected; hence
it i^ that Physicians can have no proper signs whereby they may constantly
discover, and absolutely determine whether there be any Witchcraft practiced or
not. And this is now altogether the case of this most illustrious person. For
there is non (I suppose) unless he be either a mere Dolt, or one that has no
good opinion of Christian Philosophy, that will dare to doubt whether or no the
related suspicions may not frequently accompany Witchcraft; so that hereupon
that there is in this present case no practice of Magic and Enchantment, can
by no evident Argument possibly be convinced. But if happily any one shall object
and say, That the aforesaid doubt is altogether needless and impertinent, since
that al those Accidents that the Patient suffers may very well be referred
unto the various, and those likewise sufficiently manifest vices of the humors;
let such a one know, that such as are variously affected from a supernatural
Cause, although the effects proceeding therefrom may seem to be natural; yet
notwithstanding they cannot by the aid and assistance of the Physicians so
easily be corrected and kept under, as those may that are vitiated, and derive
their depraved power and violence from some Natural and sensible Cause: so
that, albeit the knowledge of Witchcraft makes not much for the attaining of
the next and immediate Cause of the Disease; yet nevertheless it helps very
much in foretelling the facility of the Cure, and presaging the issue and event
of the Disease. I would to God that this noble person were altogether free from
this infection; which does indeed render the Cure of the Disease most
pertinacious in all respects, and most intricate and difficult. But there are
two other occult Maladies, with the which I plainly affirm that this noble
person is affected, to wit, the Scurvey, and the Plica; the Nature of which
Maladies as it is abstruse, and hitherunto never sufficiently demonstrated by
any, so the accidents therein happening are most manifest. And in very deed
(that so for brevities sake I may pass over the many other notes and signs) al
men generally acknowledge and confess, that the Plica arises from the
inexplicable and entangled Locks of the Hair; but yet they are altogether
ignorant of the proper Cause thereof, although they speak somewhat that is
probable touching the common Cause which yet nevertheless cannot be sufficient
for the constituting of the perfect Cure of the said Malady. But certain it is,
that their hairs are conglutinated, frizled, and entwi^ted from some dull and
sluggish excrement of the third Concoction of the head, sweating through the
Sutures and Pores; which being restrained and kept in by the cutting off the
hair, the Air more freely getting into the said open pores, there ensue
thereupon most grievous Accidents. It is also certain that by the drinking of
vicious Waters, or else from exhalations mingled together with the Air, after a
long abode and continuance therein, this Malady may at length be contracted;
and therefore it is that this evil is almost Epidemical unto the Inhabitants of
those places that abound so much with these like Fountains and Rivers that are
so well known unto this noble person. Neither can it be doubted, that such as
have weaker heads, are sooner and more grievously infected. But of what kind
that excrement is, and with what poison infected, that seems a thing
altogether occult and hidden; as likewise for what reason it does infest the
head rather than any other parts; and why in tract of time it vanishes of its
own accord, but yet will not in the least yield unto those Remedies that call it
forth, and such as we call Alexipharmaca or Counterpoysons; and lastly, from
whence it obtains that notable and altogether to be admired power of
Conglutinating. For neither can these be referred unto the manifest qualities
of any one humor (the first or second) although true it is, that according to
the generating of these depraved humors more or less, the evil may possibly
creep more or less, and be more or less confirmed. This may wholly be said
(which is likewise usual in the explaining of al other poisons) that those
Waters, and the exhalations thereof are infected with a poison endued with this
property that it is more annoying unto the head, is fixed more pertinaciously
unto the root of the hairs, binds them together most strongly, and
wonderfully writheth them, and most obstinately resists all kind of Remedies
whatsoever, by reason that the peculiar nature and generation of this poison is
altogether unknown, insomuch that this Noble man seemed to have said but the
very truth unto me, that some Boors there were within his Territories that had
discovered more of the original of Plica, as also of the progress, and Cure
thereof, than those Authors that had written concerning the same; none of which
have as yet been so successful, as to restore unto perfect health any one that
has been afflicted with this Plica. But for the Scurvy it is to be esteemed a
far more grievous Malady, in regard that it creeps into the whole blood; and
the corruption thereof prevailing and getting strength may at length cause
death unto the party therewith affected; which the Plica if let alone without
cure, and not meddled withal, never yet did unto any. So that this Noble person
is not without good cause very much perplexed and troubled as touching this his
Malady, being in good earnest grieved, that there is hardly any regard had unto
this Affect in this City; where there has scarcely ever yet been seen (at any
time) any one infected with the Scurvy. And I (for my own part) although I have
seen two Hollanders and one English man (both at Venice, and at Padua also) al
three of them affected with an exquisite Scurvy, yet I neither expect nor
desire that any Credit should be given unto what I say; but yet notwithstanding
from what I find written touching the Scurvy by Forestus, Eugalenus, and
Sennertus, most truly, and according to what they had seen, and found attested
by many Histories, I shall presume (and that very confidently) to affirm that
this illustrious Lord is at present much afflicted with the Scurvy. For
excepting only the swelling of the Lips, and the flagginess of the putrid Gums
(the Accidents of the Scurvy confirmed) al other signs and tokens of the Scurvy
are present; to wit, the much and long use in former time of salted and
smoke-dried flesh, unto which the Soldiery in the Septentrional parts are
extremely addicted; add unto this the looseness of the Teeth, with some kind of
itching in the Gums; the continual great lassitude and weariness of the parts,
and especially of the internal; the extension of the left Hypochondrium, and
the Mesentery; and the broad Efflorescencies, one while wan, and other whiles
red, budding forth continually here and there throughout the whole body without
any Fever; which is conceived to be a Pathognomick Symptom of the Scurvy. Unto
this we may add, that this illustrious person about some three years since was
apparently affected with the Scurvy, and that the Physician who then had him in
cure (being most expert in the knowledge of the Scurvy) told him plainly and
freely at his departure, that the relics and remainders of the Scurvy were
not in the least to be slighted by him, but upon al occasions opportunely to
be prevented. But perhaps the Italian Physicians do therefore slight and but
little account of the name of the Scurvy, in regard that they are of opinion
that all the aforesaid accidents may be al of them referred unto those causes
that are evident, and not called by unusual names, and such as in former times
were not so much as ever heard of. For the redundance of the adust Melancholy
which is much defiled with Ichores and thin Excrements (which said redundance
of Melancholy and other the said humors, that they are at present to be found
in this illustrious Lord, is manifestly shown by the boiling heat of his Liver,
the weakness of the Spleen, the familiar flux of the Haemorrhoids, and the
frequent use of meats salt and earthy) may possibly breed and produce a
lassitude, and litherness, but more especially in the internal parts, unto
which the humor by its weight and heaviness naturally tends. Unto all this it
may be added that it much impaireth the strength and natural powers, enervates
and weakens the body, and extenuateth the same by corrupting the Aliment; it
extends likewise the Natural Bowels by its great plenty and thickness, and
obstructeth the same by the admixture of the diffused Ichorous Excrements with
the overhot blood. Neither are we at al to wonder that various spots arise,
since that both by its own proper thinness that more hot part of the adust
humor is easily carried forth unto the outside of the body; and that (the
expulsive faculty of the internal Bowels being irritated) it is no hard matter
for it to be purged forth through the loose skin, being porous and weak. And
therefore to me there seems to be no cause why we should abuse the new and
unusual name of the Scurvy in the explaining of things so well known. But how
many sick persons have been most miserably cast away through this kind of
reasoning, we may every where read in those Authors that have written touching
the Scurvy; who all of them with one consent affirm, that never any yet being
affected with the Scurvy, and having had administered unto him only these
remedies that have acted by a manifest quality, and such as were proper to
evacuate and temper Melancholy adust, and to take away the obstructions of the
Bowels (although administered by the most able and expert Physicians) was
thereby perfectly cured; in regard that the Melancholy blood (in this Disease)
contracteth a corruption peculiar, and such as cannon well be expressed; which
ought to be removed and taken away by those Alexipharmaca that are fit and
proper for it, and that otherwise irritate and enrage adust Melancholy, if we
regard the manifest qualities. For Spoonwort, or Scurvy Grass, Water Pimpernel,
and certain kinds of the Cresses and Water Parsley (al of them being most
sharp, and unto which alone the Scurvy gives place) seeing that they attain
unto the third degree of heat, and greatly dry, they would vehemently increase
the vices of the adust Melancholy, and all the causes thereof, unless by their
Alexipharmick quality they opposed the corruption of the Scorbutic blood. And
that the said efflorescency of the spots in the Skin are the Concomitant of
this Corruption, will be demonstrated even by this, That in those other
Meridional Regions, in the which adust humors do oftentimes sway and reign,
such like efflorescencies do not at al appear without a Fever. Seeing that
therefore the name of the Scurvy designeth and points out unto us something
that may be useful in the Cure thereof, it is by no means to be exploded, as
unusual and altogether unheard of by the Ancient Physicians, unto whom the name
of Plica, of the French Disease, and the Measels, was alike unknown. Now if
this be so, this illustrious person may very well conceive some hope of the
recovery of his health (in regard of his Catarrh, pain of his belly, and want
of his rest) from the help and assistance of the Italian Remedies: but I must
profess that I understand not what is likely to do him any good in the Cure of
Plica and the Scurvy wherewith he is also affected. The Remedy of the Plica is
altogether unknown; and this illustrious person knows, that hitherto there
was never any yet (either here or elsewhere) perfectly recovered of this Malady
by the help of the Physicians though never so able. And what this noble person
has small hopes to expect from Physicians, he may perhaps within four or five
years attain by the benefit of Nature; since that it has been observed, that
men grown have in the fourteenth or seventeenth year been wholly freed from it,
the Plica falling off of its own accord, and never after more appearing. But
Italy wants Alexipharmaca for the Scurvy, into which if any chance to be
brought, they will hardly be preserved above one year. What is therefore to be
done in this Case? This alone, to wit, That (for very good reason) he persist
in the Cure as it is already begun (which may corroborate the Stomach, dry the
Head, and draw forth unto the outward parts the virulent excrement of the
Plica, by the help of a Decoction, and the external use of Bath-waters, as also
by the dropping of hot Oils upon the stomach) until the latter end of April, or
the beginning of May, if at least he be able so long to endure and bear the
strength of these extraordinary drying Medicaments. But then let him wholly
apply himself unto the Cure of the Scurvy; that is to say, let him use the
Decoctions of the opening Herbs, mingling therewith that quantity of the
Alexipharmaca that the Physician well exercised in this kind of Cure shall judge
fit and convenient. But in the general, the cure of the Scurvy is more
especially to consist in this, That those things that open obstructions (the
choice whereof is to be left unto the judgment of the Physician that has
undertaken the Cure) are evermore to be tempered together with the
Antiscorbutick Remedies. For which cause I judge it fit and very requisite that
the Patient with all possible speed make a Journey into the Northern parts, that
so he may find the Herbs yet flourishing, and full of juice. For the general
opinion is, that the Antiscorbutick Herbs benefit more by their Juice than by
their Decoction, or any other way whatsoever. Lee him have recourse unto Daniel
Sennertus, the most eminent and famous Physician of our Age, and one most
exercised in the knowledge and Cure of the Scurvy: let him wholly commit himself
unto his Care, and be ruled by his advice, and in so doing (next under God) let
him expect his recovery from this most dangerous Malady from him alone. He
lives at Witteberg, where the Antidotes against the Scurvy are known very
familiarly. Now if so be that before Winter he shall appoint him again to make
use of the Hydrotick Decoction for the Head, (for the strengthening of the
head, and belly, and the drawing forth of al thick excrements whatever) this I
judge to be very beneficial and conducing unto the hastening on of the
spontaneous and voluntary Cure ot the Plica. His Liver though it seem to be
extremely hot, and to require extraordinary cooling Medicaments, yet
notwithstanding it will be far more safe in the hot Summer time to use a cooling
Diet, than any cooling Medicaments: for the Stomach being but weak and
fleshless by the use of these said Medicaments may easily be destroyed; and it
is likewise observed that the Plica is but the more enraged by the use of
refrigerating Medicaments. And this (most Excellent and Illustrious Doctor, and
my very good Friend) is that which I thought fit to write back unto you, for
the satisfying of your request. I have purposely forborne the mentioning of the
Remedies, in regard that all such as were to be taken in Italy have already
been most prudently prescribed unto the most Illustrious Patient, and to my
knowledge have continually been made use of, and without any, or very little
change made therein, continually practiced by him: and as for such as shall
henceforward be prescribed for him (in Saxony or elsewhere) for the Cure of his
Scurvy (the State and Condition in which this Illustrious Person shall then be
found to be after all the toil of his Journies being first thoroughly
discovered, and a trial made of the Cure yet further to be continued) they are
in a various manner to be accommodated unto the necessity of his body; neither
may they indeed (without much arrogance) be so much as hinted unto one so
expert as your self. God Almighty Grant that the Desires and Travels of this
Illustrious Person may find happy Issue and success.

Thus far the Advice and Counsel of Johannes Prevotius, in Answer unto an
Italian Doctor, on the behalf of that Noble Lord, Count Nicholaus Sapieha.

But the Patient returning home unto his own Country, and finding no
alleviation of his Disease, but that it rather from day to day grew worse,
following the advice of that eminent Physician Dr. Prevotius, writes Letters
unto me from Codma, 28. day of May, in the year 1628. wherein he acquaints me
with making a Journey unto Witteberg for his healths sake. But when his Kindred
and Friends (by reason of so great weakness of his body dissuaded him from the
Journey, as thinking that he would never come hither alive, he deferred his
Journey until the Autumn following. But when he perceived his Disease daily to
increase upon him, he at length provides himself for his Journey; and in the
month of November the same year, being carried in a Hors-litter he took his
Journey through Polonia and Silesia (about a hundred German miles) and came
hitherunto me at Witteberg, but almost half dead. For he hung together (as it
were) only by Skin and Bones; being not able to move Hand or Foot, no not so
much as his Head. But I had rather relate the History of his State and Disease
in the Words of his Domestic Physician, which he had brought along with him
out of Italy (that famous and Eminent man, Dr. Franciscus Mistruccius, Doctor
of Physic at Forojulium) then mine own; who gave me an account of the Disease
of this noble Lord, describing it in the manner following.

Among those many remarkable and famous things wherein Antiquity flourished,
and was of old much admired for, this Custom of theirs (most excellent Doctor)
was evermore held to be one of the most famous and laudable, that they made
Journeys sometimes as far as unto Delphos, that they might there receive an
answer in doubtful Cases from the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, an Oracle much
famed all the World over. After the manner of these Ancients this Generous and
most Illustrious Count, my Lord Nicholaus Sapieha, Standard bearer General of
the great Dukedom of Lituania, Careful as he is for his own safety and
preservation after trial made of so many and so various Medicaments, after so
many Answers received both in his own Country Polonia, and likewise in Italy,
has at length arrived now at this time hereat Witteberg ( no Delphos I
confess, but in very truth another Athens) that he may now Consult with you, I
had almost said, the most wise Oracles of Physic; and expecting from you the
utmost of your assistance, which he earnestly imploreth and expects, and you
have ever out of humanity afforded it unto any. And (since it is a task imposed
upon me) I will very briefly indeed, and yet notwithstanding distinctly, relate
the History of this Noble Person; his Affects and as for those few remedies
that I shall call to mind, for the removal and overmastering of this kind of
Malady, I shall prescribe them with that modesty that becomes me; and yet
nevertheless referring otherwise al unto your most quick apprehension, and
accurate Judgment (as unto a Lydian stone) for the further polishing and
adorning thereof.

The principal Affect touching which this Noble Lord is so greatly sollicitous
(as of that which has twice or thrice threatened even Death at the door) is the
long lasting and cruel pain of all the lower Belly, having its residence one
while in the right, and another while in the left Hypochondrium, and as soon
again about the Navel. This is now the seventh year, since that these fierce
and cruel pains and torments have had their recourses; which have been so
pertinacious and unyielding, that (let me freely speak it) they have now almost
driven both the Patient and the Physician likewise even to desperation; so far
have these torturings hitherto been from yielding unto any Medicament. There is
now a year and a half past since that I was added unto those that had this
Noble Person in Cure; in which time only I shall acquaint you what the quality
of the Disease has been, that so there may be no vain repetition of what went
before, all things in a manner keeping (as it was related unto me) the very
same Course and Tenor at all times. And therefore (that we may speak something
of what happened in that space of time) the Case in a manner stood thus. In the
month of July out of Italy we came to Cracovia, where this Illustrious Lord had
at that very time committed himself unto the care of a certain Physician that
professed the Curing of Scurvy; who without due respect had unto the Counsel of
Hippocrates (to wit, that before the Dog Star, and during the time thereof,
Purges work not kindly, but are rough and harsh) and not at all regarding, that
this Noble Lord stood at that time in more need of rest and quietness (by
reason of the many discommodities he underwent in his long and tedious Journey)
then of any new agitation and disturbance of Medicaments, began to administer
unto him those same Scorbutic Medicaments, to wit, the Syrup of Spoonwort or
Scurvygrass, the Juice of the same Herb, and other things of the same rank and
order; adding thereto some certain Pouders and Potions that were purging; in
which said Medicaments this Physician persisted for six whole weeks together,
without any apparent benefit at all. But at length his most Illustrious Lord
seeing that he was not like to get any good from him, began to think of his
departure thence; and so about the end of August we came to Lublin; whither so
soon as ever we were come, those fierce and cruel torturing pains assaulted him
all the lower Belly throughout, reaching even unto the Region of the Loins;
which would not admit of any the least intermission, until after a long time,
and many difficulties, and much drawing forth of the peccant humors; as
likewise both upwards, by the benefit of a spontaneous Vomit; and downwards
also by the frequent use of Clysters, of a certain snotty Matter, white,
insipid, sometimes thin, bitter, yellow, and sometimes duskie; and also withal
great store of Wind: In which pain the Belly was so Costive, that the many
Clysters that were put up, although otherwise purging, would not be brought
back again without much difficulty: the Urine likewise that he made came from
him red, and with much straining, and not without an extraordinary pain about
the Reins; which afterward (upon the abatement of the pain) flowed forth in
greater abundance, and withal he voided much red Gravel. And so (the pain being
assuaged) from Lublin we came to Codna, about the latter end of October; this
Codna is a City of his Lordships. But shortly after our arrival there, the
Obstructions return, and the pains are renewed in their former height, with
frequent swouning and fainting sits (like as but a little before it had
befallen him in his Journey) insomuch that we wholly despaired of his life: in
which his pains and fainting sits, although that by putting up of mollefying
Clysters, and by the use of Evacuating Remedies given him downward, his Belly
was much opened and loosned, so that (even as was said before) there were cast
forth Excrements of all sorts, with some evident alleviation and ease; yet
notwithstanding the Disease returns again with no less vehemence then before,
other new Obstructions still succeding the former; neither hitherto could the
Disease be extirpated. Yea in the month of August last past, after the taking
of a China Decoction, his Disease so far prevailed upon him for about the space
of forty days, and so miserably was he tortured and wracked by his pains,
that we could scarcely move him in his bed, he was almost speechless, and could
very hardly draw his breath. And so in his Journey, in the midst of his
Coughing, his breathing was thrice so stopped and hindered, that we were
altogether in fear that he would have been strangled. But you must know
moreover, that besides those intolerable pains that are felt in all the parts
of his Belly; there are others likewise that are sometimes extended throughout
the whole Back, and unto the very utmost Joints; but especially they pass along
through unto the joints of the Arms and Feet: yea in the journey aforesaid,
such and so great were the pains that he felt about those parts (after the
torturing pains of his lower Belly) that the like thereunto he had never before
felt in all his life: for (even as erewhile, you might likewise have observed,
most Excellent Doctor) he could scarcely take any rest, nor hardly stir Hand or
Foot: unto which pains there at length followed a Palsy (not such as is indeed
Usual, and properly so called) of the Hands and Feet, with a pining away, and
illfavoredness of all the Members, as appeared unto all the beholders. And it
is likewise to be observed, that those pains do now recurr more frequently then
formerly in the years past. There is also adjoined a Pruriginous or Itching
yellowishness, and Excrescence, of the Gumms, with certain red spots, like unto
Flea-bitings, appearing more especially in the Back and Thighs, which by
degrees tending unto a pale and wan color at length wholly vanish. And although
that the pains of the Abdomen do now and then intermit; yet nevertheless his
leanness still continues, as also the extraordinary Lassitude of his whole body;
the Palsy in like manner still persisteth, and the pain of the joints, with
such and so great an astriction of the Belly, that he cannot (in truth) of
himself void forth any the least show of excrement: and therefore we are fain
often to provoke it, and put it forward with Aloes Rosat, and every other day
with Clysters. But if the Evacuation be but for one day omitted, then to be
sure, his tormenting pains return afresh upon him. And wonderful it is to see,
what abundance of Excrements of all sorts (but especially of Choler and snotty
Phlegm) he daily without fail voideth forth by the benefit of these Medicaments;
and yet nevertheless his Disease still persisteth with all kind of Obstinacy.
Unto those aforesaid purging Medicaments we adjoyn likewise those things that
Corroborate; such as, the Rolls of the Species of Aromaticum Rosatum,
Diarrhodon Abbatis; and adding thereunto Corals and Margarites, the Confection
of Hyacinth, Alchermes, and other things of the same rank; and yet by all these
means we have hitherto done him no good. But as for what concerns those
doubts that by your Letters you signified unto me that I should explain unto
you (by loosening the knots of them) thus it is, as far as I conceive. As for
that Haemorrhage which he had some four years since, it proceeded not from any
debility of the Bowels; for after it he did not again recover his health in
that measure that for almost a year and half before he had enjoyed it in Italy:
neither yet from the retention of the Hemorrhoids; for together with it the
Haemorrhoids likewise had their Periods every month; which when (from the midst
of the year only) they altogether intermitted, I was then constrained by Art to
prvoke them three or four several times. It remains therefore that the said
Haemorrhage has its original from the acrimony and thinness of the blood,
which it contracteth from the Head extremely overheated. And as for the Plica
which he bears about with him in his Head, it first of all manifested it self
almost a year after the beginning of those pains; neither is it hereditary; for
none of his Stock before him ever had the like Affect. And as for the
destillation from his Head, it has continually been, and as yet abides in
great abundance, even as it appears from those things that are continually
voided out of the Head, by the Nosethrils and Palate; the greatest part whereof
falls down unto the Stomach, and from thence to the Intestines; from whenee
perhaps the aforementioned pains receive no small part of their fuel, and that
which continually feeds and foments them. The Pulses (that otherwise are
always obscure, with some kind of frequency) admit of a variation, according
unto the Intenseness or remissness of the pains. The order and Course of his
Diet for the most part (especially in the paroxysm of his pains) has been
guided rather at the pleasure of the Assistants, then by the Advice of the
Physician; of Cullises, of Capons mashed together, new Eggs potched and supt
up, and Broths aromatized with all kind of Spices. He drinks Italian Wine, of
a good substance. He has an Appetite so dejected and weak (especially during
the continuace of his pains) that even the very smell of Flesh makes him ready
to cast: He is continually thirsty, and thereupon he is very apt evermore to
exceed in the drinking of Wine. He passes whole nights (for the most part)
without sleep; and if he chance at all to sleep, that sleep is altogether
unquiet, and full of Phantasms. In I^aly how and in what manner this Noble Count
has been handled by Medicaments, you have now already seen all that can be
written concerning the same. These therefore are those Symptoms that so fiercely
and cruelly afflict this most Illustrious Person. From these (as far forth as
it is possible) he desires to be freed. And if ever help and assistance be to
he expected for humanities sake; he in very truth (in these his so great
miseries and sufferings) desires and expects this assistance from none
other, but from your self alone, next under God: I say from thee alone (most
(Excellent, and Expert Sennertus) whom I see to flourish (like as a most
fragrant Rose in the most delightful Garden of Physic) among the thickest
Brambles (as I may so call them) of these difficult Diseases in the aforesaid
(Province of Saxony; and for my own part (I profess) I much admire thy
Abilities. Thus far Dr. Franciscus Mistruccius.

And with all these Maladies was this most Illustrious Count continually
afflicted. And the truth is, that which exceedingly troubled and tortured him,
was the irremovable Obstruction of his Belly, which evermore continued, unless
it were removed either by Clysters, or Purging Medicaments. For the moving of
his Belly, and the keeping of it open, he had brought along with him out of
Italy a great quantity of Aloes Rosat. But I well knowing that by the use
thereof his Belly was dried much the more, dissuaded him from continuing the
Use of it. When he went to stool he then voided Phlegm (Viscid, Clammy, and very
Tenacious) in great abundance. And withal at that same time he was usually
infested by those most grievous and intolerable pains in the Belly, which were
most an end terminated in the pains of the Joints; as for the most part these
likewise again ended in those former. But if it so chanced that upon the
invasion of these Belly pains he were taken with any great Vomiting (which very
often happened) his pains were then the more moderate, and did the sooner
remit. There was moreover present a Palsy of all the Members, as likewise of
the Tongue oftentimes, so that he faltered there in, and could not speak
distinctly. And yet notwithstanding, those most grievous pains of the Joints
(with a certain kind of Swelling) accompanied the Palsy, as we have already
said. At certain time also (by intervals) he was infested by a Symptom that
greatly terrified him, to wit, a fear of suffocation, and a certain strangling
as it were (of which we have already made mention in Chap. 4. touching the
Scurvy) which proceeded from a Styptick Vapor contracting the Muscles, moving
the Larynx, and as it were violently pulling them together. In the Body (the
Back especially) there appeared wan spots; the Teeth were loose, and indeed
some of them were already fallen out. There was likewise continually to be seen
in the hollow of his Hands a perpetual redness, proceeding (no doubt) from the
heat and dryness of the Liver; and this arose from the unseasonable use of
Medicaments heating and drying. For he had not only for forty days together
used the Decoction of China (as is beforesaid) but other Medicaments of the
like Nature. He lay whole Nights (many times) without any sleep at all. There
was likewise present a Fever, that observed no course at al, such as those are
wont to be that accompany the Scurvy. Such was this Patient when I first
received him, that for the recovery of his perfect health I could give him no
assurance at al; neither could I well give him any certain hope of the
preserving his life from a sudden death, which continually threatened him. But
yet nevertheless in regard that he had come so far a Journey for his healths
sake, I endeavored (what I could) by my continued care and pains to effect his
desire, and to do him good; and by the good hand of the Almighty assisting me I
so wrought, that his Belly was able again to do its office; and that the
excrements acquitted again their natural consistence; that the pains of the
Belly and Joints ceased; and that the Arms and the Hands had likewise their
motion restored them; insomuch that the Noble Lord could not only perform other
offices with his Arms and Hands, but could likewise write Letters. His Belly
also that was altogether extenuated began again to increase, and not only so,
but even also to grow fat again.

And yet notwithstanding there still remained and pertinaciously persevered the
Palsy of the Feet, and their contraction; which could not be taken away by any
kind of Medicaments, no not by the use of those admirable Baths (to wit, the
Teplicenses) into which he was put, in the month of June, in the year 1629. and
as I conceive, it will hardly ever be wholly and perfectly cured.

Now the Medicaments that I made use of were directed unto these ends and
purposes; to wit, that the Belly might again be made loose and soluble; that
the Cacochymy might by degrees be evacuated; that the vice of the humors, and
the Scorbutic disposition of the Bowels might be amended by Antiscorbutick
Medicaments; and that the most urgent Symptoms might be quite removed and taken
away.

As for what concerns the matter of Physic; here to set down all the forms of
those Medicaments which almost every day were administered, it would be too
tedious, and not worth the while; in regard that the same Indications still
abiding, the very same Medicaments (but yet nevertheless with often variation
of the forms) are frequently to be repeated in this long lasting and
contumacious Disease. We will therefore only subjoyn the matter of those
Medicaments that answer unto the Indications, extracted from the forms: which
yet nevertheless were not al of them administered in all Medicaments, but
according unto the present condition, and the Nature of the Circumstances,
sometimes these, and then another while those were administered. And yet
notwithstanding we will here add a form or two. For the loosening of his Belly
(which unless some ways irritated would scarcely ever have done its office) he
had indeed, as I told you before, brought out of Italy great store of Aloes
Rosat. But when I perceived that by the use thereof his Intestines were but the
more dried, I dissuaded him from the use of it. And so instead thereof he often
made use of Clysters (unto the which his body had been much accustomed) made of
the Roots of Marshmallows, Polypody of the Oak, the Leaves of Feverfew, of the
Herb Mercury, Bears-breech, Mallows, Marshmallows, Centaury the less; the
flowers of Camomile, and Elder; Dill-seed, Fenugreek seed, Lin-seed,
Cummin-seed; Electuar. Diacatholic. Diacartham. Benedict. Laxat^v^, Hiera
simplex, Syrup of Roses Solutive; Oil of Camomile, of Elder, of white Lilies,
and Yelks of Eggs.

But the Laxative Syrups were made of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Fern,
Succory, the Rinds of Tamarisque, the Roots of Capars, Fumitory, Agrimony,
Endive, Germander, Spleenwort or Miltwaste; the seeds of Carthamus, Raisins;
Leaves of Seen, Agarick, Zedoary, Galangal; the Rinds of Citron; the Cordial
flowers, Manna, Cream of Tartar, and Sugar; as much of al these as shall suffice.

Pills of the Mass of Pass of Fabricius Aquapend. with the Species of
Diacartham.

For the correcting the vice of the humors, and the amending of the Scorbutic
disposition, he made use of Antiscorbutick and opening Medicaments. As for
example,

Take of Scorbutic Water (described in the third Book of our Practice) four
ounces, of Spoonwort or Scurvygrass, and Borrage, of each one ounce; Conserve
of Spoonwort an ounce and half; of Betony half an ounce: Let them stand al
night, and strain them in the morning; adding thereto of Tartar and Vitriol, or
the simple mixture, of each half a dram, and mingle them together. Also,

Take the Juice of Spoonwort newly pressed forth, of Water Pimpernel or
Brooklime, and Watercresses, of each a quart; of Succory root newly Candied
six ounces; Salt of Tartar half a dram. Let them stand digesting in a close
Vessel for some days; and afterward strain them; unto the straining add, of
white Sugar four ounces; Conserve of Borrage, Betony, and Fumitory, of each two
ounces: let them stand again in digesting one whole day and night; and afterward
strain them. Also,

Take of the simple Mixture one ounce and half; Rob of Juniper one ounce; Juice
of Spoonwort, Watercresses, Brooklime, of each six ounces; Species of
Diarrhod. Abbat. two drams; Syrup of Borrage, of the lesser Gilliflower, of
Acetosit. Citri, of each one ounce and half; Cinnamom Water half an ounce; let
them stand digesting, and afterward pour out al thereof that is clear. Also,

Take of the simple Mixture one ounce and half; Rob. Juniper two ounces;
Extract. Calam. Aromat. one scruple; Saffron half a scruple; Conserve of
Spoonwort three ounces; Fumiterry, and Sorrel, of each one ounce and half;
Juice of the Citron new drawn four ounces; Scorbutic Water six ounces;
Spoonwort Water four ounces; Cinnamom Water half an ounce: Let them stand in
digestion; and afterward strain them.

He made use likewise of the Pills of the Trochisques of Capars; the Extract of
Succory, Spleenwort, and Gentian; and also, Cream of Tartar Vitriolat.

There were likewise Rols prescribed for him, of the Species of Aromat. Rosat.
Abbat. Diarrhodon Abbat. Plires Archont. Extract of Otrace, Elecampane, Erynus,
the Powder of Bezoar: as likewise this Powder:

Take Species D^aireos one dram; Calam. Aromat. the seed of Cresses, Rocket,
Saffron, of each one scruple, Cinnamom one dram; Cream of Tartar two drams;
make a Powder.

He used Electuaries made of the Conserve of Spoonwort, Betony, Sage, Succory,
Germander, Ground Pine, Citron Rinds Candied, the Root of Vipers Grass Candied,
Rob. Juniperi, Confect. Alcherm. Syrup of Borrage, Gilliflower, Acetos. Citri.

He made use also of the Wine of Spoonwort; which is made, if some handfuls of
Spoonwort (while it is yet green) be bruised very small, and a few pints of
Rhenish Wine poured thereto; and then let them stand in a Cellar in a Glass
Vessel, for three days; and then afterward strain them. And this also,

Take Wormwood three pugils, Conserve of Spoonwort three ounces, Green
Watercresses bruised one handful; the dry Rinds of Citron six drams; pour
thereunto of Rhenish Wine two quarts: Let them stand in a Glass for some days;
and after this pour out that which is clear.

And at length when I had once gotten the Spirit of Spoonwort from that most
industrious Apothecary of Gorlicum, Johan. Buttnerus, which (like as he does
also out of most other Plants) he artificially prepares by fermentation and
distillation, that so it may still retain both the smell and the taste of the
Plant; when our Patient was tired out with, and even loathed the taking down of
any other Medicaments, he then most frequently, and with very much benefit,
made use of this Spirit.

And likewise that we might provide for the safety of the Spleen (which at this
time was very far amiss) we caused an Emplaster to be put upon the Spleen.

The pains of the Belly and the Joints took place (as it were) by turns, and
reciprocally; so that when the pains of the belly remitted, then the pains of
the Joints began; and so on the contrary, when the pain of the Joints ceased,
then those of the Belly began to disquiet the Patient: and both of them were
(for the most part) much moderated, when he plentifully (which very often so
happened) cast forth the tart, salt, and bitter humor, in an almost incredible
abundance.

For the mitigation of the pains of his Belly, there were prescribed Clysters,
of Marshmallows, Camomile, Fenugreek seed, Dil seed, Lin-seed, Oil of sweet
Almonds, Oil of Dil, Oil of Camomile, Honey of Roses, Oil of Bayberries: and
unto the Belly there were laid both Fomentations and Cataplasms of the same and
the like Medicaments; and the Emplaster of Laurel Berries. He used likewise the
Decoction of the flowers of Camomile with Manna, and the Oil of sweet Almonds.

For the pains of the Joints in the Hands and Feet there were used Fomentations
and Cataplasms, of the Roots of Marshmallows, the flowers of Camomile, and St.
John's wort, Wormwood, Betony, Watercresses, flour of Lin-seed, and Fenugreek
seed, Earthworms, Oil of Elder, Oil of Camomile, and the Unguent Dialthaea.

The Wife of this Noble Lord told us that in her Country (for the moderating of
such like pains as these) they had in use Cataplasms made of the Horse Raddish,
bruised and boiled; and (this being grounded upon Reason) there were therefore
such like Cataplasms imposed now and then, with very good success.

There were likewise used Fomentations of Elecampane Roots, Marsh-mallow Roots,
Bryony Roots, Laurel Leave, Sage Leaves, Rosemary Leaves, Herb Ivy Leaves,
Wal-flowers, Lavender flowers, Prim-roses, Arabian Stoechados, and Juniper
Berries. As also Inunctions of Marsh-mallow Roots, and Bryony Roots, and
Earthworms boiled unto a softness; adding thereto the Juice of Spoonwort and
Watercresses, Unguent of Bdellium, and of Turpentine, Oil of white Lilies, Oil
of Camomile, as also of the Unguent Valeriola; which we may find in the fourth
Book of his Observations. And so likewise this:

Take the juice of Brooklime, Watercresses, of each one ounce and half; Oil of
white Lilies two ounces: boil them til the Juyces be consumed, and then add Oil
of Turpentine half an ounce; Oil destilled out of Juniper Berries, and the
Unguent of Bdellium, of each one ounce; Gum Elemi, and Gum Hederae, of each
three drams; Man's Fat half an ounce: Mingle them.

Also the Unguent that is made of the Root of the Florentine Orrace, the Leaves
of Sage, Primrose, Tansey, Mugwort, Betony, Bayberries, Juniper Berries, Rocket
seed, Lavender flowers, and Spike flowers, boiled in Wine, and the Oil of
Earthworms, the Oil of Foxes, the Oil of Rue, the juice of Watercresses; and
then strained, adding thereto the destilled Oil of Juniper, Sagapenum,
Bdellium, Styrax Calamit. Gum Elemi, the Fat of a Fox, and Man's Fat, and Wax.

My own Emplaster likewise for the Nerves was added, of which this is the
Description:

Take Leaves of Laurel, Betony, Rosemary, Ground Pine or Herb Ivy, and
Prim-rose, of each one handful; flowers of Lavender half a handful; the tops of
St. John's wort one handful; Earthworms washed in Wine three ounces; boil them
in good Wine; and being strained add thereto Oil of Camomile three ounces; Oil
of Orrace an ounce and half; boil them until the Wine be consumed; and then add
of clear Turpentine three ounces, Goats Suet an ounce and half; Gum Elemi two
ounces, Tacamahaca dissolved, Shippitch, Rosin, of each one ounce; boil them
again; and then add, Litharge three ounces, Wax as much as will serve the turn,
and make an Emplaster; unto which in the end add Oil of Turpentine, and of
Juniper Berries, of each an ounce and half; of Rosemary, and Sage destilled, of
each one dram; and mingle them.

For the Palsy of the Tongue there were made use of Mouth-Washings of Sage
Water, Rosemary Water, Extract of Calamus Aromaticus, Oxymel Scillitick, the
destilled Oil of Nutmeg; and likewise Inunctions of the Tongue, of Treacle,
Extract of Castoreum, of Calamus Aromaticus, Oil of Nutmeg, or Sage, and
Mustard seed. There were also Trochisques made of the same.

For the Vices of the Gums, and the looseness of the Teeth, there were
prescribed Unguents of the Leaves of Columbines, of Sage, Mints, Nutmeg,
flowers of red Roses, Alum, Honey; Collutions or washings for his mouth there
were made of the Decoction of Fern Root, and Bistort or Snake-weed, the Leaves
of Watercresses while they are yet green, Sage Leaves, Mints, Columbines,
Frankincense, the Water of Sage, and Mints, Alum, and Honey Rosat.

And by these Medicaments indeed, although (as we told you before) that the
Disease of the Scurvy was for the greatest part removed and cured, (excepting
that the Palsy of the Feet remained still firmly sixth and immovable;) yet
notwithstanding the Plica held on its old course still; only there was one Nail
on one of his Toes that returned unto somewhat a better state and condition.

Chap. 10. Of the Vices of the Nails.
FIrst of al, if the Nails have their own Natural Constitution, like as other
parts of the body, they are then smooth and plain, and they have a color white
and red, and a due and meet hardness and thickness: if this their Natural
Constitution be changed, it falls then under the Nature of a Disease.

Nails unequal, thick, and rugged.
And first of al, indeed the Nails are sometimes unequal, and become thick and
rugged. Which happens from the juice by which the Nails are nourished,
abundantly flowing thereunto. For then they are not only made long, but they
likewise become thick, unequal, and rugged. And this happens from strong and
hard labor, by which the Nails about the roots of them are as it were moved
together, and so they attract the aliment in greater abundance.

This Vice cannot easily be amended, unless that the external Cause cease. But
if the said external Cause be removed, then in process of time (those thick and
unequal Nails being by degrees cut off) other that are better will succeed in
the stead of them.

The Roughness of the Nails.
Moreover, the Nails also become rough, and ill colored, and thick; Scabrities
and Lepra of the Nails.
which Vice is called the Scabrities and Lepra of the Nails: in which Vice, not
only the magnitude, but likewise the figure and Conformation of them is
vitiated.

This Vice is generated from the vicious and excrementitious humors mingling
themselves with the aliment of the Nails. Now those humors are more especially
Melancholic, which is shown even from the color it self of the Nails, they
having in them something of Tartar, from whence the said hardness proceeds.

This Vice is manifest unto the Eyes, and brings along with it rather a
deformity, than any dang r; and yet nevertheless it may hurt and hinder the
laying hold upon any thing, which is wont to be done by the Nails; and it
likewise shows withal, that there is some vicious humor lying hid and
concealed in the body, that Nature thrusts forth unto the Nails; like as we
have before told you, that those who are affected with Plica Polonica have also
this evil befalling them.

This Vice is cured, if what cannot be amended be by degrees pared away, and
the excrementitious humor discussed. If the Vice be but new begun, then the
Decoction of the Vetch Orobus and Lentiles will be very convenient; or else a
Cataplasm formed of their meal: or else let Sulphur with Oil and Vinegar be
laid upon them. Pliny writes that Orach (or Arrach) will take away the Nails
without any Ulcer; as we find it in his 20. Book, and Chap. 20. And the lesser
Celandine with Pitch does perform the very same. Or else let an Unguent be
imposed, or an Emplaster made of Pitch, Wax, Rosin, Mastick, Burgony Pitch; or
else lay on Raisins with Opopanax, or Cresses with Lin-seed: stronger are the
Roots and Leaves of Crowfoot. Or,

Take Rosin half an ounce; Turpentine two drams; new Wax, and Goats Suet, of
each five drams; Mastick one dram and half; Frankincense two drams; Make an
Emplaster.

See more of these in Paulus Aegineta his second Book, and 81. Chapter. And in
Avicen, in the seventh part of his fourth Book, last Tract, and 14. Chap^.

The color of the Nails changed.
But sometimes only the color of the Nails is vitiated; so that they become
leaden colored, yellow, and black. Which Vice happens nor only by reason of
the change of the color of the flesh lying underneath (as some have thought)
but because the very aliment of the Nails is vicious, and endued with such a
color. And now and then likewise the Nails ar here and there marked wi h
certain small white spots (especially in the younger sort of people) which
arising for the most part about the Roots of them, together with the growing
Nail they change their place; until at the length they are pared off with the
Nail; and they have their original from the thick juice that mingleth it self
with the aliment.

In Curriers also (by reason of their handling of Lime and Ley) and in Dyers
(by means of their handling their Dying stuff) the Natural color of the Nails
is frequently changed into another, which oftentimes lasts and continues
long.

This Vice indeed brings with it no danger at al; but yet it causes a
deformity, and is very offensive and troublesome unto Men, but especially unto
Women.

But now that this Vice may be taken away, the vicious humors (if they lie hid
in the whole body) are to be evacuated; and then after they are to be taken away
out of the Nails themselves. This may be done, if the new growing nails be very
often pared, until all that is viciated be quite taken away. And unto the Nail
it self that Emplaster that ere while we mentioned (in the Lepra of the Nails)
is to be applied.

But there is then a peculiar change of the color of the Nails, when by reason
of a Contusion there is blood shed forth under the Nail; and when shining
through the Nail it produces a red or a blackish color, as it is wont to
happen in Suffusions. Which if it chance, Avicen advises to make a hole
through the same, and so to let out the blood that lies underneath the Nail.
And yet nevertheless, there is in thus doing great care to be had, lest that in
the perforation the nervous skin lying underneath be hurt, and so a pain be
thereby excited. The Nail having a hole made through it (or if it has not, it
makes no matter) lay upon it Candy Dittany, with the Glue or Gelly of fish. Or
the Basilick Emplaster, of the Root of Solomon's Seal well bruised. Or,

Take Sagapenum as much as you please; mingle it in a Mortar with the Oil of
Nuts, that an Emplaster may be made and laid thereon.

The Crooking of the Nails.
There are some likewise that make mention of the crooking of the Nails among
the Vices of the Nails; and indeed it is of that crooking wherein the Nails (in
their extremities) are rendered crooked, and as it were hooked (l^ke as we see
it to be in Birds) and this crooking they say proceeds from a dryness that
does overmuch contract the substance of the Nails. But this Affect is very
rare; neither (when any such there is) does it proceed from dryness, but from a
vicious matter; by reason of the abundant flowing of which the Nails come to
grow in that vicious and uncouth manner: and this (as we have already told you)
happens in the Plica Polonica. And therefore there is no other way or method
of Curing of this Evil, than that of Rough and Leprous Nails.

This is not unusual (especially in the Feet) that the Nails grow forth too
much at the sides, and make a hole through the skin lying underneath; upon
which the flesh there in that place begins to grow luxuriant, and to become
proud, and proves a very great impediment, both in putting on of the shoos,
and also in going. Which if it happen, we are then to sprinkle upon the place
burnt Alum, which takes away whatsoever of the flesh is superfluous; and
afterward the Nail that has grown forth too long is to be pared off.

The Cleaving of the Nails.
And now and then likewise solution of Unity happens unto the Nails; so that
they are cleft either longwaies, or else transversly, and as it were cut into
two thin plates.

And this comes to pass either from Causes external, as Wounds; or else from
the vitiousness of the Humor, which sometimes falls out in the French Disease,
and the Leprosy.

If the Cleft be from a Wound, the Wound is then to be healed: yet nevertheless
the cloven Nails can no way be united; but while they grow a whole and sound
Nail is wont to succeed the cloven: but care must hereby taken lest that the
Nail in that part where it is cloven should grow together with the skin lying
under it. For if this should happen, the Nail will never be whole as it ought to
be; but will evermore grow forth cloven and in two parts.

If this Fissure or Cleaving arise from any other Disease, and vicious humors,
then that Disease is to be cured, and such like Topics are to be administered
unto the Nail as are wont to be applied in the roughness of them.

The Falling of the Nayls.
And at length also the Nails are wont to fall off, leaving the extreme part of
the Finger quite naked: which Vice may not unfitly be referred unto Diseases in
the number; since that without cause the Nails are excluded from the Number of
the parts, notwithstanding that they have their Natural conformity and use, and
are nourished like as other parts are, and cohere (as al other parts likewise
do) unto the whole. But why the Nails fall away, this first of all and
principally proceeds from the fault of the Aliment; which when it declineth
into another Nature, and so indeed that the Aliment is not only become simply
vicious (the same that happens likewise in the ruggedness and roughness of
the Nails) but that it is also sharp withal, and corrodeth the roots of the
Nails (in the very same manner as the roots of the hairs are wont to be gnawn
asunder in the Alopecia, Ophiasis, and shedding of the hair) the Nails then
fall off. And so very often after Ulcers and Wounds about the roots of the
Nails, the Nails are wont to fall off, Pus or filthy matter gnawing asunder the
roots of them. And when the roots of the Nails are eaten asunder by the said
purulent matter, although the Nails do not then fall off of their own accord,
yet by the Nail new growing they are thrust off. And so it is found that after
pestilent and Malignant Fevers, not only the hairs have shed, but the Nails
likewise have fallen off: and this has likewise been observed to happen after
the drinking of Poison, and in the French Disease. And moreover, the very same
may likewise happen from the want of Aliment; like as we have seen and found by
experience, that such as have traveled in the Snow, and that have held their
hands long in cold water, have had their Nails fall off, either from a
Constipation of the Pores of the hands that carry the Aliment unto the Nails,
or else from the extinguishing of their Native heat.

Now this Vice (which is obvious unto the sight) does not only cause a
deformity, but likewise hurts the laying hold on any thing, for which the
Nails serve: and moreover (in regard that the Nails do as it were defend the
Fingers ends against external injuries) by this means the Fingers are rendered
as it were defenseless, and easily obnoxious unto al kind of external injuries.
And therefore this Malady does deservedly require a Cure. And yet nevertheless
all the Nails that fall off cannot be restored. For if from a depraved humor the
whole root of the Nail be eaten asunder, and the Malady has now long
continued; or if by reason of the want of Aliment the Nails be fallen off, they
can very hardly be restored. But if the root be not wholly eaten asunder, and
the Malady be but new begun, there then remains some hope of a Cure: and
therefore in this case we are to cover the Nails with a Cap made of Ladanum,
Ammoniacum, Bdellium, and Wax.

The looseness of the Skin about the roots of the Nails.
And then at length, Reduvia, or the looseness of the skin about the roots of
the Nails.
there is likewise a Vice, not of the Nails themselves, but of the Skin that is
next unto the Nails; which the Latins call Reduvia, and the Greeks Paronychia
because that it is near unto the Nails. But this Paronychia of the Greeks is a
Vice far different from the Disease that is described before (in the first Part
of this fifth Book, and Chap. 14.) and is there reckoned up among the
Inflammations, and by the Arabians is also called Paronychia. For that
Paronychia (as we there told you) is a most grievous and dangerous Disease. But
the Paronychia of the Greeks (of which we are now speaking) or Reduvia as the
Latins call it, is the least and lightest of all Affects, and brings along
with it no danger at al; and scarcely deserves the Care and pains of a
Physician; as appears out of Galen, who in his Comment. 2. touching the
Nature of Man, about the end thereof, disputing whether or no that Book were
written by Hippocrates, says that Sabinus and the rest that reject that Book,
do indeed take notice of a few small faults that are therein, but they neglect
and pass over without any notice taken of the faults that are far greater, and
worth Consideration, after the fashion of those ill Physicians, who while they
consider and take notice of the Paronychia of sick Persons, they then through
Ignorance neglect the greater and more difficult Evils

Neither indeed is there any reason for us to think, that the Paronychia of the
Greeks and that of the Arabians is one and the same Affect, and that Reduvia is
a small and beginning Paronychia (such as the Greeks describe) either in the
Swelling, or Inflammation, or any notable pain; which is in a Species of the
Rhagades, and is described by the Greeks. But if it be already become such, it
will then turn into an Inflammation, and a dangerous Impostumation, such as is
described by the Arabians, and is by them named Panaritium. For these things do
no way answer to Experience. For neither does the Panaritium of the Arabians
begin from such like Clefts, neither is the Reduvia and Paronychia of the
Greeks ever turned into the Panaritium.

Paronychia therefore, or Reduvia, Reduvia what it is
is a certain slight Cleft of the Skarf-skin at the Roots of the Nails.

It proceeds from a salt humor eating through the Skin in that place.

The Vice appears sufficiently of it self; neither has it any danger at all
to attend it, but only that it is somewhat troublesome by reason of some light
and small pain that follows it, whenas the Skarf-skin being cleft and divided
the true Skin is left quite naked.

Now it is Cured by Purslane, the Roots and Seed of Mallows, Oil of Violets,
and Oil of Roses.

Clefts in the Hands
In the last place we think it not amiss, to mention also the Clefts that are
oftentimes found in the Hands; which happens more especially about the
beginning of Winter, when the Hands being tender are exposed unto the Cold,
whereunto they have not as yet been accustomed; whereupon it is that they
contract these Clefts, especially about the Joints; yet nevertheless, this same
happens sometimes likewise unto the Feet.

It may be Cured most speedily, and most conveniently by this Unguent.

Take Litharge of Silver, Myrrh, and Ginger, of each alike parts; bruise and
powder them very small; and so with Virgins Wax, Honey, and common Oil as much
as will suffice, make an Unguent; unto which (for the rendering it the more
grateful to the smell) Musk and Ambar may be added.

THE FIFTH BOOK THE FOURTH PART. Of WOVNDS.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature, Causes, and Differences of a Wound.
AMong the external preternatural Affects of the Body, and such as are obvious
unto the senses, there remain Wounds, Fractures, and disjoyntings; of which we
will now speak in order. And First of all, as touching a Wound, that it is a
solution of Unity in a part, Bone, and softer Cartilage, is without al doubt
and controversy. But yet nevertheless it is sometimes taken largely, and
sometimes in a more strict sense. Celsus takes it in the largest sense of all,
whn (in his fifth B. and sixth Chap.) he thus writes; That Wound (says he) is
far worse, and more dangerous, which it caused only by a Bruise, then that
which is made by incisiom and dividing the part; so that it is also far better
to be wounded by a sharp and keen edged Weapon, then by that that is blunt. It
is taken in a large acceptance, when it is attributed unto all kind of
solution of Unity made by any sharp instrument; whether this solution be made
by pricking, or by cutting; like as Galen (in his Sixth B. of the Meth. of
Physic the first and following Chap.) calls the pricking of the Nerves the
wounding of them. It is taken strictly, when it is distinguished from a
pricking; that a wound is the solution of Unity in a soft part, made by a Cut
from any keen and cutting instrument; but a pricking is that solution of unity
that is caused in a soft part, by a prick from an instrument that is cutting.
By which it appears, that the solution of Continuity in a soft part is wider
and broader then a Wound, whether it be made by cutting, or by pricking. For
Unity may also be dissolved (in a soft part) by a thing that is not sharp, but
only hard and heavy; and this may be, the Skin either appearing whole, or even
broken likewise, which happens in those Wounds that are inflicted by Bullets
from Guns, Moreover also the Unity of the soft part may be dissolved by
extension, which (in special) in the similary parts is called Rupture, but in
the Compound, Apospasma; to wit, when those fibrous Ligaments and Threads (by
which the parts are fastened together, the one to the other,) being broken, the
parts themselves likewise become broken. A Wound what it is.
By all which it appears, that a Wound is the solution of Unity in a soft
part, caused by a cutting and sharp instrument.

But if (as Guido in the Second B. of his Surgery; and Fernelius in the
seventh B of his Meth. of Physic, Chap sixth, rightly admonish us) the Wound
become sordid and foul, and that some thing be by the Pus or filthy corroding
matter eaten away from the substance of the wounded part, then the Wound
passes into an Ulcer; or certainly we may very well say that an Ulcer is
conjoined with the said Wound. The truth indeed is, that Rudius (in his B. of
Wounds, and first Chap.) does impugn this Opinion; but al to little purpose.
For neither is it absurd (as he without Reason thinks) that one Disease
should be changed into another, or that one should be added and Joined to
another.

The Wound and Ulcer they are both of them the solution of Unity in the soft
part; bu^ the Wound is made by section of cutting alone, whereas the Ulcer is
caused within it by Erosion; and therefore it is that in an Ulcer there is
somewhat that is lost from the substance of the part. If therefore in a Wound of
any part something shall be Eaten away and consumed from the substance of the
flesh, it is then altogether to be granted* that now there is likewise present
even an Ulcer also. Which nevertheless is not so to be taken, as though so soon
as ever on the fourth day the Pus or filthy corrupt matter does begin to appear
in the Wound, that then likewise an Ulcer may be said to be present. For that
said Pus proceeds from the blood that is shed forth without the Veins; or
some Aliment that sticks in the Capillary Veins, and spaces of the parts;
neither is there then any thing Eaten away from the substance of the part. But
if there be so great an abundance of the Pus gathered together (whatsoever the
Cause thereof be) that something be Eaten away from the substance of the part;
then it cannot be denied but that there is an Ulcer likewise present; seeing
that there are then present all things that are required unto the Essence of an
Ulcer; and in this Case, the Cure is no longer to be ordered as in a single and
simple Wound, but as in an Ulcer.

But since that a Wound is to be accounted in the number of Diseases, there may
be enquiry made (and that upon good grounds) what actions they are that are
hurt thereby. Unto which it may be rightly answered, that all the Actions of
the said part, and the several uses thereof unto which the part is destined,
are hurt by the Wound, whether that part perform those actions, either as a
similary, or as an instrumental part. That the Organical Actions may oftentimes
be hurt by a Wound, (to wit, when the part destined for motion is Wounded)
cannot be denied, ^t being a thing so manifest; since that the wounded Member
can no longer be moved in a due and right manner. As likewise the Vein that is
cut assunder can no longer convey the blood unto the part, for the nourishment
thereof; neither a dissected Artery the vital blood and spirits, or a Nerve the
Animal Spirits.

But indeed the truth is that the temperament of the part is not next of all
and immediately hurt by the Wound; but yet never the less it is mediatly hurt;
to wit, when the Vessels being cut assunder, and the blood poured forth, the
heat of the part is withal dissipated, and the influx of the Blood, spirits,
and heat flowing in (this last being so necessary and requisite unto the
temperament of the part) is altogether hindered. For all which Causes, the
attraction of the part, the Concoction, the Nutrition, and the expulsion, is
hurt. And from hence it happens, that the temperament being changed, there
are more Excrements generated in that part, then otherwise were wont to be. And
from thence also it proceeds, that the Pus is not presently generated in the
very beginning of the Wound, but afterward, to wit, about the fourth day, when
the heat of the part that was dissipated is again restored.

The Use is likewise hurt in the Wounded parts. The Skin being Wounded can no
longer cover the parts lying underneath it; neither the dissected Peritonaeum
the Intestines; the Cornea Tunicle of the Eye can no longer contain the Humors;
neither can the Arteries when they are once cut in sunder any longer contain,
or convey the Blood; neither can the Nerves carry the Animal Spirits.

The Differences.
The Differences of Wounds, some of them are Essential, and others of them
Accidental. The Essential are taken from the very Nature of the Wound, to wit,
from the form thereof; in which respect, according to the Figure, some of them
are straight, other of them oblique, and these indeed likewise of a very
various Figure: in respect of their Magnitude, some of them are small and others
great; some deep, others of them only superficial; and hither also may this be
referred, that a wound being inflicted, either there is ^omwhat cut off from
the substance of the part, or else there is not any thing at all cut away.
Although (if we would but rightly and accurately Judge of the thing) these are
no proper and Essential Differences, in regard that they are taken not (...)
the very Essence of the Wound, but rather from some certain Accidents that
happen thereto, to wit, the greatness, the figure, etc. From the part affected,
(which is sometimes the Musculous Flesh, sometimes a Nerve, now and then a
Ligament, and very often a ^endon) now this, or that part is affected. And
indeed in one and the same part, there is great respect to be had, in what
particle of the part the wound is; as for example, whether the Wound be in the
beginning, or in the end, or else in the middle of the Muscle: and whether or
no in the Wound of any Bowel, the Parenchyma, or the V^ssels therein be
wounded. From the Cause, because that the wound afflicted is either by cut^ing
(which is in special call d a wound:) or by pricking, which in special is
called a (...) or pr ^king: or else together with the (...) there is likewise
present an incision (...); or else all these three, incis^^^ p^^eking, and
Contusion, are Joined together.

But the Accidental Differences are such as are drawn from those things that
are without the Definition of the Wound. Galen (in the Third B. of his Meth. of
Physic, and last Chap.) has reduced them to three Chapters; and he teaches
us that they are taken either from the manner of their Generation; (to wit,
that there is a total incision, or a total disruption;) or else, that there is
only a part cut, or a part broken. Secondly, From the situation of the Wound,
to wit, when in a wound obliquely inflicted, one part of the Wound is in sight,
and another part lies hid under the Skin. And ^hirdly, From the time, that one
wound is fresh, and new made, another old and inveterate.

There are likewise certain other Accidental Differences (we may rather call
them improper) taken from those things that are conjoined with the Wound; to
wit, that that wound, is poisonous that is inflicted by a poisoned sword; or
else by the biting of some venomous beast: that there has chanced unto the
wound some inflammation, or an Eryfipelas; or that there is a Fracture, or
disioynting Joined therewithal: or else that there is conjoined an Hemorrhage,
Pain, or some other Symptom.

The Causes.
We need not say much touching the Causes of Wounds. The Causes of a Wound that
is made by cutting, are al those things that have in them a power of Cutting,
Swords, Glass, and the like. Of a Puncture (or pricking) the Causes are,
whatsoever things are sharp-pointed, as Arrows, Needles, and the teeth of
living Creatures. Of Ruptures, such things as distend the soft parts, and pull
them into Contrary parts; such as the lifting or carrying of some extraordinary
weight, a Fall, Blow, loud speaking, and the like. Those things that bruise,
are all things Heavy, Hard, and Blunt, as Stones, Wood, Lead, and among these
Leaden Bullets shot out of Guns have in them a power of perforating.

Chap 2. Of the Diagnostick Signs.
THe Truth is, that the wound it self is (of it self) sufficiently manifest
unto the senses; and therefore needs not any signs whereby it may be known
But although that place in the Skin that is wounded be obvious and open to the
sense; yet nevertheless if the Wound penetrate unto the more inward parts, what
parts they are that are wounded within is oftentimes very obscure, and hidden
from us. But this may be known, first from the situation of the parts; Secondly
from the Action that is hurt, and the Use. Thirdly, From the supervening
Symptoms; and Fourthly, from the Excrements. For if the wound of the Head be so
inflicted that it be very deep, it shows that the Brain is wounded: and if
the whole Thorax or Chest be run through with a Sword, it argues that the
Lungs are likewise wounded; and so of all the other parts. For the exact and
perfect knowledge of which, the Situation of the parts is to be learnt from
Anatomy. Secondly, the Actions that are hurt do demonstrate the Wounded part.
And so, after a Wound received in the Privy parts, if the Urine flow forth of
its own accord, it shows that the Sphincter of the Bladder is hurt. But here
notwithstanding, we are wisely and carefully to consider, (in case any Action
be hurt) whether the hurt of the said Action be not by Consent of some other
part. And therefore other Signs are to be conjoined. If (a wound being received
in the Abdomen,) the Intestines fall forth, it is an Argument that the
Peritonaeum is cut a asunder.

As for what concerns the Excrements; if Chyle flow forth upon the receiving
of a Wound, it is a sign that the Stomach is wounded, or the small Bowels; if
the Excrements of the Belly, that the greater and thicker Intestines are
wounded; if Urine flow forth of the Wound, then it shows that the bladder is
wounded; if out of the Wound of the Thorax (or Chest) Air pass forth, it is a
sign that the Lungs are wounded. Whether it be a Vein or an Artery that is hurt
and wounded, the efflux of the Blood will show; since that, what flows forth
from an Artery comes forth Leaping and Dancing, as it were, and is more Red
then that from the Veins.

We have notice likewise given us of the part that is wounded from the
supervening Accidents. And so a vehement pain suddenly happening manifests
that some Nerve is wounded.

Chap. 3. Of the Prognostics, and foretelling of the Event of Wounds.
BEfore the Physician attempt the Cure of a Wound, he ought First to be very
Sollicitous and Inquisitive touching the Prognostics. To wit, in the first
place, he ought to foreknow, whether the Wound be Curable, or altogether
incurable. And then if it be indeed curable, whether the Cure will be easy, or
difficult; and whether or no the wounded person be like to have his former
perfect soundness restored unto him; or else whether or no being Cured, and his
Wound healed, he be likely to undergo and suffer the hurt Action of some one
or other of his Members. For so oftentimes it happens, that some Tendon being
cut asunder, the motion of some part is wholly lost; and that the Brain being
wounded, the Memory, or Rational faculty is thereby hurt: and Moreover, whether
the wound be likely to be Cured in a short, or whether it will take up a longer
time. But on the other side, if the wound be altogether incurable; whether it
be Mortal, and such as is likely to hasten Death; or else whether it be not
more probable that it will degenerate into some long continuing Ulcer.

And Lastly, it must be foretold likewise, whether the Changes and Alterations
of the Wound will be for the better, or for the worse, and when these Changes
will be. Now in the first place, it must be diligently explained,

What Wounds are Deadly, and what Wounds are not so.
For indeed this Question is of very great Moment, and therefore most
diligently and exactly to be weighed and known by the Physician. For whereas
oftentimes the lives of some men are much hazarded and endangered, (when they
are brought before the Magistrates in the public Courts of Justice) by Reason
of Wounds they gave unto others; and that oftentimes the Judges desire the
Physicians Opinion touching the same; great Care and a diligent Endeavor ought
to be used, that the Physician give so true a Relation, and so distinctly
deliver his Opinion touching the quality of the said Wounds, that the innocent
may not be condemned, nor the Guilty acquitted.

But in the first place we are to know that not every Wound which has Death
following it is to be called a Mortal wound, but that alone which in its own
Nature brings Death. Now such like wounds are twofold. For Mortal or Deadly
(as Galen in the 5. B. of the Aphor. Aphor. 2. and Aph. 18. teaches us) is
sometimes taken and understood of those wounds that are of necessity deadly and
sometimes again of such Wounds as are so for the most part, as Hippocrates
speaks; and such as by Reason of which (as the same Hippocrat. makes the
limitation in the 18. Aphorism, 6. Sect, in Coacis, or his tract of Playsters)
those that are wounded, almost, or for the most part die: like as Galen (in his
5. B. Aphor. 2.) writes. that Deadly is to be taken for that that is
dangerous, and is oftentimes terminated in Death. But the Question is here
especially of the former kind; for that wound that has been at any time Cured
in others cannot be taken for a wound simply Mortal and Deadly. But we shall
afterward tell you, when it is to be taken and accounted for Mortal, or not
Mortal. And therefore, Secondly, Wounds cannot be accounted simply Mortal,
whereupon the supervening of most grievous Symptoms (which said Symptoms
notwithstanding do not always and necessarily follow upon the reception of
these like wounds) the wounded person dies; as when in the Wounds of the
Joints, and the Nervous parts, an inflammation, Deliry, and other Symptoms
happen; or that by Reason of a Cacochymy lying secretly in the Body a fever is
kindled upon occasion of the Wound. And it is altogether most true, that many
things often fall out that render Wounds incurable, which in their own nature
were curable. Like as neither are those to be accounted for Wounds simply
Mortal, the Curing of which is long protracted, and by Reason of which it at
length happens that the Wounded person perishes by a slow and lingering
Death: the same that happens when (the Lungs being Wounded) an Ulcer and the
Consumption follow thereupon; or the Thorax, or Stomach being wounded; which
oftentimes after a long space of time become the Causes of Death unto the
wounded person. For whenas it has been observed and known that these like
Wounds have been healed in others, they cannot then be accounted for Wounds
simply Mortal. But those Wounds are only to be reputed simply Mortal, which in
the space of a few hours, or days, do necessarily bring Death unto the sick
person, and cannot be cured by any Art. And therefore we are to distinguish
between Wounds Mortal, and Wounds incurable. For all Mortal Wounds are
incurable, but all Wounds that are incurable cannot be said to be Mortal. For
Wounds incurable (as we have told you) are al those that though they cannot
indeed be cured, yet notwithstanding they are not suddenly the Cause of Death
unto the wounded person, since that (although they cannot be healed) yet
nevertheless the sick person may after this live not only many Weeks but even
years also. And such a like Wound was that which Mathias Cornax (in his Epistle
Responsory unto Dr. Aegidius Hertogh.) and Julius Alexandrinus (in his
Annotations upon the sixth Book of Galen his Meth. of Physic Chap. 4.) have
described unto us. For when as a certain Bohemian Boor (as he was hunting)
received a Wound in his Stomach with a broad hunting spear, it could not
possibly be consolidated but yet in tract of time the lips of the wound became
hardn'd by a certain Callousness growing over them, so that the wounded person
survived for many years after; and by applying of an instrument he could at his
pleasure evacuate his stomach.

And now in the next place let us see what Wounds they are that we may account
to be simply Mortal, or Deadly. And now whereas Death happens upon the defect
and extinction of the Native heat; and that the Native heat may in a twofold
manner be extinguished, either sensibly and by degrees, (as it is in a Natural
Death, and long continued Diseases, as the Consumption, and the like,) or else
suddenly and violently: the latter way it is that Wounds are said simply and
necessarily to bring Death unto the wounded person, to wit, a violent one.

Now the innate heat is extinguished, either because the vital spirits are
dissipated, or because they are suffocated. And therefore all Wounds that are
Mortal, and of necessity cause a sudden and violent Death, either they suddenly
suffocate the vital spirits, or else they dissipate and corrupt them. But in
regard that the Heart is the Storehouse of the vital spirits and the Native
heat, first of all therefore the Wounds of the Heart of all others do
especially and most speedily bring upon the Wounded Person a violent Death. And
the very truth is (as Galen writes in his 5. B. of the places affected, and 3.
Chapter) if the Wound penetrateth unto the ventricle of the Heart, (especially
the left) the wounded person of necessity dies suddenly: but if the Wound
penetrate not so far as unto the ventricle of the Heart, but that it consist in
the substance thereof, the man may then indeed live for a while, but yet
nevertheless he must necessarily die this violent Death.

Secondly, It is of necessity that the man die, if some Vessel be wounded in
that part of the Lungs that are next unto the Heart, and that out of it store
of Blood be poured forth unto the Heart, overwhelming it, and suffocating the
heat thereof.

Thirdly, All the internal wounds of the greater Vessels that cannot by any art
be closed upon regard they cause (the Blood being plentifully poured forth
either out of the Veins or the Arteries) that the spirits be suddenly
dissipated, therefore of necessity they speedily suffocate the wounded person.

Fourthly, All those Wounds are said to be Mortal that suddenly take away the
Respiration, and hinder the ventilation of the Heart, so that the Native heat
of the Heart is suffocated, and so cause that the Man die even almost in the
very same manner as Apoplectical persons are wont to die. And such like wounds
are especially the Wounds of the Brain, but yet not all of them, since that
there are many Wounds of the Brain that are not Mortal, as afterward we shall
show you, and as we have already told you in the first B. of our Practice,
first part, and 23. Chapter. But those great Wounds, and such as are the Cause
that the Animal spirits be suddenly dissipated, or that the blood being poured
forth of the Vessels the Orifice of the Nerves be quite stopped, and so by this
means the influx of the Animal Spirits be hindered; or that from the same an
inflammation of the Brain, or a fever be excited. And this is not only done by
the Wounds of the very Brain it self, but likewise by the strokes and vehement
Confusions of the Head, by which the Vessels of the Brain (and those near about
it) are broken, and the Blood poured forth of them unto the beginning of the
Nerves, and there subsisting hinder the influx of the Animal Spirits. And this
may also happen. if the Sinus or hollow places of the Brain chance to be hurt,
so that out of them blood be poured forth unto the Basis of the Brain; and so
it is likewise in the Wounds of the Eyes, if they penetrate so deep that they
open either the Vessels of the Brain, or those that are in the Basis thereof,
or those that are near about the said Basis of the Brain, and so that the Blood
poured forth unto the Basis of the Brain hinder the influx of the Animal
spirits by compressing the beginning of the Neryes. For although that the Blood
(if it be poured forth above upon the Brain) may possibly be emptied forth by
perforating and opening of the Cranium or Skul; yet nevertheless if it be
poured forth unto the Basis of the Brain, it is impossible that it should ever
be evacuated.

There seems yet (nevertheless) to be another way, whereby the Blood poured
forth into the Brain, or about the Brain, brings Death within a v^ry few
days, if it cannot be evacuated. For when as it is without the Vessels, it
begins to putrefie usually about the fifth day; from whence fevers,
deliries, and Convulsions are excited; so that the man dies in the same manner
almost as one in a Frenzy.

That which is done by the Wounds of the brain, the very same happens
likewise from the spinal Marrow, if it be indeed wholly cut assunder in the
superior part thereof: for then the motion of all the inferior parts (and so of
the Thorax likewise) is abolished, and the wounded persons are suffocated. And
unto one of these four ways I conceive that al kinds of Mortal Wounds may be
referred. And therefore if a Wound penetrate into any interior part of the
Body, so that thereupon the wounded person die within a short space of time, we
are then to Judge that that Wound was Mortal; and if diligent inquiry be made, I
am of Opinion that it may be referred unto some one kind or other of these
Mortal Wounds: whether that Wound hurt the vital faculty it self immediately; or
else hurt it by the intervening of some other Disease, or Symptom. For, as
Nicolaus Boethius writes out of Felinus, (in his 323. Decision, Numb. 10.) it
is all one, whether a Wounded man die of his Wound, or of some infirmity caused
by the same. Which yet nevertheless is so to be understood, if the Wound
necessarily attract that Disease, or that Symptom which is the Cause of Death.

But as for all the other Wounds whatsoever that cannot be referred unto some
one of these manners, I conceive that they cannot simply nor necessarily be
accounted Mortal. The which that it may be made the more plainly to appear, we
have it now in our purpose, in special to weigh and discover unto you the
Wounds of all parts that are to be accounted Mortal.

Now Hippocrates Judges the wounds of seven parts to be Mortal, What Wounds
accounted Mortal by Hippocrates.
whilst (in his sixth Sect. Aphor. 18.) he thus writes. Whosoever has his
Bladder out through, or his Brain, or his Heart, or his Midriff, or any of his
small Guts, or his Stomach, or his Liver, that Wound is Mortal. Which Aphorism
notwithstanding (in his Coaca, or his Tract of Playsters, Aphor. 509.) he both
Limiteth and Amplifieth, when he thus says. From a Wound even Death it self
may almost happen, if any one be wounded in his Brain, or in his spinal Marow,
or in his Liver, or in his Midriff, or in his Heart, or in his Bladder, or in
any one of the greater Veins. Death likewise soon follows, if any
extraordinary great Blows be inflicted upon an Artery, and upon the Lungs; so
that the Lungs being wounded, the Breath that passes out at the Mouth is less
then that which issues forth at the Wound. But they suddenly perish* whosoever
they are that have received a Wound in the interior Nerves, whether small or g
eat; if the Blow or Wound be both Transverse and great: but if the Wound be but
small and straight there are some that escape the danger. But there is neither
Death nor any great dang^r impending from those Wounds that are inflicted on
those parts of the Body in the which there are none of these, or which are as
far distant at may be from these

Indeed he limits the Aphorism, whilst that he does not simply write that such
like wounds are altogether Mortal, but almost and for the most part. He
amplifyeth it, whilst that he adds the spinal Marrow, the greater and
thicker Veins, the rough Artery, and the Lungs, and the interior Nerves. And
therefore we will in order consider the wounds of these parts. For it is without
doubt, that the Wounds of the rest of the Parts are not at all of themselves
Mor^al: and this Hippocrates himself teaches us in the above mentioned
Aphorism, 509. in Coacis. Celsus (in his 5. B. and 26. Chap.) thus rendereth
the foresaid Opinion of Hippocrates. He cannot possibly be preserved, that has
the Basis of his Brain, his Heart, his Stomach, the parts of his Liver, the
Marrow in his Backbone, wounded: or that person that has either the middle of
his Lungs, or the Jejunum, (i. e. the hungry Gout) or any of the smaller Guts,
or the Stomach, or the Reins be wounded; or he that has the greater Veins or
Arteries about his Jaws cut assunder. And they also very hardly recover their
former soundness that have any part of their Lungs, or the thick part of their
Liver, or the Membrane that contains the Brain, or the Spleen, or the
Matrice, or the Bladder, or any Intestine, or the Midriff, wounded These
likewise are in extreme great danger, in whom the Swords point has pierced
even unto the greater Veins that lie hid and concealed within, in the Armpits,
or in the Hams. And those Wounds are also dangerous, wheresoever there are any
of the greater Veins; in regard that they soon spend a man by the extraordinary
effusion of Blood. And this happens not only in the Armpits, and in the
Hams, but likewise in those Veins that reach even unto the A^se, and the
Stones. And besides these, that Woe end is also evil and dangerous that is in
the Groins, or in the Thighs, or in the void places, or in the Joints, or
between the Fingers. As also whatsoever wound it be that has hurt any Muscle,
or Nerve, or Artery, or Membrane, or Bone, or Cartilage. But now, because that
Hippocrates what he had said (in the sixth B. of his Aphorism Aphor. 18.) to be
Mortal and Deadly; that in his Coaca, Aphor. 509 he explaineth by saying that
they almost die, let us therefore see what ^ounds of these parts are simply
Mortal, and what not.

And first of all Hippocrates (in the Sixth Book of his Aphorism Aphor. 18.)
reckons up the Wounds of the Brain among the Mortal Wounds; The Wounds of the
Brain.
and yet nevertheless (in his Coaca) he limits it, and writes that for the most
part this is so. For all the Wounds of the Brain are not Mortal. For Galen
himself saw when such Wounds were Cured, in the 8. B. of the Use of the parts,
and 10. Chap. and in the sixth of the Aphor. Aph. 18. And we have instances
thereof in Valleriola in his 4. B. of Observat. and 10. chap. and in his 5. B.
of Observe. chap. 9. and in his sixth B. of Obser. chapter 4. in Gulielm. Fabricius
his 4. Cent. Observe. 1, 2, and 3. and he there gives us a long Catalogue of
the Physicians who had seen some Wounds of the Brain Cured. In Johannes Andreas
a Cruce, in his first B. of Wounds, Tract. 2. chap. 14. of a hurt and wounded
Brain. Yea Moreover it has been observed, that after the loss and perishing of
some small part of the Brain, yet nevertheless the wounded person has perfectly
rec^vered: for the confirmation of which we have many Histories given us by
Diverse Physicians; Anton. Musa Brasavolus, in his Comment. upon the 18. Aphor.
of the sixth Sect. of Hippocrates, Nicolaus Missa, in his first B. Epist. 11.
Fallopius in his Tract of the Curing of Wounds, chap. 45. Franciscus Arcaeus,
in his first B. of the Curing of Wounds, and 6. chap. Johannes Andreas a Cruce,
in his first B. of Wounds, Tract, 2. chap. 14. Ambrosius Paraeus in his 9. B.
and 22 chap. and others; all which (or at least the greatest part of them) have
been collected by Schenckius, in his first B. Oserva. 40. and 42. And well
worth Observation also are the Histories of the most dangerous Wounds of the
Brain, that are extant in Cabrolius his Obse vat. 16, 22 and 34. in Henricus
Petraeus his 2. Tome of Harmonic. Disputat. Disput. 36. Quest. 10. in Gulielm.
Fabricius, every where very frequently in (...) wounding of the Heart did long
survive. For although it has indeed been observed, that Tumors and Ulcers have
been found in the Heart; yet those seeing that they arise and grow by degrees,
life may sometimes for a while persist together with them; although that in the
conclusion even these also bring Death unto the Party. But wounds, in regard
that they suddenly disturb the very frame and Economy of the Heart, the life
cannot therefore long persist with these. And albeit Galen (in his 2. B. of the
Decrees of Plato and Hippocrates, and 4. Chap.) relates that sacrifices at the
Altar (after the heart has been cut forth) have been heard to cry: yet
notwithstanding this lasts so long only as the vital spirits are remaining in
the Arteries; which being exhausted, soon after the Beast falls down and dies.
For (as Aristotle writes in his third B. of the parts of Animals, and 4.
Chapter) the Heart alone of the Bowels, and of all the parts of the Body, will
not admit of, or bear any great injury; and this for very good Reason. For when
the very principium or principal part of all is corrupted and injured, it
cannot then possibly afford any aid and assistance unto those other parts that
depend thereupon. And more especially (as has been said) the left ventricle of
the Heart (which is the storehouse and treasury of the Blood and the vital
Spirit (being wounded, the wounded person immediately perishes. But if the
right ventricle of the Heart be wounded, that the wounded person may in this
case lengthen out his life for some short time is confirmed unto us by a
strange (but yet true) History that we may find written in a Table hanging up
against a Wall in the Library of the University of Groaning; and as it is
described by Gothofredus Hegenitius in Itinerario Frisic. Hollandico, Page 16.
in these very Words.

Nicholaus Mulerius, health to the Reader.
It has hitherto been believed, that the heart being wounded no man could
possibly lengthen out his life, no not for the short time of one hour. Which
opinion both Reason and Experience confirm. For seeing that our life depends
upon the safety of the spirits (whose Storehouse and Fabric is Situated in
the very Heart) the Heart being wounded, the said treasury and fabric that it
Situated in the same must of necessity be wounded likewise. But I thought good
here to relate unto you a very Memorable History; a History (I say) of a
certain Soldier, who being wounded at the Heart, yet lived above fifteen days
after; the like whereunto we meet not with in any of the observations of either
Ancient or Modern Physicians. Andreas Haesevanger, being a Soldier enrolled in
the City Garrison under the most Illustrious Count William of Nassau, (Chief
Governor of Frisia, Groaning, Omland, etc.) received a wound in his breast from
a fellow Soldier of his, in the year 1607. the two and twenty day of August, in
the evening; and he died the eighth day of September following, an hour after
Sunrising; it being the sixteenth day from that whereon the wound was given
him. The Body of this dead Soldier by the command of the Governor of the City
Garrison, for the discovery of the Nature of this his wound, was opened and
examined by my self and two Surgeons, Gaspar and Luke Hulten, there being
present and looking on that valiant and most Noble Bernhard Hoornkeus; there
looking on likewise some others both of the meaner and better sort of Soldiers.
We had no sooner opened the Cavity of his Breast, and emptied forth no small
store of purulent matter that stank not much, but beho^d, we found to our great
admiration, that the Wound had penetrated even into the right ventricle of the
Heart; and that the aforesaid part of the Heart was almost all of it withered
and wasted away, the left part still abiding safe and entire; in which is
contained the Primary Storehouse and treasury of the vital Spirits. And
therefore by the benefit of this alone the life of this Soldier was preserved
even unto the sixteenth day, in the morning. And lest (happily) that this
relation should not be Credited by some, the most Noble and Illustrious persons
before mentioned ( Bernhard Hoornkeus, Governor of the City Garrison, and
Petrus Pappus, the Military Praetor,) have confirmed the same by their
Testimony and the subscription of their Hands. And the latter of them has
likewise made an exact narration of this History, in his learned Commentaries
upon the Military discipline.

Done at Groninga the 22 day of June, in the year, 1627.
I Bernhard Hoornkeus do attest what is above written: this 22 of June, 1627.

I Petrus Pappus von Tratzberk do attest, that this History is true; and that I
my self very well know it to be so.


And therefore what is related by Matthias Glandorpius, in his Speculum
Chirurgicum, Chap. 23. touching Sanctorius a Professor at Padua, that struck a
Coney through the Heart with a sharp instrument, the Coney still remaining
alive for many Months after; this without doubt being to be understood of the
right ventricle of the Heart; it happening withal likewise, that the instrument
(out of all question) was not broad, but narrow and sharp-pointed.

VVounds of the Lungs:
Fourthly, The Wounds of the Lungs, Hippocrates indeed reckons them up in the
number of those Wounds that are Mortal, in the place before alleged, in
Coacis; and yet nevertheless he does not absolutely and simply pronounce all
the wounds of the Lungs to be Mortal, but he himself adds a Limitation; to
wit, this, if the wound shall be so great, that the Lungs being Wounded there
passes forth less of the breath by the Mouth, then there issues forth of the
Wound. And that all the Wounds of the Lungs are not Mortal, we are oftentimes
taught by experience; which evidently confirms it unto us, that many who have
been wounded through the whole Thorax, and the Lungs, have yet notwithstanding
escaped with their lives, and recovered their former health and soundness. And
I my self saw an example of this in a certain Student, who in the year, 1633.
in the Month of July, in the night received a wound, by a narrow sharp pointed
Sword run through his Breast on the right side thereof, about the Third short
Rib, near unto the Arm-pit, and coming forth opposite unto it near unto Spina;
so that he sent forth by the wound much Breath, with a great noise; and yet
notwithstanding this man recovered, and was well again within the space of a
month; and even now also (in this year, 1634. wherein I am writing these
things) he is in good health and strength. Yea, Guli^lmus Fabricius (in his 2
Cent. Observat. 32.) our of a History imparted unto him by one Abel Roscius
(which is as follows) tells us of the Cure of a wound in the Lungs that was
far more dangerous then the former. The story is this. There was (says he)
among the Delphinates, in the town of Calmuntium, a certain person grievously
wounded in his Br^^st (the wound being made by the prick of a Sword) betwixt
the fifth and sixth ribs of the breast, not far from the Sternum or Breast
bone; in whom when the Sword by its broad point had lightly pierced through
even the very Lungs, in the drawing of it forth, I know not by what ill chance
it being turned round it brought forth along with it through the wound a small
portion of the Lungs; whereupon immediately all the standers by adjudged the
Wounded person to be at the very point of Death. In the mean time, the
Physician (together with a Surgeon) being sent for, so soon as he was come,
instantly commanded that the part of the Lobe of the Lungs that hung forth,
(being first well washed in Wine) should again be thrust back into the Breast.
But in the handling thereof, perceiving that it began to look blackish and wan,
he caused it to be cut off with a red hot Iron Instrument. But as for the Rest
of it, the Surgeon gently thrust it back again into the Breast, the Ribbs
being first dilated with a Wooden wedg that was instantly provided for that
very purpose. And then after this, by the Art and Medicaments prescribed by the
Physician, he was Cured; then being withal external means administered, and some
certain pectoral Decoctions of Vulnerary Herbs for a few days inwardly drunk;
and so the wounded person perfectly recovered; and after this lengthened out
his life for many years, his Lungs and Breast all the while continuing still
very sound, and altogether free from all manner of hurt and detriment. And
therefore we may conclude that the Wounds of the Lungs are not always of
themselves Mortal, or incurable; unless happily a deep Wound therein be affected
with an Inflammation; or else when the Wound has hurt the great Vessels, or
the Lappets thereof; or that the wound reaches near unto the Heart. And many
other such like Histories Schenckius (in the 2. B. of his Observat.) relates
out of Franciscus Valleriola his fourth B. Observat. 10. Nicolaus Massa,
Franciscus Arcaeus, Fallopius, and Foresius: and the like are to be seen also
in Guliemus Fabricius his 3. Cent. Observat. 36. and Cent. 1. Epist. 52. and
others: all which here to recount would be too tedious. And the like History is
related also by that excellent and expert Physician Doctor George Horstius, (in
his 3. B. Observat. 11.) in these Words. A certain Noble youth (says he)
Abraham a Schleinitz ( a Knight of Misna) living with us at Giessa, as a
student, in the year, 161^. goes to the House of a certain Citisen, upon his
Birth day, which the Citisen (as it seems) was wont to observe in a festival
manner; other in the sai^ House by Quarrels and Threats having given an
occasion of a Tumult; thither being come through a Chink of the Door he was run
through his Body with a very sharp Sword, the entrance of the Wound being not
far from the Sternum, about the Third or Fourth superior Rib, and the Sword
going forth again under the Shoulder blade, not far off from the Spina. I being
called about the first hour of the Night* found that his Pulse was very weak,
and that there was present a difficulty of Breathing; whereupon I had but small
hopes of him, as conceiving very great danger to be at hand, by Reason of the
grievous hurt of hit Lungs, and the great Vessels. But see what happened. A
vomiting taking him suddenly (without any means used to procure it) all the
grievous Symptoms ceased, and his strength by degrees returned; there being no
purulent spittle at all that offered to come forth; his Cough likewise and
difficult breathing were not very urgent and troublesome; neither for the first
Week did any heat and thirst very much affect the sick person: in the interim,
the wounds being handled after the Usual manner, there daily flowed forth an
indifferent Quantity of well concocted pus or purulent matter. These means
being continued unto the second month, and the External wounds being purified
and consolidated, the sick person was suddenly taken with a most dangerous
suffocation; so that he was in great peril of being strangled by an Asthma as
it were; and he was likewise very much afflicted with a cough, Atrophy, and
Hectic Fever, until at length the imposthume of the Lungs brake, and with the
Cough five or six pints of purulent matter were cast up at his mouth; after
which, the exulceration of the Lungs being cured by fit and proper Remedies,
the consumption, Fever Hectic, and all the rest of the symptoms remitted, and
the Patient was restored unto his perfect health.

To wit, those Wounds of the Lungs are not mortal, in which only the substance
of the Lungs is hurt, and not the great vessels; and such as are not so great
that they abolish respiration, or suddenly destroy the vital faculty, either by
their dislipating the sprits through some notable Hemorrhage; or else
suffocating the heart, by pouring out the blood upon the Lungs, and upon the
heart. On the contrary, if the wound of the Lungs be great, and that not only
the substance of the Lungs, but likewise the great vessels that are therein (to
wit, those notable and observable branches of the Arterial vein, and the veiny
Artery, be wounded; those wounds are mortal, being such as in which the blood
and vital spirit is poured forth and dissipated, or else through the overgreat
abundance of the blood the Lungs and heart are oppressed, and the Patient
suffocated. Hippocrates (in the place alleged in Coacis,) adds yet another
cause of death; which yet nevertheless does not bring so sudden a destruction
unto any person, as those in the former case even now mentioned; where the
wound being great, it is not the vessels containing the blood that are indeed
hurt, but the great and rough Artery; so that by reason of the largness of the
wound there is more breath that goes forth by the wound then by the mouth; for
then by reason of the sympathy the heart is affected, the vital spirits
dissipated, the Lungs and heart by the ambient Air altered and offended. And
indeed those wounds of the Lungs bring death likewise, in which either the
substance of the Lungs begins to be exulcerated, (and that a Consumption is
excited) or in which the blood is poured forth into the Cavity of the Thorax,
where it begins to putrefy, and where it causes either a fever, or an
Empyema. But in regard that this does not always happen, and not at al in some
wounds of the Lungs; and that likewise (when it does happen) there is no
necessity that the Patient die; for this cause therefore those wounds of the
Lungs are not to be accounted necessarily Mortal. For Felix Platerus (in his 3.
B. of Obsrv. Page 690.) relates, that a certain person that he knew, falling
into a Consumption from a Wound of the Lungs, was yet nevertheless Cured and
perfectly recovered. A certain Coffermaker (says he) one of our Citizens;
having from a servant of his received a wound very deep in the lowest part of
the Thorax by a prick from the point of a knife, by the wound he voided forth a
most stinking and loathsome pus or matter (by the ill savor whereof the whole
neighborhood was infected and offended, and likewise some certain small parcells
of his Lungs, in which the cartilaginous branches of the rough Artery did
manifestly appear: which persevering a long time, albeit that he was in a
manner wholly wasted away, yet nevertheless at the length the flowing forth of
the purulent matter remitting, the wound was closed, and he restored unto
perfect soundness; living after this many years as a foot-post, in carrying of
letters; and thus he prolonged his life for forty years safe and found, as we
say; although (as it is very probable) he wanted great part of his Lungs in one
side.

The wounds of the rough Artery,
Fifthly, That the wounds of the great rough Artery (commonly called, Aspera
Arteria) are not mortal, but that they may be cured, even the Laryngotomy, or
Cutting of the Laryinx (of which we have spoken before, in the Second Book of
our Pract, Part. 1. Chap. 24.) does evidently demonstrate: To wit, those of
them are cured that are not great, and in which the membranes only (by which
the rings of the rough Artery are fastened and linked together) are wounded;
examples of which Schenkius (in the Second Book Of his Observat.) has
collected. And I my self also have twice seen such like wounds cured. But if
those very cartilaginous rings be wounded, by reason of their hardness the part
cannot again be made to grow together as formerly, as Hippocrates teaches us
in the sixth of his Aphorisms, Aph. 19. And in the seventh of his Aphorisms,
Aph. 28. and Galen, in Book 5. of his method of Physic, Chapt. 7. And yet
notwithstanding such like Wounds do not cause a sudden death, but a flow and
lingering one; while that the Lungs are either altered and weakened by that Air
that violently breaks in upon the Lungs through the wound; or else that a
certain small gobbet of flesh grow unto the wound, which by intercepting the
breath at the length choaketh the Person. But those wounds alone of the rough
Artery throttle the Party, in which the jugular veins and Arteries being hurt
the blood violently and al at once rusheth into the Lungs, intercepteth the
breathing, and so suffocateth the wounded person; which yet nevertheless
happens not by reason of the wound of the said rough Artery, but by reason of
the wound of the Jugular vein, or the soporal ( i. e. more plainly the
sleep-conveying) Artery, that is very near unto it.

Wounds of the Diaphragm.
Sixthly, Hippocrates reckons up the Wounds of the Diaphragm among those
wounds that are mortal. But Galen (in his Book 5. of the Method of Physic,
Chapt. 9. distinguishes between those wounds of the diaphragm that are
inflicted upon the nervous part thereof, and those that are made in its fleshy
part; and those he will have to be mortal, but these latter Curable. And yet
nevertheless (in the Sixth of the Aphorism. Aph. 18.) he writes, that the
wounds of the nervous part of the Diaphragm are not always mortal; but that
the great wounds therein are only so. For then it is indeed that those grievous
symptoms plainly appear, viz. a deliry or stupid dotage, difficult breathing,
Fevers, Convulsions, and (as Aristotle has likewise observed in his third
Book of the parts of living Creatures and tenth Chapt.) the Sardonian Laughter,
wherein the sick persons die laughing. For whereas the Diaphragm receives
Nerves from the third and fourth vertebra of the Neck, and that these are
mingled with those small branches that are propagated throughout the Muscles
that move the Jawbones, and the Lips; if they suffer a Convulsion in that part
by which they reach even unto the Diaphragm, they then contract and draw
together along with them those little branches of the Muscles of the face; by
which the Jawbones, and the lips being involuntarily moved to and fro, hither
and theither, cause a resemblance and seeming appearance of laughter; which
Hippocrates (in the 5 of his Epidem.) accounts among those signs that are
deadly, by the Example of Tycho, whom he brings in for an instance.

And yet nevertheless, neither are those very wounds that are also in the
nervous part of the Diaphragm always mortal, so far forth indeed that the
party wounded in that place must of necessity presently die: albeit we grant it
to be a thing altogether impossible that those who are thus wounded should ever
be perfectly cured, or live long in that manner. A notable instance and history
of this (which I have likewise before related in the second Book of my
Institutions part. 2. Chap. 13. and in the second Book of my Pract. Part. 2.
Chapter 15. was given me by my Father in law, Doctor Andreas Schato, sometimes
Physic Professor in this University of Witteberg; which I must not here in
this place pass over in silence. Take it therefore thus: In the year 1582, the
20. of September, a certain Student, by name Henricus Euscherhovius, returning
out of the lower Saxony unto Witteberg, and much addicted to Melancholy, before
the gate ran himself through with his own sword. But yet notwithstanding with
in two months he was cured of this wound. But the year following, the 28. of
April, he began again to be much amiss; and the days following he vomited very
often, first a certain water and whatsoever food he had eaten; then after that
such things as were green; and at length, on the second of May, his vomitings
were altogether black, and that in very great abundance; and so after the last
vomit the same second day of May he died. We opened his Body, and there we
found that the wound had penetrated through the Lungs, and the Diaphragm; and
(as it seemed to us) the Diaphragm was run through in the Nervous circle. We
found very little or nothing of his Lungs on the left side that was run through,
but only a very small portion thereof which stuck above unto the short Ribs; the
rest of it (no doubt) had gone forth through the wound together with the
purulent matter. The whole stomach was ascended into the left side of the
Thorax; and it had driven the Heart (with its Case,) out of its proper place
into the right side; where while he was yet alive, and after the wound was
restored unto a good degree of health, he would wish us to observe the motion
of his heart by putting our hands there. An instance not much unlike unto this
we have in Ambrosius Paraeus his ninth Book, And Chapt. 30. Of a certain
Captain that was (by a bullet shot out of an hand-gun) wounded and shot quit
through the Diaphragm, but it was in the fleshly part thereof; who dying eight
months after this wound received, we found in his dead body (when we had opened
it) that a very great part of the Gut Colon, being puffed and swollen up with
much wind, had through the wound of the Diaphragm gotten up into his Thorax.

VVounds of the Stomach
Seventhly, As for the wounds of the Stomach, for the most part they are not to
be recounted in the number of the wounds simply Mortal, and which suddenly
strangle and destroy a man; since that we have every where exstant examples of
wounds in the stomach that have been cured. That History is generally well
known which is related both by Julius Alexandrius, in the fourth chapter of
his sixth Book of Galen his Therapeutick method; and likewise by Matthias
Cornax in his Epist. in answer unto Dr. Aegid. Hertogh; of a certain Bohemian
Boor, who received a wound in his stomach, (and that from a broad hunting
spear) and yet notwithstanding lived a long while after: this story we told you
a little before, and therefore shall say no more of it here. Neither is that
other history unknown, of a certain Boor in Bohemia; which as others have
related it, so we find it likewise mentioned by Crollius, in the preface to his
Basilica Chimica; in these very words. In the year 1602. at Prague, in the new
Town, we saw a certain Bohemian Boor (by name Matthaeus) about thirty six years
old: who for two years together (by an admirable and unheard of dexterity that
he had in his throat) would oftentimes in the company of his drunken companions
hide in his wide throat (as it were in a sheath) an Iron knife of a fit size,
First of al thrusting in the horn haft thereof, with the wonted sleight of a
Jugler; drinking upon it a large draught of beer that they gave him for this
purpose; and afterward he would pull it back again by the point thereof, at his
pleasure, by a singular art and dexterity that he had: but at length (the
morrow after Easter) I know not by what unhappy and mad rashness of his he had
swallowed it so far down, that it wholly descended into his stomach, and could
no more by all his art and cunning be from thence drawn back. And after that
(half dead in a manner with the apprehension of death undoubtedly and suddenly
to follow) he had lodged in his stomach the said knife seven wol weeks, and two
days, by the use and help of attractive emplasters of the Loadstone, and other
the like, the point of the knife by a natural impulse began to make its way
forth near unto the orifice of the stomach: which was no sooner perceived by
the patient, but he instantly and earnestly requested of the Surgeons (who
notwithstanding dissuaded him from it, by reason of the extreme hazard of his
life thereby) that it might by cutting be drawn forth. Which at the length upon
his continual importunate desires (and yet not until such time as he was come
unto a most desperate Condition, both in respect of his poverty and weakness)
was yielded unto; and the business undertaken by the principal Surgeon both
of the kingdom, and that City, Florianus Matthias by name, a Brandeburger, on
the thursday after the feast of Pentecost, at seven of the clock in the
morning; and by him (with Gods assistance) it was happily effected. The color
of the knife after he had cut it forth (it being as long as nine thumbs in
breadth) was so changed in his stomach, as if it had layn all that while in the
fire, and was immediately laid up among the Rarities of the Emperor, having
been first shown (a thing most strange, incredible, and miraculous) unto many
men, as well Courtiers, as Citizens. And thus this Boor in the space of a few
weeks (by the use of fit and convenient remedies, administered unto him by that
most expert Surgeon) without any further sickness and trouble, always
eating well, and drinking, and sleeping (as sometimes he told me himself) by the
blessing of God, and the liberal Charity of many people toward him in his low
and poor condition, (contrary unto the determinate assertion of Physical
Aphorisms) fully recovered his wonted perfect health and soundness; and not
long after he married a Wife. But those wounds of the Stomach are especially
mortal that are inflicted upon the superior orifice thereof; in regard that it
has those considerable Nerves that arise from the sixth Conjugation of the
Brain, and thereby obteineth a very near consent with the Brain and Heart; so
that it being wounded, most grievous Symptoms may very easily be excited. And
Benivenius (in his tenth B. of the hidden Causes of Diseases that are curable
Chap. 110.) reports, that a certain Fuller with one blow of his fist upon the
Stomach of a young Man, smote him so violently, that he immediately died thereof.

Eighthly, The wounds of the small Guts.
The Wounds of the smaller Guts are by Hippocrates accounted and reckoned up
among those that are Mortal. And more especially, the wounds of the Jejunum or
hungry Gut (among all the wounds of the Intestines) are especially Mortal, by
Reason of the greatness of the Vessels, and the almost Nervous substance of the
Tunicle of that Gut; from whence for the most part there follow great torments
and pains of the Intestines, Sobbings, and Faintings; as is to be seen in the
Histories related by Valleriola, in his 2 B. Observat. 8. and 9. And indeed the
wounds of the smaller Guts are then most especially incurable, when the said
Guts are wholly cut assunder in a transverse manner; since that the Lips
thereof standing wide one from the other cannot possibly by any means be
Joined, and made to grow together.

But now the wounds of the thicker Guts are less dangerous, and especially if
they be not great: and that oftentimes such like wounds have been Cured,
appears from the many extant Observations of Physicians: which Schenckius (in
his Observations) has Collected.

Ninthly, VVounds of the Liver.
Hippocrates likewise accounts the wounds of the Liver in the number of such
as are Mortal; which yet nevertheless wants a limitation. For Aegineta has
truly told us (in his 6. B. and 28. Chap.) that the Liver having been wounded,
and a part thereof cut away, yet that the wounded person may be preserved. And
Gemma relates (in the first B. of his Cosmocrit. and 6. Chap.) that a Spanish
youth a great part of whose Liver brake forth by the wound of the right Gut,
was yet notwithstanding Cured. And Bertinus also (in his 13. B. and 7. Chap.)
writes, that a Noble person after a wound inflicted near about the Region of
his Liver, and a small part of the substance thereof drawn forth and cut off,
yet escaped, and became sound again. And the same has likewise been observed
by others. Guilhelmus Fabricius (in his 2. Cent. Observe. 34.) relates that a
certain Helvetian, thirty years old, in a Duel, was with an Helvetian Sword
hurt in that part that is opposite unto the Liver; and that he received a very
great wound one span long and that hereupon there was taken from him a good big
piece of his Liver. And yet nevertheless this Man (notwithstanding the
superveising of most grievous and violent Symptoms) by the blessing of God was
perfe^^ly recovered. And Matthias Glandorpius (in his Speculum Chirurgic.
Observe. 34. Page 160) has a History of a youth dangerously wounded in his
Liver, who yet nevertheless recovered perfect soundness. And yet
notwithstanding we say, that they only recover, who have the superficies alone,
or the substance of their Liver only wounded, without any hurt at all of the
great Vessels. For if there be wounded any one of the greater Vessels, the
wounded person cannot possibly escape; and by reason of the large effusion of
the Blood, the Man (before that the wound can be Sodered and Agglutinated)
dies. And of these some indeed for a very short time have their life
protracted; but others of them die in an instant, or at least, in a very short
space. For (as Hippocrates in his 5. Epidem. tells the story,) a certain
person having had a dart thrust into his Liver immediately the color of a dead
Carcass was dispersed all his Body over; his Eyes sunk in his Head, a
difficulty of breathing (together with an aestuation or sudden vehement
passions) followed after this; and the same day he died. Another Boy being
stricken upon his Liver by a Mule, died the fourth day after; and before his
Death he was troubled with a short and thick breathing; neither understood he
any thing; but all the while (until he died,) lay under a fever.

Wounds of the spleen.
Tenthly, The Wounds of the Spleen are almost of the same Nature, and alike
dangerous as those of the Liver. For, if only the Parenchyma of the Spleen be
wounded without any hurt of the Vessels, the wounded person may possibly
escape. But if the Vessels of the Spleen be wounded, such like wounds are not
only dangerous, but also deadly and Mortal. For seeing that the Spleen has
st^re of Veins, and especially of Arteries, these being wounded, by Reason of
the great effusion of Blood, and Dissipation of the Spirits, the wounded person
must of necessity perish.

VVounds of the Bladder.
Eleventhly, The Wounds of the Bladder are likewise found in Hippocrates his
Catalogue of Mortal Wounds. But yet nevertheless here also a distinction is
requisite. For a small wound is soon sodered together by the intervening of
flesh, as Galen (in the 6. of the Aphorism. Aph. 18.) and Experience teach us.
But if the whole Bladder chance to be cut quite through (which wound
Hippocrates calls Diacope) the Wound is then yet more dangerous. And indeed
that is most especially perilous which is inflicted at the very bottom of the
Bladder, and the Nervous pa^ thereof: for by Reason of the sharpness and
extremity of the pain, the inflammation following thereupon, and the continual
fever, the party dies soon after. But as for these Wounds that are inflicted
at the Neck of the Bladder (which is fleshly) they are Curable; as we are
taught even by the Cutting of the Stone. And yet nevertheless it has been
observed, that the Bladder wounded even in the very bottom thereof has
likewise been Cured; the truth of which we have confirmed unto us by those
examples we meet with in the Observations of Schenckius. For the whole Bladder
is not altogether Nervous, but the Exterior Membrance thereof is more fleshy;
whereupon Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente, and Spigelius, account the said
Membrane for the Muscle that shuts the Bladder. But it is very rare that
such a like wound of the Bladder is perfectly Cured, albeit that the wounded
person die not thereof; but a Callousness being brought over it, the Pipe still
remains, by which the Urine is voided, forth. But yet nevertheless it is not
long that a man can continue to live with such a like wound: and therefore we
say here again as we said also before, that there is a difference to be made
between a wound Mortal, and a wound incurable. But yet notwithstanding,
touching all the Wounds of the bowels hitherto mentioned, this is to be
observed; that albeit there have been observed some examples of such like
wounds that have been Cured; yet that this has happened very rarely; and that
among these, those are to be numbered, touching which Averrhoes says, that in
the Cure of Diseases there are sometimes Miracles wrought. For when fit and
proper Medicaments cannot be applied unto internal wounds, but that the whole
work must be committed unto Nature; if in this Case Nature be not very strong
and Vigorous, the wounded person is very hardly Cured; but for the most part an
inflammation, Convulsions, Faintings and Swoundings, and other the like
Symptoms supervening, the party dies. And therefore Hippocrates says rightly
(in the sixth of his Aphorism. Aphor. 18.) that such wounds are Mortal; and (in
his Coaca) that most commonly and for the most part, men die of such Wounds.
And therefore if upon the receiving of such a wound, the sick person die within
a short time after, the Cause of his Death ought to be imputed unto the Wound;
since that much help is not to be hoped for from the Physician, as we shall also
anon show you.

And Lastly, Hippocrates reckons up the Wounds of the greater Veins among
those that are Mortal, Wounds of the great Veins.
and indeed rightly. But now by the word Phlebae he understands both the
Veins and Arteries; and by Pacheis he means great, and lying hid within;
which elsewhere he terms Aimorrhous, that is to say, pouring forth Blood;
such as are, the great hollow Vein, and the great Artery, and the great
branches of these. For such veins and arteries, seeing that they cannot be shut
close by any ligature whatsoever, (the blood and the spirits plentifully
flowing forth of them) the strength and powers of the Body are soon dejected;
or else the blood that is fallen forth without its own proper Vessels, if it
has no passage forth, but that it be still detained in the Body, it Clotteth
together and putrefieth, and gets unto it self a very evil, corrupt, and
Malignant Nature, causes a Gangreen, and exciteth most grievous Symptoms, and
at length brings even death it self upon the party. And indeed this danger is
most grievous and formidable in the Arteries, when the Blood and vital spirits
being poured forth the powers of the Body are dejected, and the man's life
endangered; neither can the Arteries be easily brought to close, by Reason of
their continual motion, and hard substance. And these are the Wounds that (as
Hippocrates rightly says) are Mortal. Of which notwithstanding (as I told you
before) some are simply or altogether Mortal: which Prosper Farinaceus (Tit. de
Homicidis, Quest. 125. Part 3.) defines, that they are such that require not
the Care and advice of Physicians, but are such of which the Wounded person
dies, that is, by Reason of which (although they be Cured by all the Art and
industry of the most skilful Physician,) yet nevertheless the Wounded person
instantly dies thereof. And others of them are not altogether Mortal, and
certain in their causing of death; which the same Prosper Farinacius defines
to be such, of which the Wounded party dies not suddenly; and of which
sometimes he dies not at all.

But what Wounds of the latter sort are Mortal, that is, of which although some
are now and then cured, and recover their perfect health and strength, yet
nevertheless this or that particular person may truly be said to have died of
them; will indeed plainly appear from what we said before touching the Mortal
Wounds of each single and particular part. And yet nevertheless this is
likewise to be added; that we are especially to Judge by the Event, whether any
such Wound be actually Mortal, or not. For although some strong and lusty Boor,
or a Man otherwise exactly found and healthful shall recover of some such
wound; yet Nevertheless it will not necessarily follow, that therefore an old
person, a Child, a Woman, or any other that is but of a weak constitution, must
recover of the like wound; but albeit the former of these was cured of the like
wound, yet this latter may necessarily die of the same. But now whether or no
such dangerous Wounds be Mortal in this or that particular person, Nicolaus
Boerius (in his 323. Decision, Number. 11.) teaches us how we may discover it, by
fix Conjectures. The first whereof is, the shortness of the time; to wit, if
the sick person die very suddenly after the Wound: of which space of time,
(albeit there be very many opinions touching it) yet notwithstanding he says
that the principal is this, if the wounded person shall die within three days
after the wound received. But yet however there are some that extend this space
of time unto the fifth, or even also unto the eighth day. But others
notwithstanding extend this term even unto the eighth month, or a whole year;
and this seems unto me most probable. And unto this space of time the
Mosaical Law ( Exodus Chap. 21.) seems to have respect. The Second Conjecture
is, the persevering of the vomiting, and fever, and other Symptoms that from
the very first signified and threatened death. And this is a right Conjecture,
and according to the Opinion of all Physicians, yea even of Galen, and
Hippocrates himself. For those great and mortal Wounds have their Decretory and
Critical days, like as Acute Diseases have, as Hippocrates tells us (2
Prorrhet.) in the which good or evil Symptoms are wont to happen. And
therefore, if grievous Symptoms (such as are Convulsions, Vomitings, sobbings,
Dotages, Syncopes, and the like; which otherwhiles also are wont to presage
Death in such as are wounded) presently and even from the very first invade the
wounded person; or else appear upon him on the Critical day, and after
continually persevere, they then signify, that they were necessarily brought
upon the Party by the Wound, and therefore that the Wound is altogether mortal.
The third Conjecture is, the breadth and depth of the Wound. For a Wound that
is very great and dangerous in it self may yet although it be great, yet not be
dangerous, if by it no Noble part be hurt. The fourth Conjecture is, the
quality of the instrument with which the Wound is given, and by which the
person inflicting the Wound is convinced that he had a will and purpose to kill
the party Wounded. But this conjecture concerns rather the Court of Justice,
then the College of Physicians; who inquire not so much after the will and
intention of the person wounding, as simply and solely after the quality of the
Wound it self. The fifth and sixth, is, the Continual pain, from whence the
Convulsion is brought upon the wounded person. But these conjectures belong
unto the Second. And thus, whether or no any one die of a dangerous Wound, and
of that kind of them which almost always are Mortal, the Physician out of
those six aforesaid Conjectures, makes use of two of them especially, whereby
he Concludes that that wound (touching which the inquiry is made) was in it
self Mortal and deadly. First, from the shortness of the time that the wounded
party lived after his Wound. And then next of all, from the State and Condition
of the wounded person, who always (after his Wound) falls from bad to worse,
until his Death; and those grievous and deadly Symptoms, which either
presently, or on the Critical day, followed upon the wound, and continually
afflicted the sick wounded person. And unto the two former we may not unfitly
add likewise a third; to wit, if nothing has been either committed, or
omitted, that might render the Wound Mortal. For from these we may Collect,
both that the Condition of the Wound was such, that it might bring death unto
the Party; and that the wounded person had such a disposition that was not able
to master the Wound. And these in all the aforesaid particular parts are those
Wounds that are deservedly to be accounted Mortal.

As for the wounds of the rest of the parts, Hippocrates rightly pronounces
them not mortal; and indeed experience teaches us, that sometimes the greatest
and most dangerous wounds have been cured; of which there are diverse Histories
recited by Valleriola, in his fourth Book, Observat. 10. And there are every
where the like extant, in the observat. of Guilhel. Fabricius, and the writings
of other Physicians. But yet notwithstanding it oftentimes so happens that
those very wounds of which some have recovered have proved mortal unto some
others; and that very many also die of most slight and inconsiderable wounds.
And Hippocrates (in 2. Prorrhet.) writes, that a man may chance to die of any
kind of wounds. Of which we meet with examples almost in every Author. Touching
the Child of Philias, Hippocrates (in the seventh Book of his epidem.) writes,
that he died of only the making bare of the forehead bone, a fever supervening
for one day, and a certain wan leaden color contracted in the sad bone. And the
same Hippocrates likewise relates that the Child of one Theodorus, upon the
making bare of a bone, (almost of no moment) died the 23. day after. And that a
certain person, Master of a great ship, having hurt and bruised his forefinger
on the right hand, and his mouth, with an Anchor, (an inflammation and
convulsion supervening) on the thirteenth day following died thereof. And that
Telephanes also the son of Harpalus by his free woman received a blow in the
great toe of one of his feet; upon which an inflammation, and a vehement pain
followed; which remitting, the sick person fell into a convulsion, and died the
third day. And so Pliny writes ( in the seventh Book of his Nature. Hist.
Chapt. 53.) That Aemilius Lepidus, Crushing but his thumb against the bedpost,
breathed his last. And that Caius Aufidius going into the Senate house, only
hurting his foot, died of the same ere he could be carried home to his own
house. Petrus Forestus (in the sixth Book of his Chirurgical observat.
Observat. 50.) reports that a certain Consul ( Alcmarianus by name) washing
his feet as he was wont to do and endeavoring to cut and pare away the thick
Callous skin in the sole of his foot, wounded himself, and that a spasm
following upon it, he died immediately. And oftentimes likewise a Gangreen
follows upon the wounds, and make them deadly, And so Petrus Forestus (in the
sixth Book of his Chirurgic. observations, Obser. 49.) tells us of a certain
person that hurt his Leg by hitting of it against something that was hard, and
that upon this bruise and wound of his Leg a Gangrene soon after following took
his life from him. And Guilhel. Fabricius (in the fifth Cent. of his observat.
Obser. 2.) mentions two examples. One of a certain Labourour, who pricked his
foot with a thorn; and the other of a woman that with a thorn likewise wounded
the very tip of her right forefinger; both which upon the supervening of a
Gangrene died. And Johannes Matthaeus (in his Physic Quaest, quaest. 27.)
writes that at. Freudenberg, a town of the Dominion of Nassaw, receiving but a
slight wound in one of his shoulders, died thereof. And that another in the
County of Oldenburg, being but very slightly wounded with a knife in the
middle of his Thigh, died immediately. And that at Lemgovia a certain Citizens
son, being but slightly hurt in his Arm by the sword of a Student, (Contrary
unto the expectation of all that saw him) died within one hour after. And
Horatius Augenius (in the first Tom^ of his Epist. Book 9. Epist. 2.) relates
very many histories of them that have perished upon slight and inconsiderable
wounds. And examples to confirm this truth we very frequently meet with in the
reading of Authors, and more especially those before mentioned. Now this
happens for diverse Causes, which Hippocrates likewise (in 2. Prorrhet.)
touches upon in these words. Whosoever (says he) would know, concerning
wounds, in what manner they shall end, each of them Particularly; in the first
place he ought ind^ed to make a narrow search and strict inquiry into the
several kinds of men, which of them are better able to bear out a wound, and
which of them are worse able to undergo the same. He ought moreover to know the
several ages in which every particular is difficult to be cured; and to be well
acquainted likewise with the several parts and places in all kind of bodies,
how far forth they differ each from other. He ought also to know even these
other things that happen in each of them, of what nature and quality they are,
and whether they be good, or evil. For if any one shall know and well understand
all these things, he may indeed then likewise know the several events of each
particular wound. But he that shall be ignorant of these things can never know
what shall be the ends and events of Wounds. I shall reckon them up in this
order following.

VVounds Curable from what causes they are made Mortal.
For First of all, if the Sword, dart, (or whatsoever it be that inflicteth the
Wound) be poisoned, a Wound then that seems but slight in it self may yet
bring death.

Secondly, The Idaea of Men (as Hippocrates speaks) ought heedfully to be
attended; for such as are of a Robust strong body, and sound, these likewise
bear and undergo the most grievous Wounds; and they are oftentimes cured of
them without any great a do: and although that many times very grievous
Symptoms may supervene, insomuch that you would judge them even ready to die;
yet notwithstanding beyond all hope and expectation they escape, and recover
again. And hitherto apperteineth the vicious disposition of the body, and the
present Cacochymy. For if any Wound shall befall unto Such a like Body, Nature
being irritated and stirred up is wont to thrust forth those vicious humors
unto the Wound; whereupon other diseases and symptoms happening, that wound
which in a sound and pure body was Curable, here becomes Mortal; concerning
which Galen thus speaks ( in his sixth Book of the Places affected, Chapt.
2.) suppose, says he that one came unto us that had only his skin pricked with
a Needle; this Man (if he be one whose wounds are wont to be easily healed)
although without any medicament administered, with his Member naked and bare,
you send him to his accustomed labor and employment, will yet take no hurt,
nor feel no evil: whereas those whose Wounds are not cured without much
difficulty, and that are either Pl^thorical, or oppressed with vicious Juyces;
these in the first place feel indeed a certain pain in the Wound; and afterward
a part thereof will infested both with a beating pulse, as also with a
Phlegmone: and it is found, that of such like small and slight wounds
oftentimes Convulsions, inflammations, a Gangrene, yea death it self has
followed.

Thirdly, The Age is well to be considered; in regard of which also there may be
a very various Event of Wounds. For those Wounds that are grievous and
difficult, yea Mortal, in an old man or a Child, these in a man that is young
and strong, are not mortal yea are sometimes accounted very slight and
inconsiderable.

Fourthly, A Wound that otherwise is curable may yet become Mortal, by reason
that either the Surgeon is wanting; or if he come he chance to prove either
negligent, or unskilful: and so by reason of the hemorrhage (in the want of a
Surgeon) whose part it was to stanch and stop it by ligatures, and
otherwise, a man may often run a great hazard of his life, although the wound
were not otherwise Mortal. And so, if the Wounds of the brain, of the Nerves,
of the Joints, be unskilfully and negligently handled, (an inflammation,
Convulsion, Gangrene, and the like evils befalling the Party) the man may
miscarry and perish, notwithstanding that the Wound (had it been rightly
handled) were in it self Curable.

Fifthly, Sometimes there happen grievous symptoms so suddenly that although
both the Physician and the Surgeon bestir themselves with all possible
diligence, before these can be calmed and quieted, other diseases and symptoms
happen, by which the man is quite destroyed. And therefore oftentimes the very
pain in the part wounded (it being of a very exquisite sense) causes an afflux
of humors, the afflux of humors an inflammation, the inflammation a Fever, a
Gangrene, and then death. And this indeed happens the more easily, if the
wound be in a part that is in it self indeed ignoble, but yet such as can very
easily draw a part that is Noble into a consent with it.

Sixthly, Both the Constitution of the Air, and the propriety of the place,
have here a peculiar power. So the Wounds in the Head that in many (yea the
most) places are not Mortal, in other places are Mortal; which yet nevertheless
some there are that reckon them up otherwise. Vidus Vidius (in his sixth Book
of the Cure of diseases Chap. 10. Page 249.) writes, that at Florence the
Wounds of the head are Mortal to most men; and he ascribes the cause unto the
cold thin Air; but that at Pisa and Lions very few die of them, in regard the
Air is there thicker and warmer. Amatus Lusitanus (in his sixth Cent. Curat.
100.) Writes that at Florence and Bononia the Wounds of the head are extremely
dangerous, but not so at Ragusum. And Ambrosius Paraeus testifies, that wounds
of the head are far more difficult to cure at Paris, then they are at Avignion.

Seventhly, An ill course of Diet may render those wounds deadly that in
themselves are not very dangerous: to wit, if the wounded party either eat
meats of an ill Juice, be much moved with anger, terrified with fear, Laugh
immoderately, and use venery. Examples of this truth, as we meet with them in
others, so especially Guilhem. Fabricius (in the first Cent. of his observat,
Obser. 22. and in his 5 Cent. Observe. 75. and in the 1 Cent. of his Epist. n.
1.) recites certain of them; as they are there to be seen.

And unto this kind of cause, and in special to a sudden fear and affrightment,
or vehement wrath, those wounds are to be referred, that being in themselves
but slight and scarcely considerable, yet notwithstanding many have been known
to die of them within the space of a very few hours. For although that the
Nerves being pricked and a Convulsion excited, a man may suddenly die; yet
nevertheless, in regard that in these there is happening neither any
Convulsion, nor yet any other such like grievous symptom appearing; it is
therefore credible, that they died by reason of the vehemence of the Passions
of Wrath and fear; in regard that these Affects of the Mind have in them a
very great power of affecting the Body. Of which thing we have every where
examples extant. Suidas writes, that a certain person naturally timorous and
fearful, hearing but the bare report of Hercules his coming hid himself for
fear in a private place; from whence now and then looking forth, and it length
seeing Hercules by chance passing by, he fell down dead with fear. And so Julia
the Wife of Pompey died suddenly, upon the sight only of her husbands Garment
spotted with blood. And as Plutarch testifies, Lentulus also hearing
unexpectedly of the death of Pompey fell down dead suddenly. And some there are
that upon the fight of their own blood in venesection, or when they have
received any Wound have presently swounded and sunk away. And Manlius (in his
Common places, Sub. 5. Praecept.) relates this history. A Fool or Natural
(says he) for some fault by him committed was brought forth unto a pretended
and feigned, but not really intended punishment; as if he should have been
beheaded. The Headsman comes, and shows him the sword indeed, thereby only to
terrify and scare him, and withal lightly strikes him on the neck with a
little wand, and thereby makes the Man (fearful and faint-hearted fool as he
was) to fall down dead, to the admiration and astonishment of all the Beholders.
And Johannes Matthaeus, (in his Physical Quest. Quest. 27.) tells us this
story. When (says he) in the Court of the most illustrious Prince Ernestus
Fredericus Marquess of Bada, his Highnesses Chief Gentleman of his Chamber
Johan. Beckber a Plethorick young man, was but lightly touched in his lower
eyelid with a blunt-pointed sword (such as they were wont altogether to
exercise themselves with in their fencing schools) from the hand of a young
beardless youth, possessed with rage and indignation, and taking it most
heynously thus to be foyld by a boy, and his own scholar, fell suddenly into a
most grievous Epileptick Convulsion, which in the space of ^our or five hours
ended his life. And I my self also remember a certain Student (stout hearted
enough otherwise) Who being by a Surgeon to be let blood (in my presence,
and at my command) as the Surgeon was about according to the custom to bind his
Arm, and began but to move his Instrument toward the vein, he fainted away, and
fell from the seat wherein he was sitting, before ever the Lancet was put near
unto his Arm, whenas Nevertheless he had neither fever, nor any other Disease
that might any ways cause and occasion this swounding of his.

Eighthly, and Lastly, an Inflammation following upon a Wound may render that
Wound Mortal, if it be internal. For indeed an Inflammation does not
necessarily accompany Wounds: yet notwithstanding because that in internal
Wounds those Medicaments cannot possibly be administered that were wont to be
applied in external, if any internal part (especially if it be more Nervous,
and of an exquisite sense) shall chance to be wounded, then a pain is excited,
and thereupon an afflux of Humors, and from thence an Inflammation, a fever, a
Gangrene, and other Evils do arise, that destroy the Wounded person within a
very few days. And from hence it is, that the Vulgar do likewise in Wounds
observe the seventh and the nineth day; because that within these days those
Symptoms are wont to supervene, and in these days to bring the greatest danger
unto the sick Party.

Some there are that add yet another Cause, to wit, the influence of the Stars.
And so Franciscus Vallesius (in his Comment* upon the 95. Text. B. 4. of
Hippocr. his Epidem.) says that the Malignant Aspect of the Stars and
Constellations is the Cause why light and very slight Wounds are oftentimes
likewise rendered Mortal. And the very same Quercetan also tells us (in his
Third Chap. Touching Wounds made by Guns) and that for this very Cause the
Wounds of the Head are for the most part wont to be Mortal, at Ferraria, and
Florence. But this Cause is not to be admitted of; neither can there any Reason
be easily rendered, why at Ferraria the wounds of the Head should be mortal,
and not so in the near neighboring Rhodigium, or Bononia.

And from these Fundamentals no doubt it is that Civilians likewise take upon
them to pronounce what Wounds are of themselves and in their own Nature Mortal,
and what not. Nicolaus Boerius (in the place alleged, N. 18.) propounds six
Conjectures, from which it may be Collected, that the Wound was not Mortal of
it self, but that it was made such by Reason of some accident happening
thereupon. The first is, if the Wounded person died not until a longer time
after then wounded persons are wont precisely to prolong their Lives. The
Second is this, if there were present no dangerous Symptoms in the beginning of
the Wound; or if there were any present, and remained for a while, the sick
person notwithstanding was not much the worse for them, but that he was able to
perform all kind of Actions in such a manner as they are not able to do that
are mortally wounded. For if he shall appear to be in a fair way of Recovery,
and then afterward die, it is to be believed that he died upon some other
Cause, and not from his Wound. All which notwithstanding are to be understood
only of a Wound that is not of it self Mortal. The third Conjecture is, if the
sick person (in the Course of his life) were not so ordered as wounded persons
ought to be; but that he exposed himself unto the cold Air, addicted himself
unto excessive drinking, were often distempered with passions of the mind,
immoderate Anger, frequent affrightments; and overmuch addicted to Venery. The
fourth, if the Physicians were of opinion, and that they adjudged the Wound not
mortal; who as men experienced in their Art ought to be believed. The fifth is,
if the wounded person had no Physician with him; or if any were sent for unto
him, he was one altogether ignorant and unskilful; which is al one as if he had
had none at all. Which yet nevertheless (as has been said) is only to be
understood of a Wound not simply mortal in it self. For if a Wound be in it
self mortal, albeit there were no Physician sent for, yet nevertheless we are
not thence to collect, that the wounded person might have been cured. The sixth
and last Conjecture is, if the wounded person be of a strong Nature. For in
this Case, if due care be taken in the preserving of the said Natural strength
and vigor, the sick person very seldom miscarrieth. But if the Wound being not
mortal, the wounded person die, and that in a short time, we ought to collect
that he died not of his wound, but that he died from some other Cause, as we
said before.

And this is the Judgment of all Physicians in general touching Wounds, both
mortal, and not mortal. But yet there arises another Question among the civil
Lawyers, to wit, whether the person that inflicteth the Wound may be found
guilty, and condemned of Homicide. For these do not only (as Physicians) weigh
and consider the quality and Nature of the wound, but the mind and intention
also of the party wounding, and other Circumstances likewise; touching which we
may see more in the Books of these Civilians.

The Rest of the Prognostics.
Now although that out of what has hitherto been said may easily appear what
is to be foreknown and foretold touching the event of wounds; yet nevertheless
we think it not amiss here to add somewhat more as touching the premises. For
although that other Wounds (besides those we have already spoken of) do not
indeed suddenly destroy and kill the person; yet nevertheless some of them are
far more dangerous then other; and even of these some are more easy, some more
difficult to Cure. And this in the first place is to be learnt from the very
substance of the part* For the fleshy parts of all other are most easily
brought together and sodered again; the rest, as the Veins, Arteries, Nerves,
Tendons, and Membranes, with more difficulty. They may be united, and made to
grow together again, but it will be more slowly. Galen (in his 1. B. of the
Seed, and 13. Chap.) tells us, than himself saw the Veins in the Head (and those
both many of them, and great ones also) grow again; and (in his 5. B. of the
Moth. of Physic Chap. 7.) that he saw an Artery also united. Secondly, from
the Action and Use of the part. For the more Noble the part is in regard of its
more necessary Use, and the Action that it performs for the good of the whole
Body, so much the more dangerous are the Wounds of that part. And those parts
likewise that are in continual motion will not be brought to grow together
again but with much difficulty. And the more exquisite likewise the sense of
the part wounded is, the more easily upon its being Wounded there happens
unto it a pain, an Inflammation, a Deliry, a Convulsion, and other Symptoms.
Thirdly, From the very greatness of the Wound. And Fourthly, From those things
that usually happen and befall the Wound. To wit,

Prognostics.
1. The more Noble the part affected is, or which may likewise draw a more Noble
part into Consent with it, by so much the more dangerous is the Wound.

2. Those Wounds that are in the muscles, far from the Joints, and the Temples,
are more easily Cured then those that are in the Nerves, Tendons, Membranous
parts, and the Joints. For the wounds of the Nerves and of the nervous parts
are for the most part dangerous; in regard that by Reason of the pain, and
inflammations, a Convulsion and other grievous Symptoms do easily happen: and
therefore they require a very expert and diligent Surgeon.

3. All the Wounds of the internal parts are more dangerous then the Wounds of
the external parts.

4. Great Wounds are more dangerous then small ones, all things else being
answerable.

5. Moreover (says Celsus, in his 5. B and 26. Chap.) that which may much
conduce hereunto, is, the Age, and the Body, and the order and Course of life,
and the time of the year: for sooner is Cured a Child, Youth, or young man;
then one that is Ancient, and in years: and one that is of a strong
Constitution is more easily and sooner Cured then he that is of a weak and
infirm Body; and one that is not over fat, nor over lean sooner then if he were
one of these; and he that is of an entire and sound habit, then that man that
has an unsound and Corrupt habit of Body. And sooner likewise is that person
to be Cured that is given to exercise, then the slothful and sluggish person;
the sober and temperate, then one addicted to Wine and Venery.

6. Wounds are more easily Cured in the spring time, then in the Winter, or the
hot Summer.

7. That Wound likewise that has a Contusion Joined with it, is the more
dangerous. And therefore it is of the two better to be wounded with a
sharp-pointed or sharp edged, then with a blunt and dull Weapon.

8. Those Wounds are most safe, and most easy to Cure, that are made in a
straight and direct line; but those with more difficulty, that are oblique; and
those most difficultly of all that are round and orbicular.

9. If a Nerve, or a Vein, or an Artery, shall be wholly Cut, there is less
danger impending, then if it be cut but only in part: always provided, that
they are none of the more notable Veins and Arteries, and Situate in the
deeper parts of the Body. For if a Nerve be wholly cut assunder, there is then
no danger of a Convulsion; which we may well fear is night at hand if the Nerve
be cut but only in part. And so, if a principal Vein and Artery be wholly Cut,
the danger of the Hemorrhage is then wholly taken away, when the Vessel is
Contracted, and drawn together: but if a Vein or an Artery be only wounded, and
not wholly cut assunder, very dangerous Hemorrhages do then oftentimes arise.
And yet nevertheless, if it be one of the most Notable and Observable either of
the Veins or Arteries that is cut assunder, then that part unto which this
befalls is deprived of its wonted Native and necessary heat; and is sometimes
likewise taken with an Atrophy.

10. Those wounds that have passed beyond the last and untmost term of Acute
Diseases, and especially the fourtieth day, are not in themselves Mortal: but
if the sick person die, this may proceed either from all ill disposition of the
Body, or else by Reason of Errors committed in the Diet of the sick person, or
the Physicians Errors in the curing thereof. Yet nevertheless such like wounds
are not Cured without much difficulty; in regard that they indicate, that there
is present some grievous Cause, which hinders the Conglutination of the wound.

11. That wound is always evil, by which there is something cut off, and by
which the flesh that is cut off from one part hangs upon some other.

12. Such as together with their Ulcers are troubled with Conspicuous and
apparent Tumors, these are not subject unto any dangerous Convulsion, or
Madness: but those in whom they presently vanish and disappear, if this indeed
be done in the hinder part, then Convulsions and Cramps follow: but if in the
forepart, then there happens Madness, an Acute pain of the side, Empyema, and
Dysentery; if the Tumors be more red then ordinary, in the 5. of the Aphor.
Aph. 65. And ibid. Aphor. 66. If the Wounds being great, and depraved, there
appear no Tumor, this betokens much evil; which Celsus ( in his 5. B. and 26.
Chap) thus rendereth. But for a Wound overmuch to swel up is somewhat dangerous;
but not at all to swel up is far more dangerous, Yea most of all perilous. The
former is an evidence of a great Inflammation; and the latter a token of a dead
and mortified Body.

13. That an Inflammation should supervene upon a great Wound is no wonder at
all; and therefore it ought not in the least to terrify us, if it do not long
continue. But for an Inflammation to follow upon a small wound, and for it long
Continue, this indeed is very dangerous, being such as is wont to excite
Convulsion, and Deliries, or Dotings.

14. When the fifth day is now come, how great the Inflammation it like to be,
it will then show it self. On which said day the Wound being again uncovered,
the color thereof ought well to be considered. Which if it be Pale and Wan,
Leaden-colored, of a various color, or black, we are then to know for a truth,
that this wound is evil and dangerous; and this whenever we well consider it,
cannot much terrify and affrighten us; Cornel. Cellus Lib. 5. Chap. 26.

15. A Convulsion in a Wound is very pernicious; Hippocrat. Sect. 5. Aphorism.
2.

16. A Vomiting also of Choler that is neither voluntary, nor yet accustomed
unto, even presently so soon as ever a man is wounded, or while the
Inflammation remains, this is an ill sign; because it betokens that the
Nervous parts are wounded.

17. If the wound in the Arm, Hand, or other part, be so great, that by Reason
of the Veins and Arteries cut assunder it can no longer possibly receive any
influx from the Liver and the heart, the extreme part then dies; and therefore
lest that the Gangrene should be communicated unto the sound part it is
maturely even with all speed to be cut off.

18. Those wounds that happen unto Cathectical and Hydropical persons are very
hardly Cured; because that (as Hippocrates speaks of Ulcers) Whatsoever is dry
comes nearer unto that that is sound; and whatsoever is moist approaches very
near unto that that is vitiated.

19. The greater the Wound is, the more time (all things else being answerable
is required for the curing thereof; and the l^ss it is, the less time it
requires for its Cure; so that some wounds indeed are cured in twenty four
hours time, but others require the space of many days for their perfect Cure.

20. That wound that is not purged and cleansed but with much difficulty is
likewise hard to Cure, and flow in the Curing; in regard that that which is an
impediment unto the Curing thereof is not taken away without much difficulty.

21. A wound in that part that is apt and ready to receive the influx of the
Humors is very hardly Cured.

22. All wounds that have any other affects complicated and in^erwoven with
them, are the more difficultly cured. For the more the Affects are, the more
Nature is hurt; and it is easier for her to take away and correct one only
affect, then many; and in very deed the more the affect that is conjoined does
hurt the temperament of the part, so much the more difficult will the wound be
to Cure

23. All things extraneous, and that coming from without stick in the wound, if
at the very first they cannot be drawn forth, they much retard the Cure.

24. Wounds have likewise their Critical days; touching which Hyppocrat. (in
Coacis Praenat.) faith; That for a seave (in the wounds of the Head) to begin
the fourth day, or the seventh, or the eleventh, is very fatal and dangerous:
but that for the most part it is to be Fudged of if it begin on the, fourth day
of the wound, and so continue unto the eleventh; or that it begin on the
seventh day, and continue unto the fourteenth or seventeenth; or if it begin on
the eleventh, and continue unto the twentieth. And in his B. of the Wounds of
the Head, he' faith, that when any Error is committed in the Cure of a wound,
that then for the most part (if it be in the winter)a Fever comes upon it
before the fourteenth day, but if it be in the Summer, after the seventh day;
and there he also asserteth, that some perish either (in the Summer time)
before the seventh or (in the winter) before the fourteenth. And in his 4, B.
de Popular. he there relareth, that unto the Son of Metrophantus being wounded
in his Head there happened unto him a Fever on the twelfth day, and that he
died about the twenty fourth day; And in ' the, popular. he reports that
Antonoius of a Wound in his head died the sixteenth day; and a servant Maid in
Omylum on the fourteenth day, unto whom a Fever had befaln on the eighth day:
and that the Daughter of Nereus by a friend of hers being in sport and
merriment struck on the forepart of her Head, at that very time affected with
the Vertigo, presently became breathless; and as soon as she was come home she
was forthwith taken with a vehement Fever, and with a pain in her head, and a
redness about her face; and that she died on the nineth day, when on the
seventh day about her right ear there proceeded forth a great quantity (more
then a Porringer full) of filthy stinking Pus or Mattier, being somewhat red, but
very offensive. And that the Son of Phile after a wound in his head had a
Fever surprising him on the ninth day, and upon this he soon after dyed. And
that Aristippus rece^ving a violent and grievous blow (by the stroke of an
Arrow) upon the upper part of his Belly, died in seven days after. And all
along in Hippocrates we shall find, that he also in wounds did observe the
Critical days. The truth is that wounds (as wounds) have no Critical days;
since that a wound is a Disease without matter. But as there may happen unto it
some certain matter (that ought to be Concocted) or some kind of disturbance of
the Humors upon occasion of the wound, in this regard it may likewise have some
Crisis. For even Nature her self, upon some certain fixed and set days, both
concocteth that that ought to be concocted, and calmeth the disturbance of the
Humors. And therefore, whenever on the Critical days there is no change nor
alteration for the worse, but that all things proceed in a right manner, and
that the Symptoms which before were present are now quieted and Calmed, it then
affords great hopes of a happy Cure to ensue. But if (on the Contrary) in these
days there supervene any evil, as pain, Inflammation, or Fever; or if those
Symptoms that were before present are not lessened, but are rather become more
intense and greater then before, it then betokens either Death, or a very
difficult Cure. And it is altogether a very rare thing, that any such kind of
motion in wounds ever bode any good unto the party; since that it declares
that Nature is not able to quiet and Calm that Motion of the Humors that
happens in a wound; but that being stird up and set on work she endeavors
the expulsion of these Humors either unto the wounded part, or some other
principal part. And therefore, when any such motion as this is taken notice of
in a wound, rather much evil then any good at all is from thence to be
presaged. And therefore it will be to very good purpose to observe those
Critical days in wounds; that so by them we may come to know the useful
actions of Nature, and that so we may not hinder them. We are likewise on these
days to abstain from all those things that may excite any motion of the Humors
on the said Critical days.

Chap. 4. Of the Cure of Wounds, and first of all, touching the Indications.
The first and Common indication of the solution of unity is the uniting
thereof; or, unity dissolved shows, that the parts that are separated and
disjoined should again be united and brought together, so far forth indeed as
the wound is a simple affect. But if there be conjoined other Affects, whether
they be causes, or diseases, or symptoms, there are then so many indications
given us as those several things are that are conjoined with the Wound, and so
constitute a compound Affect; and these may be very many For sometimes the
weapon or some other body sticks in the Wound; which because that it is
extraneous it has the nature of a cause; and (as those things that are from
internal causes, and in their whole kind preternatural) indicateth its removal.

If there be any of the substance of the flesh lost, there is then a double
indication given; to wit, that which is divided is again to be united; and that
which is wanting, again to be renewed. If the flesh and the skin be bruised,
that that is bruised is to be converted into Pus, that so it may separate and
fall off. And so likewise of al other affects that are conjoined with the
Wound, the case is one and the same.

Now we will first of all treat of a simple Wound, and the solution of
continuity that is caused by a weapon; upon which there has as yet followed no
other evil: but yet because that sometimes the Weapon, or some other strange
body inflicted with the wound sticks therein, we will therefore together and
at once treat of the removal of them.

But now, (as we said before) the common indication of a simple wound is union,
as Galen teaches us in his Art. Medic. Chap. 90. And (as the same Galen has
it in his third Book of the Meth. of Physic, Chapt. 4^) a simple Wound only
requires agglutination. Now this Agglutination and union is the work of Nature
alone; and by her operation only the wounded parts, as likewise those parts
that are broken Hand disjoined, do again grow together, and are conglutinated.
But then since that there is required for this purpose a certain medium, and a
glue as it were; nature for this purpose makes use of that very matter by
which the parts are nourished, to wit, the blood. For this blood being
attracted unto the part for nutrition, and sticking in the pores of the sides
and the lips of the wound, is converted into a substance like unto the wounded
part, to wit, flesh; and so by the benefit thereof, what was disjoined now
grows together again, and so of two becomes one. And this in the flesh the
Sarcopoietick faculty performs; in the skin, the cutifique or skin-breeding
faculty: and so in every part, Nature generateth a Medium of the same kind, for
the Agglutinating of that which was disjoined. And this inded albeit that it be
solely Natures work; yet the Physician in the furtherance of this work is a
Servant unto Nature; and the truth is, that unless the Physician strike in for
Natures assistance, she is in many things frustrated of her end; neither can
she effect the intended Conglutination.

But now those things that in this case are to be done by the Physician, are
reduced by Galen (in Art. Medic. Chapter 90) unto four heads. Nature her self
(says he) causes to unite and grow together again those things that stood at
distance one from the other, and she it is that restores the pristine Unity:
but now it is our part and work actually to apply and put together the extremes
of the distant parts, and being thus brought together into one, so to keep and
preserve them; and thirdly to beware of this, that nothing fall into the Lips
of the wound; and fourthly, our work it is to preserve safe and unhurt the
substance it self of the part. And so in the Cure of Wounds, there are
especially four offices belonging to the Physician specified by Galen in the
place alleged. First of all, the Physician is to see and take care, that
nothing fall into the part affected, which may hinder the Conglutination.
Secondly, That the Extremes in Unity dissolved may again be rightly conjoined,
and put together in a due and fit manner the one to the other; and the extremes
thus Joined together are so to be kept, until Nature has done her work.
Thirdly, That so the temperament and the innate heat of the part it self may
the better be preserved, he is during the time of Agglutination to afford unto
Nature all the necessary help and assistance that he can by the best of his
skill and diligence. Unto which We may not unfitly add a fourth, to wit, that
those Symptoms which may, and are wont to supervene, may be prevented and
corrected, and all those things taken away which may be any the least
impediment to Nature in the Conglutinating of the Wound.

But now in regard that there may be a very great difference in the solution of
Unity, these Scopes are not always to be performed alike in one and the same
manner in all parts. And first of all, for what concerns the wounds we are
now treating of, if there be any thing extraneous (as Clods of Blood, or
Hairs, or any thing of the Nature of any sort of Weapons, or small pieces of
bones, or any thing else whatsoever from without) shall chance to stick in the
Wound, that is to be taken forth, and extracted. For they cannot possibly
become one, between which something lies that is of a different kind. And
indeed we are not only to draw forth of the wound (at the very first) all
things that are extraneous, but we must likewise afterward take great Care,
lest that any thing from without fall into the wound*

When once all extraneous things (if any such there were) are drawn forth, the
lips of the Wound are then to be brought together, and Joined close the one to
the other; the which how it ought to be performed, we shall by and by show you.

The parts that stood at distance being thus Conjoined, all the rest of the
work (to wit, that they may be united, and grow together in one,) is the work
of Nature alone. For it is she only that Conglutinateth these parts when they
are disjoined. But seeing that Nature in this Agglutination makes use both of
the temper of the part, and the innate heat thereof; we must therefore do our
endeavor that the temper and innate heat of the part may be preserved, or if
it has been by any means weakened, that it may be again restored. And seeing
likewise that the matter of the flesh (by which the parts are Conjoined) is the
Blood; we must therefore take especial care, and use the very utmost of our
endeavors, that the Blood that flows unto the part affected may not offend
either in quantity, or quality. For if the Blood be vicious, it cannot generate
good flesh. And again, if there be too great abundance thereof, the flesh then
becomes over Luxuriant and proud; and there are many Excrements generated: if
there be less thereof then is requisite, it does not then generate and make a
supply of sufficient matter. And whereas the wounded part is made much the
weaker both by the pain, and by the wound; therefore in the wounded part of
necessity there must be produced store of Excrements, and corrupt filthy
mattier: and if the Sanies and Excrements intervene in the midst of the Lips
when they are drawn together; or if that also there shall be any middle place
between, which though it be indeed void of filth and Excrements, yet is full of
Air, such a like Ulcer (I say) cannot possibly be Conglutinated by the sole
Conjunction of the disjoined and distant parts; but that it may unite and grow
together again, there is a necessity that it be first filled up with flesh. And
therefore in such like case as this there will be need of a sarcotick
Medicament. And so, in the performing of the cure of Wounds, our first office
and work is,

1. To endeavor, that nothing extraneous and coming from without may stick in
the wound, and betwixt the Lips thereof; and that nothing be left remaining
therein.

2. That the Gaping parts of the wound may be again conjoined.

3. That being conjoined they may be so kept.

4. That they sodder and grow together again, each to other.

5. The performing of which seeing that it is the work of nature, it is
especially requisite, that the temper and strength of the wounded part be by
all manner of means preserved.

6. That all the symptoms, and whatsoever may possibly hinder the uniting and
Coalition of the part, may be taken away, and removed. And thus, although that
a wound, only considered as a wound, is one simple Affect, and seems to
indicate and require one only uniting; yet nevertheless, the very truth is,
that there are herein couched very many indications, as before we told you.

Chap. 5. Of things extraneous, and from without, that are to be taken forth of
the VVound.
IN the first place therefore we must use our endeavor, that there may be
nothing extraneous in the wound that may hinder the union and glutination
thereof. And therefore first of all, the blood is not instantly to be
suppressed; and we must permit whatsoever we find sticking in the lesser veins
cut assunder freely to flow forth. For so by this means there will both a less
quantity of Pus be generated, and all the danger of putrefaction and
inflammation be prevented. Which is likewise very well known by him who out of
simple wounds is wont either to extract the blood, by sucking it forth with his
mouth, or to squeez it out by the compression of the wounded part with his
finger. Moreover, when there are any hayres near about the wound they are to be
shaven away, lest that they fall within the lips of the wound. Thirdly, if sand
or earth, or any such like thing stick within the lips of the wound, it is to
be cleansed away with wine. Fourthly, if there shall be any Clods of blood in
the wound (seeing that they may hinder the uniting, excite pain, and putrefying
may cause a fever) they are therefore to be wiped away with a piece of a soft
Linen Cloth, or a lock of wool; or if need require, they may likewise and must
be taken forth with an iron instrument. In which action notwithstanding we must
use no manner of violence at the first setting upon the cure; neither is all
the Clotted blood at once to be taken forth, and especially if a Hemorrhage be
feared; since that the clods of blood may stop the orifices of the veins, and
the vessels may grow together under them: but this is to be deferred until the
second or third dressing; when we have afterward nature her self (which
begins to expel whatsoever is extraneous) helping and assisting. Fifthly,
the little broken bones likewise (if any such be in the Wound) are to be taken
forth. In the first dressing nevertheless only those things are to be taken
forth that are altogether free and loose, so that they may be taken out of the
Wound without offering any violence thereunto: but as for such small pieces as
yet stick fast unto other bones, in these Natures endeavor is to be expected,
and so it will soon be seen whether she intend to unite these fragments that are
broken with the rest of the bone, or else whether she purpose to make a
separation. Sixthly, if Glass be broken in the wound, it is to be taken forth;
and this is also to be done, if any other kind of Weapon, or Arms wherewith the
wound is inflicted, stick in the Wound. But before we assay the extraction of
the said weapons we are to look and consider, whether or no the wounded person
be likely to live after the drawing forth of those things aforesaid. For if
there be no hopes of life remaining, there is no such taking forth of any thing
to be attempted, no not of the weapon it self; lest that the Surgeon should
be thought to have hastened on the parties death and lest the wounded person
dye under the very hands of the Surgeon; which happens sometimes in the
wounds of the Heart, of the Brain, (the basis thereof especially) the Vena Cava
(or great hollow vein) or the great Artery. For it has been observed, that
such wounded persons though the weapon has been left in the wound, have yet
lived for the space of a whole day; but that upon the drawing forth of the
weapon (by reason of the Hemorrhage following thereupon) they have instantly
died. But where there is any hope that the sick person may be recovered of his
wound, we ought then to labor that first of all the weapon be drawn forth. For
the weapons, as likewise leaden bullets, although they may sometimes stick very
long in the body: yet notwithstanding it is a very rare thing, that a wound
should be perfectly cured, the weapon still secretly abiding in the body.

But now to draw forth the weapons aright is a thing of much difficulty; The
drawing forth of the Weapons
and this difficulty arises especially from the place into which these weapons
being thrust into the body have penetrated. And therefore for him that will
attempt rightly to draw out the weapons forth of the body, there are two things
mainly necessary; First, well to consider and mind the substance and nature, the
figure, situation, and connection of each several part of the body: and then
Secondly, to know the diversity of the weapons, from their matter, magnitude,
and figure: and it is likewise altogether necessary (in the drawing out of the
Weapons) to be cautious, that the veins, Arteries, Nerves and tendons be not
torn or violated. For (as Ambrose Parry says truly) it would be a thing very
shameful, and much unbecoming an Artist, that the hand of the Surgeon should
do more hurt then the iron weapon. But that the weapons may the more fitly and
expeditely be drawn forth, let the wounded person be set in such a posture and
figure as he was in when he received his wound. Which if it cannot altogether
be done, yet lying along let him so be placed, that he may come as near as is
possible unto that figure.

Now the Weapons are taken forth in a twofold manner, How many ways the Weapons
may be drawn forth.
either by extraction, or impulsion; that is to say, either the same way that
the weapon went in, or else that way that it tends. It is extracted the same
way that it was thrust in, either without making any section, or else by a
section made in the part. For if the weapon has not pierced very deep, if it
has not passed through the great vessels and Nervous places; and if that
either right opposite unto it, or the way that it tends, it has bones,
veins, arteries, or nerves; and lastly, if there be no great fear of any danger
to follow upon a wide opening of the part; then in this case, it may be drawn
back the same way by which it pierced into the body, and that without any
section at all.

But if there be any danger, and cause to fear lest that the body may be torn,
if the weapon be drawn back the same way by the which it entered in; the wound
is then to be dilated, either by section, or else even without it; to wit, with
that instrument which Celsus (in his fifth Book, and Chap. 7.) calls
Ypsiloeides, or else with a Swans bill, or Storks bill, or some other dilating
instruments, to the end that the weapon may be drawnforth the more easily. But
then, the weapon is to be drawn forth either with the Hands, (if that may
conveniently be done; as when it stands out, and is fastened in the flesh
alone:) or else with that instrument they call Volsella, when it sticks deeper
then that we may well lay Hands upon it; or with those other instruments that
the Greeks call Beloulca; of which sort are the long Cisers that are full of
Teeth, straight, or a little Crooked, broad in their extreme part, and likewise
round; unto which the Surgeons of latter times have given diverse names from
their several Figures; and they call them Crows Bills, Storks Bills, Ducks
Bills, and Goose Bills; several Figures whereof we find extant in Ambrose Parry
his tenth B. and 18. Chap. and likewise in Johan-Andreas a Cruce.

But if the weapons point has penetrated further then unto the middle part of
the Member; and that the space and distance by which the weapon is to be drawn
back be greater then that which yet remains to be passed through, and that
neither Bone, nor Nerve, nor Vein, nor Artery any way hinder it; it will then
be more commodious (a Section being made) to drive the weapon forward by that
part toward which it tends, and so to draw it forth by a wound new made. For
in this manner it will be drawn out more easily, and the wound will the sooner
be cured, in regard that now the Medicaments may on both sides be applied. But
yet nevertheless if the Weapon be too broad, it will not then be expedient to
drawn it forth through the other part, lest that we add unto the great Wound it
self another likewise as great. And if also the Weapon be thrust in between two
bones, the Members lying next unto them are to be widened (according to the
usual manner) and drawn several ways, that so the space betwixt the bones may
be the looser and wider, for the pulling forth of the Weapon thrust in between
them.

But if some small piece of a Bone, or a Thorn, or Splinter, or any such like,
stick in the Wound (that can neither be drawn forth with the hands, nor any
instrument,) it is then to be extracted by those Medicaments that have in them
a power and virture to draw forth. And for this purpose there are commended (by
Dioscorides, What Medicaments they are that draw forth those things that stick
in a Wound.
in his 2 B. and 58. Chap.) those things that follow; to wit, the Heads of
Lizards, bruised small, and imposed thereon; Water Pimpernel or Brook-Lime,
Dittany of Crete, the Roots of round Aristolochy or Birth-wort, Anemony or
Wind-flower, the Root of Narcissus, of Gladiol or Cornflagge, and of the Reed,
Sagapenum, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Pitch, Pine-rosin, and the like, administered
in the form of an Emplaster.

There is also commended the Emplaster of Avicen, that is Compounded of Leaven,
Honey, or the Propolis (as they call it) of Beehives, of each half a pound;
Bird-Lime three ounces; Ammoniacum two ounces; the oldest Oil three ounces.

And so is likewise the Unguent of Betony, and the fat of an Hare. Or,

Take New Wax, one pound; Colophony, and yellow Rosin, of each four ounces;
Ammoniacum, two ounces; Bdellium, one ounce; the Juice of Citrons, three
ounces; the Oil of Yelks of Eggs, four ounces; of the Lodestone, five ounces:
And make an Emplaster according to Art. Or,

Take Virgins Wax four ounces; Turpentine two ounces; the Loud-stone one ounce
and half, Hulled Beans, one ounce; Hearts Fat, half an ounce; And make an
Emplaster according to Art. Or,

Take Rosin of the Pine Tree, two ounces; dry Pitch, one ounce; Ammoniacum,
Sagapenum, Gum Elemi, of each half an ounce, R^ot of round Aristolochy, and of
white Dittany, of each one dram and half; Cretan Dittany three drams; old Oil,
or the Feces of the Oil of white Lillies as much as will suffice. And make a
Cerot. Or,

Take Oil of Olives one pound and half; new Wax, one pound; let them melt
together; and then add Litharge of Gold one pound and half: then boil them,
after this adding and mingling therewith, of Galbanum and Opopanax, of each one
ounce; Ammoniacum and Bdellium, of each two ounces: Let these Gums be dissolved
in Vinegar, and then add of the Root of round Aristolochy, Mastick, Mirrh,
Frankincense, and Lapis Calaminaris, of each two ounces; and in the Conclusion
boil them all together with a soft and gentle fire, adding thereunto in the
latter end of the boiling, Oil of Baies, and Oil of Turpentine, of each four
ounces; and stir them well together during the boiling: then pass them through a
Linen Cloth into cold water; and then softening all with the Oil of Camomile
or Turpentine, Make an Emplaster. Or,

Take Narcissus Onyons, two of them, Reed Root one ounce, Gladiol Root half an
ounce, Mullein leaves one handful; rotten Doves dung, one ounce; wild Cucumber
Root, and the Root of Round Aristolochy and of white Dittany Root, of each
three drams; Cretan Dittany half an ounce, the meal of the bitter vetch Orobus,
a little quantity thereof, Honey as much as will serve the turn. And make an
Emplaster. Or,

Take Wax, and Turpentine, of each six ounces, Colophony, Ship-Pitch, of each
one ounce; Ceruss, Roman vitriol, of each four ounces, Lap. Haematites, or the
Boodstone, and the Lodestone, of each two drams, Mastick, half an ounce;
Frankincense, Camphire, Mummy, Dragons Blood, of each one ounce; Oil of Juniper
one ounce and half; Oil of Eggs six drams, Oil of Cloves two drams; of Saint
John's Wort, half an ounce; of Earthworms an ounce; And make an Emplaster.

Touching the drawing forth of the Weapons out of Wounds you may see more in
Cells. his 7. B. Chapter 5. and in Paulus Aegineta his 6. B. and 38. Chap.

But if by no artificial means the Weapon (or whatsoever else it be of any
thing Extraneous) cannot be drawn forth of the Wound, the whole business is
then to be committed unto Nature; which oftentimes in this kind works
wonders, as it were; and expels those preternatural things that are thrust
into the Body, by any ways whatsoever where there is any possibility: of the
truth whereof we every where meet with Histories to confirm it. Hippocrates (as
he tells us, 5. Epidem.) in one that had an arrow shot within his Groins, took
forth the Head thereof six years after. And Guilhelm. Fabricius for one that
had a knife run into the Spina Dorsi or Backbone, drew it forth two years
after; as he tells us, in his first Cent. Observat. 62. The like whereunto
(and a thing very Memorable) happened here at Witteberg. For a certain Student
being wounded with a knife even to the Root of his Nose, and the internal Angle
of his right Eye, half of the knife being by violence broken (almost as long as
ones Finger) stuck there firmly fixed in the bone: which when neither the
Physician nor Surgeon took any Notice of, neither he that had given the
wound would be known of any such thing as the breaking of the Knife, the wound
was speedily consolidated. It happened notwithstanding, that after a quarter of
a year, the sick person felt a certain pain in the upper part of his Palate,
before the Columella; and afterward there was an Ulcer opened: and yet
nevertheless, neither the sick person himself, nor the Surgeon thought any
thing of the Knife that lay hid within, but happily they thought that this Ulcer
that was opened had its original from the rottenness of the bone wounded. Yet a
little after it so happened, that behind the Columella there stuck forth some
thing of a black color, which they thought to be a s^iver of the rotten bone.
But the sick person coming to me for advice, I commanded the Surgeon that
with his instrument he should search, to find what it was; who immediately
discovered that it was Iron; and so we found that it was the point of the knife
that stuck forth. And without question the edge of the Knife by its motion had
opened that aforesaid Ulcer before the Columella. But yet nevertheless,
although the Surgeon attempted the drawing of it forth, (the broader part of
the Knife still sticking fast in the bones) the Knife do what he could was not
by any means to be drawn forth; but that when al was done the whole business
must be committed unto Nature; by whose assistance it happened, that the Knife
hung forth every day more then other. At length, when the point of the Knife
stuck forth in the Jaws almost the length of a Fingers Joint, and that the sick
person manifestly perceived some sensible motion thereof, (which before he had
not done, in regard that by degrees and insensibly it daily conveyed it self
downward, which he took no notice of;) he then conceived himself to be in
extreme Peril, fearing that the Knife by reason of the sharpness of its point
should makes its way into the Bowels; and therefore with the Surgeon comes
running unto me, to ask my advice. But then suddenly the broken piece of Knife
being freed and set at liberty by its own motion, and falling more and more
downward, the point thereof was laid hold on by the Surgeon, and so brought
forth; and very little it wanted from falling into the Throat. And whereas (the
bone being eaten through) a hole was left in the upper part of the Palate,
which was a very great impediment unto him in his speech, (besides fit and
convenient Medicaments, to cleanse, and dry much) at length I ordered him a
thin plate of Gold, in the form of a shield, which in the back thereof had
something sticking forth, and round as a Globe; this I caused to be provided for
him, and then I ordered a little Sponge to be bound unto it; which said plate
by the Sponge being put upon the hole, and there sticking, and shutting the
hole, he spoke distinctly enough to be understood. Yet notwithstanding the
flesh began afterward to grow and increase in the Lips of the Wound, (although
but very slowly) and the hole became somewhat narrower. After I had furnished
him with this plate, he departed hence: yet nevertheless the hole for the
greatest part was filled up with flesh; and it was told me that he was now
turned preacher, and that he could deliver himself very distinctly without that
Golden Plate. And in Guilhelm. Fabricius his 2 Cent. Obser. 74. Claudius
Deodatus relates the History of a wound, which by a sharp Sword was inflicted
upon the Pylorus, or at the top and entrance of the small Guts (as all the
Surgeons present thought, indeed; but yet notwithstanding Gilhelm. Fabricius
denies it, supposing the Gut Colon to be wounded, which on the left side is
annexed unto the Reins) and that it was miraculously Cured. But when after this
(the Wound being covered all over with a Cicatrice) the sick person felt near
about the part affected a sharp pricking pain, and a swelling withal, it so
happened, that when about the end of the year he had dispatched his affairs,
and was returning homewards, in the midst of his Journey he was constrained to
ease and empty his Belly, and then together with his Excrements he voided forth
by the Belly the very point of the Sword that was thrust into him. But seeing
that now adays wounds are more seldom inflicted by Arrows (then in former
times) therefore also in our days the Chirurgical Extraction of Arrows is very
rarely required: but whereas now adays most Wounds are made with bullets from
Guns, there is therefore a greater necessity incumbent upon the Surgeons of
our times, that they extract and draw forth those Leaden Bullets that from Guns
are shot and sent into the Body; touching which I shall speak further anon.

Chap. 6. Of the Provision that is necessarily to be made for the binding up of
VVounds.
IF in the Wound there be nothing sticking that is extraneous and of a
different Nature from the part affected; or if there having been something
sticking therein it be drawn forth, we ought then to endeavor that the lips of
the wound may be joined together. But now seeing that for the right performing
of this, there is a certain provision and preparation to be made, as necessary
thereunto (although notwithstanding for the most part the same provision is
required likewise in the Curing of Fractures) therefore in the first place we
shall repeat something in the general out of our Institutions touching the
dressing and binding up of Wounds; and we shall afterward treat thereof more
particularly.

Unto the binding up of Wounds there belong swathing, the injection of the
Splenia (we shall show you anon what these Splenia are) the fitting of the
Splints, Illaqueation, or casting about of a binder, and the right placing of
the part when it is bound up.

Of Swathing.
A swathe what it is.
Now a Swathe is a binder that is both long and broad; and a due and fit
swathing is a drawing about, and rolling together of the Swathe-bands about the
Member that is to be cured.

Now touching Swath-bands, Galen (in his B. of Swaths) has written sufficient,
and indeed somewhat largely, and therefore for our better knowledge in this
Particular, we are to acquaint our selves thoroughly with what he has written.
But that we may briefly speak something according to our purpose, (and as before
we promised you;) Swath-bands may be made of Linen Clothes first put unto other
uses and somewhat worn, that thereby they may be made more soft and pliable; but
yet they must be so strong that they may not be broken. For although the matter
of Swath-bands may be threefold, Linen, Woollen, or Skins, yet now adays we
seldom use any other but Linen only. But then these Linen Cloths must be Clean,
Smooth, Soft; which have neither any Seams or Knots sticking forth.

Now there are various differences of Swathes; Differences of Swathes
which are all taken from the Figure, length and breadth. They differ in regard
of their Figure, in that some of them are made so as to be woon'd up, long and
equally broad, and rolled round together: others of them Cut; which indeed
consist of one Linen Cloth, but this is cut either in its extreme or middle
parts: others that are sewed together, that consist of Swathes and strings
ending in several Heads. Swathes differ in their length, in regard that some of
them are longer, others shorter; and so in their breadth likewise.

Differences in the binding
And then of the binding up (that is done by the Swathe) there are two
differences; one simple, another compound, or manifold. The simple is either
equal, or unequal. The simple equal is only round, which on both sides binds
together the Member affected in a circular fashion, without any declining on
one side more then another. But the simple unequal is divided into Ascia and
Sima; which yet differ only in regard of their being greater or less; because
that Ascia declineth but a little from that which is round, but Sima very much.
Of various and several sorts of Swathing there are many differences, taken from
the similitude of the parts that are bound, or of certain living Creatures, or
of other things; touching which we may see sufficient in Galen his B. of
Swathes; and in his Second Comment. upon the B. of those things that are to be
done in curing of Wounds, Text 7.

The swathing how to be instituted.
But that the Swathing may be rightly performed, it is first of al to be
considered, from whence the binding is to be begun. For sometimes the binding is
to be begun from the part affected, sometimes from the found place nigh unto the
part affected, and at other times also from the opposite part. And then next of
all, in what manner the Swathe is to be drawn about. For sometimes the Swathing
is to be begun from one end of the Swathe, and sometimes from the middle
thereof. And Thirdly, We are to look well that the Swathe neither bind and
press together the part too hard, and likewise on the contrary that it be not
over loose. For if it be too loose, it will not sufficiently keep the part
together; and by its over great compression it will occasion both pain, and an
Inflammation. But now that all this may be rightly performed, the use of
Swathing will teach us. Now the Use of Swathing is twofold; one of it self, The
Use of swathing.
but the other only accidentally conduces unto the Cure. Swathing considered
in it self makes much for the Cure, in regard that it brings together the
parts disjoined, contracteth the parts dilated, and fetteth straight the
distorted and writhed parts, keeps within due limits the Member being set in
its right frame, as also the conjoined parts, repelleth the Humor flowing in;
and if it be already flown in, it drives and presses it forth again. For in
hollow winding impostumations the binding is begun from the very bottom, and
ends at the Orifice of the Ulcer. The extenuated parts are so to be bound up
that the sound parts may be pressed together, and that the Blood may be forced
unto the parts extenuated: which will be done, if the Swathing be begun from
the sound, or the opposite part; from whence toward the extenuated part it may
be a little loosned; and at length rolled about after the most loose manner
upon or near the extenuated part. But in the parts dilated, and when there is
need of driving back the influx of Humors, the binding is to be begun in the
place affected, and the two or three first rollings about let them be closer
and harder then ordinarily.

But by accident these Swathes conduce unto the cure, when they are so
administered, that they may contain those Medicaments that are applied for the
effecting of the cure. Touching these see Hippocrates in his B. of Fractures,
Comment. 1. Text 21. and in his 2 B. Touching those things that art to be done
in the way of curing, Text 30, 31, 32, 33.

Of Splenia.
For the better binding up, there are likewise administered those things they
call Splenia which are Linen cloths folded together, and so termed from the
Figure of the Spleen. They were by the Ancients called Plumaceoli because that
they were made of Feathers sewed up between two clothes: they are likewise
called Pulvilli from the resemblance they have with a bolster. Now they differ
in regard of their Figure, which is either long, broad, or thick. Their Figure
is threefold, to wit, according to the end for which they are propounded, and
the manner of their being imposed. For sometimes they are laid upon the part
straight and long ways sometimes in an oblique manner, and sometimes
transversly. And indeed they are sometimes laid on double, sometimes treble, and
now and then four double; sometimes single, and sometimes more of them, according
to their use and that which they ought to perform, to wit, the strengthening of
the binding, for Members that are unequal in thickness, or for the making equal
and filling up of parts that are lean and hollow; that so by their means the
whole binding may become equal; and also for the defense of the parts from the
weight and pressure of the Swathbands; and Lastly, for the pressing forth, and
drinking up of the Sanies and Ichorous Excrements. And they are sometimes
imposed dry; but most commonly they are soaked, and moistened in some kind of
liquor that is sit and proper for the Disease and the part affected. Touching
which see Hippocrates, in his 3 B. of such things as are to be done in the
Curing of Wounds, Text 1, 2. and in his 1 B. of Fract. Text 32. and in his 3 B.
of Fract. Text 21. As likewise Galen in his Commentaries.

Of Ferulae, or Splinters.
Sometimes (for the more convenient binding, there are administered those things
they call Ferulae; to wit, smooth Splinters, that are wont to be fitted unto
bones that are broken and out of Joint, after such times as they are set again,
and returned unto their due and proper place. Hippocrates and other of the
Ancients made them of the woody bark of the Ferula shrub; and from hence also
they have their Name. Now adays (in the want of other) these Ferulae are made
of the thin shivers or long thin Chips of Wood, or the Barques of Trees, or
paper glewed together, and pieces of a hard and thick hide. But yet we are here
admonished by Guilhel. Fabricius (in his 4 Cent. Observat. 98.) that the
barques of Trees (especially while they are new and green) are by no means to
be administered in Fractures instead of the aforesaid Ferulae. For when they are
thoroughly dried they are apt to be contracted about the Fracture, and to excite
pains; and sometimes again to move the bones out of their places.

Hippocrates requires such Ferulae as are smooth, equal, plain, and a little
hooked and sloping at the very ends, that is, such as are shaved smooth on the
lower part of their ends, on both sides somewhat shorter then the Swathing lying
under it, lest that they press together the part beyond the Swathing. Now they
are imposed upon the Fracture on every side round about, so that they may not
stand distant one from the other less then a Fingers breadth; and they are so
to be fitted, that the ends of the said Ferulae be not placed above the Heads
of the Joints that stick forth, or the Nerves nigh unto the Joints; or that
they touch upon the naked Skin. See Hippocrates, touching those things that are
to be done in the Curing of Wounds, Tit. 11. and in his 1 B. of Fract. Text 40.
and in his 2 B. of Fract. Text 5. 7. 11. 64. 69. 71. And Galen in his Comment.
And Paulus Aegineta, in his Sixth B. Chapter 99.

And unto the extreme parts also that are grievously wounded, or broken, or
disjoynted, (the Hands especially) there are sometimes applied little Coffers,
or Chests of smooth Wood, so wrought that they may answer unto the Figure of
the Member; or else such as are made of thin plates of Iron, or a hard Skin, or
paper glewed together; that so they may hold together the parts united and
conjoined, that so they stir not, neither move to and fro, and so again start
fort and fall out of their places.

Of Laquei, or Binders.
Unto the binding up of Wounds there likewise belongs the injection of Laquei
(as they term them) which we may fitly call Illaqueation. Now this Laqueus is
properly a bond so knit and tied, that what is drawn together, or pressed down
by weight, may be shut up and closed. And the use thereof is, for the extending
of bones broken and out of Joint, for the keeping of them in their places when
they are set, and for the streightening and close binding of the parts. The
differences of these Laquei are very various, taking their Names either from
the inventors, or from their use, or from the similitude and Figure of some
thing or other, or from their manner of knitting, or from then effect: which
since that they cannon well be perceived nor understood without a manifest
Delineation, and very hardly from a bare description, therefore touching this
Particular, Consult that B. de Laqueis, that is commonly ascribed unto
Oribasius.

Of the due placing of the Member after it is bound up.
After that the affected Member is rightly bound up, it remains that it be
likewise fitly placed. Now the due and fit placing of it consists in this,
that the part have that position which conserveth the Natural figure thereof,
such as is without pain, and fit for the cure of the disease. Now the member
shall thus be placed, if all its parts, Bones, Muscles, Nerves, Veins, and
Arteries, have that situation that they are neither distended, nor pressed
together; if the Member be softly and equally situated; if in a hollow ulcer or
wound the Orifice (as much as may be) look downward, that so the Sanies may be
purged forth; and lastly, if in the placing there be a mean kept in regard of
the binding up, and that the binding be neither too loose, nor yet over
straight and hard. And indeed that there may in the placing be an apt and meet
figuration of the Member, we must especially have respect unto two things, unto
the Joints, and unto the Muscles; to wit, in respect of the Joints. That the
Member have a middle figure (as Galen very often calls it) which is without
pain, to wit that in which we are both born, and accustomed to keep all our
Members when we are out of Action; and in which no Muscles at all do act; and
such as is equally distant from the extreme motion of the Joints, or their
extensions, and inflections: and in regard of the Muscles, to wit, that on one
part it has Muscles, and the whole entir fibers thereof; and that neither a
whole Muscle, neither its fibers be distorted.

Now placing Consists either in reposition, or suspension. A member is then
fitly put back, when by certain props and stays (as feathers, fleeces of Wool,
or soft Clothes) it is so born up that it is made quiet, and rising upwards,
lie always equally and softly, so that it be neither shaken by any motion, nor
assaulted by any flux; or that any Sanies or Ichor be therein retained. And
from hence it is that (if the thigh be broken, and bound up) Hippocrates
supporteth it with something like a Counduit pipe, (the ham being stretched
forth) from the hip even unto the foot. Our Surgeons use to apply some
certain props of straw or of paper rolled together like a Counduit pipe, and
within filled up with hurds, and so involved and wrapped up in the extreme part
of the linen clothes* by which the whole Member is firmly held together, lest
that it should unawares be moved.

But the Member is hung in a string and supported thereby, when the sick person
either lies down, or now begins to walk abroad. For although that while the
sick party lies in his bed it suffices if that while he is awake he have his
hand softly inclining upwards; yet, lest that when he is asleep he should
unawaers move it, therefore it is not amiss for him to have it hung in a sling
of a swathband. But it is especially requisite when the sick party begins
now to walk, that he carry his Arm wrapped up and hung in a swathe, (which the
Greek Physicians call Taenia, and Celsus Mitella) the narrow heads whereof let
them be cast about the neck; and for the breadth of it, in that part wherein
the Arm is enwrapped and born up, let it be so broad that it may contain the
whole arm, that so there may be no part thereof that is not equally supported.
And here for the more fit underpropping of the hands there is oftentimes great
need of those little Coffers or Chests, of which but even now mention was made;
upon which the Hand (when it is bound up) is to be placed; and then (which the
said Capsula or little coffer) it is to be put upon the swathband.

Chap. 8. Of the swathing of wounded parts.
ANd that we may apply unto Wounds all that has hitherto been said of swathing
in general; the Surgeon when he is ready to bind up the wound must in the
first place be very careful in stanching of the blood, if it flow forth over
abundantly. But since that there happens not unto all Wounds any such
extraordinary and remarkable hemorrhage, (but only when the greater vessels are
Wounded) of the stopping and stanching of the hemorrhage we will speak more
below in the fourt^enth Chapter, And now at the present (as for what concerns
the very swathing it self of wounds, the lips of Wounds when they are disjoined
are to be drawn together, and conjoined: and when they are thus brought
together they are then to be kept conjoined; which without the solution of
continuity may be done two ways; either by swathing, or Glue, or by stiching,
and sodering it together per Glutinum (as they term it) which what is meant
thereby, we shall anon show you.

And First, as for swathing, this suiteth very fitly unto wounds that are made
according to the length of the Member, Swathing.
and which are not very deep; and where we have hopes that by swathing alone
the lips of the wound may be joined together, there stitching and sewing is not
rashly to be practiced. But now let the linen swathe be neither too hard nor
over soft; the breadth whereof ought to be such, that being once cast upon the
wound it may not only comprehend and contain the said wound, but may likewise
comprehend something on either side, even unto the very confines of the said
wound But if the Wound shall chance to be longe^ the binding up of the wound is
then better performed by a narrow and straight swath; than is, one of about
three fingers breadth. Now this binding is accomplished with a swath of two
heads, (as I may so say) or that has a double beginning; and in Wounds that
are not very long the middle of the swathe is first of all imposed upon the
opposite part of the wound; and the rolling of it about is begun from it, and
drawn toward the Wound, and above the Wound it is strained; and in this manner
the lips of the Wound are rightly drawn together; and then after this, both
heads or the swathe are rolled this way and that way, that so the lower part
thereof may be drawn about by the lower part of the Member; but the superior by
the higher part of the member; and all to this end that so the humors may the
better be pressed forth of the part affected. Let this Ligature be streighter
and harder above upon the place affected, then in the parts that lie near unto
it; and let it be such as is neither overloose, nor too straight. For if it
should be too loose, it would not contain nor keep in the lips of the Wound
being drawn together; and if it be overmuch strained, it would then cause pain,
an afflux of the humors, and an inflammation. And therefore let the term or
time of the straining be, as long as the sick person can well endure it. And in
the Winter (by reason of the cold) the rollings and swathings about may be the
more; but in the Summer the fewer the better, lest that by reason of the many
windings about of the swath the part affected grow over hot. The knot is to be
knit a good way distant from the Wound, or rather the heads of the swath are to
be fewed together. But now that in the greater sort of Wounds the drawing
together of the lips may be made the easier, the Plumaceolus, or little pillow,
or linen Clothes many times doubled, but most commonly four double (of all
which we spoke before) are to be administered: but according to the judgment and
opinion of Avicen (in the fourth sect. of his fourth Book, tr. 1. Chapt. 8) The
triangular pillows are far more commodious; which two of them together (on
either side one) are put unto the wound; so that the sides of both of them
being disposed and placed according to the length of the wound, (and therefore
those aforesaid pillows, etc. ought to exceed the length of the Wound) may have
respect each to other. For the swathe being drawn upon the Angle of the
Triangular Pillow forces forward the pillow (together with the lip lying
underneath) unto the Contrary part; and (as Avicen speaks) straineth together
only upon the fissure or cleft of the wound; which would not so be, if those
pillows were four square.

Of the stitching or sewing of Wounds, with Glewing.
But now whereas in transverse and long Wounds swathing alone will not suffice
for the drawing together of the lips of the Wounds, and so keeping and
preserving them, in this respect therefore there will be need of stitching. But
seeing that in the Wounds of the face stitchings cause a great deformity, and
in other long and great Wounds the stitches are oftentimes broken before the
agglutination of the Wound; and because likewise that tender bodies will by no
means away with sewing, (which is done with the needle) therefore a certain
Glutination, or stitching with gluing has been invented, which draws
together the lips of the Wound without any the least mangling of the wounded
part, or pricking of it with the needle. Now this is the provision that is to
be made. Strong Linen Clothes are prepared, that are equal, soft,
quadrangular, or triangular, or of some other figure, according as the nature
of the situation of the Wound and member unto which they ought to be applied
does require; let these be either folded together, or sewn (so as that the
stitches may be no great eyesore) in that part wherein they have respect unto
the Wound; and let threads now and then be passed through them in the broadest
places of them. Unto these Linen Clothes are to be fastened little handles or
loops of threads many double, and twisted, and then waxed; at the same distance
that the stitches are wont to be made, or if you please, somewhat a less
distance. Upon this linen let the aforesaid Glutinum be spread, that is made of
a stringent and viscous clammy Medicaments; such as are, the white of an egg,
Bolearmenick, Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocol, fine flour Parget, Tragacanth,
Corralls, and fat Rosin, As for instance.

Take Bole-Armenick, Sarcocol, Mastick, Dragons Blood, of each two drams: Let
them be mingled with the white of an Egg. Or,

Take Of the finest Flour, and Mastick, of each half a dram; Bole-Armenick
Corals, Sarcocol, of each one dram; Dragons Blood, two scruples. Mingle al
these with the white of an Egg.

And if we fear that the said Glutinum may be separated (which is chiefly
caused by the Sanies or thin Excrements that flow forth of the Wound) then the
Rosin of the Pine, or of the Pitch Tree is to be mingled together with the
rest, these not admitting of any humidity. As,

Take Dragons Blood, Frankincense, Mastick, Bole-Armenick, Rosin of the Pine
Tree, of each as much as you think fit; and let them be mingled together with
the white of an Egg. The Linen being in this manner spread over with the said
Glue, and furnished with their little handles, two on both sides, at the sides
of the Wound, (the distance of a Thumb one from the other) are so to be fastened
thereunto that the handles may rightly answer the one to the other: and they
are there to be left so long, until that the Glue being dried up the Linen
stick fast unto the Skin; which commonly is wont to be done in the space of
four or five hours. The Linen now sticking fast unto the Skin, the handles or
threads aforesaid are to be drawn close together, and then tied fast one to the
other, that so the Lips of the Wound may be rightly united. And in this manner,
without any pain at all, and without any Cicatrice and Deformity (such as is
wont to be caused by the Needles point) the Lips of the wound are drawn
together, and being thus brought together and united they are so kept and
preserved a longer time then by that sewing or stitching that is done with the
Needle. The aforesaid kind of sewing seems to have in it this one only
inconvenience and discommodity, to wit, that it is of little or no use until
after six or seven hours (for sooner then this it will not be dried, so as to
stick fast unto the Skin:) whereupon it is, that many do first administer the
sewing, and then afterward the glue. But the aforesaid delay can bring no
great danger and detriment along with it. And if any danger be feared, instead
of the aforesaid Glue, an emplaster may be provided, (which sticks
immediately) such an one as is described by Caesar Magatus, in his first B. of
Wounds, Chap. 59. As,

Take The Gum of the Fir Tree, four ounces; the Liquor of the Elme-Tree three
ounces; Rosin of the Pine, Greek Pitch, and Ship-Pitch, and Wax, of each one
ounce; Ammoniacum, Mastick, Tacamahaca, of each ten drams; Sarcocol, Dragons
blood, Gum-Juniper, and Gum-Hedera, of each six drams, the Root of the greater
Consound, of round Aristolochy, Bistort, and Tormentill, of each two drams,

The Gums that will away with melting are to be dissolved over the Fire with a
portion of that which sweateth out of the Fir Tree; and then the rest that are
wont to melt at the Fire being dissolved according to art let them be added,
and then let them be well and diligently mingled together, that so they may be
reduced into one Body; and then after cast them altogether into an Alembick,
and by the heat of the Balneum draw forth the Liquor; and when you conceive
that the feces are freed from al their Watery Humor, unto these when they are
again melted by the heat add the rest of the powders, and mingle them together
with all care and diligence; and then again destil them, until that all the
Humor be wholly evaporated; and then (withdrawing the Fire) suffer the Balneum
to cool. For so it is, that the matter which is contained in the Vessel will
become solid, like unto a Cerote, and it will be very tenacious; neither is it
by the heat of a man's Body so to be melted and made thin that it forget its
office and what it has to do.

I my self also am wont to use this following, which may be provided with far
less labor.

Take Bole-Armenick, Mastick, Dragons Blood, Frankincense, of each one dram;
Gum Tacamahaca, two drams; And make a powder; which with a hot Pestle you may
spread upon Leather, that an Emplaster may be made thereof.

Caesar Magatus has likewise a peculiar manner of applying this future by
Gluing. He extends and spreads a part of such a like Cerote upon a new thin
Linen cloth; and then with a pair of Cizers from this linen Cloth he cutteth
off so many parts (of a Fingers length, or somewhat longer, and as broad as an
ordinary point that we use to truss with, but in the ends of them something
broader) as the stitches that seem to be requisite in a Wound, or not many
fewer; and the first he applies in the middle of the Wound, and yet so, that
it may stick only unto one side of the Wound in the half part of it, and that
the rest be free. Unto this, at the side, (but yet opposite unto it) he
applies another; and so by turns he proceeds, applying one on the right
part, and another on the left: and after this, he lays hold on the parts that
are free, (and that as yet stick not unto the Skin,) one with his right hand,
and the other with the left, and draws them both together toward the opposite
Lip, until that the Lips be so drawn together that they touch one the other:
and afterward he applies both the parts that he held in his hand unto the
opposite lip, unto which they did not stick; and here he is very Curious, and
takes a great deal of pains to make them stick right on all parts: and so
likewise he proceeds in the rest of them; so that betwixt one and another
there is left as much space as is otherwise wont to be between the stitches.

And indeed the well experienced Surgeon, who by his long practice knows
well how by such like Emplasters that stick close unto the Skin (of which there
are many sorts of them to be made) to conjoyn the Lips of Wounds; this
Surgeon, I say, in almost all Wounds (Yea even in the very first dressing)
knows how very well to be without the said sewing or stitching made with the
Needle, which is both cruel, Bloody, and painful. And certainly it were far
better that the Surgeons should accustom themselves unto this manner of
sewing Wounds together; in regard that in the other which is performed with the
Needle after a kind of Barbarous fashion they oftentimes commit many Errors,
whiles that in stitching of the wound they excite more pain then was caused by
the wound it self: and using Needles that are too thick they take in more of
the Skin then is requisite, and so often leave the Lips of the Wounds writhed,
and pleited; insomuch that the Skin is not Joined close unto the Skin, neither
the Flesh to the Flesh; but the Skin is sewed in the midst between the Flesh:
or if they do their endeavor to avoid this evil they fall into another as great,
by taking so little hold of the Skin that the Wound is left hollow, and the
stitches within a very short time break out again.

Of the Suture, and Buttons.
And al these Conjunctions and drawings together of the fleshy and soft parts
are performed without any wounding of the said parts. There is yet another
also, which is done by dissolving of continuity. For not only the Ancient
Surgeons, but those likewise of our days (in Wounds transverse, and great,
and altogether in those wherein Swathing only will not suffice for the drawing
together the Lips of the Wounds) use sewing and Buttons.

Unto the stitching or sewing of Wounds there are required three things, What
is required unto sewing of Wounds.
a Needle, a Thread, and the little hollow Instrument, having holes through one
end of it. The Needle that is required (for its more easy penetration) ought
to have a Triangular point, A Needle.
(which the Curriers most commonly make use of,) indifferently thick, (that so
it be not broken, or pass through the more difficultly) and a little hollowed
in the Tail thereof, that the Thread hinder it not in its passage forth. Most
Artists require a Thread of Silk; yet nevertheless others reject this, Thread.
in regard that it easily breaks the Skin, and they take one of Flax,
doubling it, that it may be firm and not easily broken. And this they will have
not to be over much writhed, but waxed, equal, and of a mean consistence. And
when the Needle is passed through one lip of the Wound, it is then likewise to
be put through the other Lip of the Wound: and lest that the Lip through which
the Needle ought in the Second place to be passed through, should in following
fall under the other, and so be drawn aside too much from the other, therefore
without there is an instrument laid unto it, which they term Cannula, or
Canalicus. To wit, a little Pipe, partly Gold, The Instrument Cannula.
and partly Brass, or else all of Silver, having holes through one end thereof,
that so through the holes the Needle may pass; and that the Lip of the Wound
may rest it self upon the Pipe, lest that whiles the Needle is passing through
it should be moved, and so not follow upon the drawing forward of the Needle
and Thread. And yet nevertheless the Lip of the Wound may likewise be held
together by the tops of the Fingers, to wit, the fore Finger, and the middle
Finger; and with the other it may be sewed together, if so be that the Thread
pass through readily, which will be, if in the Tail the Needle be hollow about
the hole (as we have said) and that the Thread in respect of its thickness bear
a proportion with the Needle.

Now the sewing is performed after this manner. The First way of sewing.
In the middle of the Wound (the Needle drawing after it a double Thread) if
the Wound be great the Lips of the Wound are to be thrust through, and a knot
being tied the Thread is to be cut off a little above the knot. And then in the
middle spaces on either side other holes are to be made with a Needle and
single Thread, and a knot being then likewise made the Thread is to be cut off;
and this is to be continued, until the Lips of the Wound be rightly sewed
together. And this Suture is termed Intercissa, because that after every prick
a knot is tied, The Suture intercissa.
and the Thread cut off. But we are well to look, that the stitches stand
neither too wide, nor yet too close; for if they be too thin, they will not
rightly hold the Lips of the Wound together; and if they be over thick, they
then cause pains and Inflammations. And therefore between one prick and another
let the space that is left be such, that the Skin may as it were follow the
Needle drawing it. Some will have it, that betwixt every stitch there ought to
be a full Fingers breadth. But it is very seldom that there is need of so many
stitches; neither do all Wounds require one and the same number of stitches;
but according as the Wounds do gape more or less, so there will be need of more
or fewer stitches. And yet notwithstanding it will not sometimes be amiss, that
not only the Skin but likewise that some of the flesh (if it lie underneath) be
taken in, to the end that the sewing may be so much the more firm, and that the
Skin be not broken thereby. And yet nevertheless we are to look well unto it,
and to be exceeding Cautious that the Tendons be not pricked with the Needle.

And this is altogether the most usual and most Convenient manner and way of
stitching and sewing of wounds; in which (this is likewise to be understood for
all other cases) this only we are yet to acquaint you with (out of Celsus his
5. B. and 26. Chap.) that the stitches ought so to be made, that the very Lips
are not indeed quite to touch one the other; that so if there chance to be any
humor gotten together within, there may be made a passage whereby it may flow
forth. And hence it is, that the Surgeons are likewise wont to thrust in
Tents anointed with some fit and convenient Unguents; that so the Humors that
are wont to be gathered together in the wounded part may flow forth; and then
also that the Medicaments may the better penetrate unto the bottom of the Wound.

Indeed Felix Wirtzius rejects the Use of Tents in Wounds of the Joints, The
Use of Tents.
and of the Hands, in his second B. of Surgery, and 13. Chap. But Guilhelm.
Fabricius upon very good ground refuteth this Opinion, in his 4. Cent.
Observat. 76. and by four Examples he proves the same to be both absurd and
dangerous. The First Example is of a certain Citizen of Colen, who neglecting
these Tents, a Wound that he had received in his Hand closed up in the
supersicies thereof; whereupon about the fourth day a great pain arose, which
was followed by a Fever, an Inflammation, and a Phlegmone, so that the Hand
was in many places exulcerated; and it was not to be restored again without
much labor and long time.

The Second Example is of a Citizen of Lausanna, who pricked the hollow of his
Hand with a Penknife. And because the Surgeon (by reason of the narrowness
of the Wound) could not by Tents keep it open, there followed thereupon most
grievous Symptoms; and the sick person could hardly be restored to his former
soundness until he had long endured much Pain and Torture.

The Third is of a certain Country Woman, one Hildena by Name, who with a Thorn
pricked the very tip of her fore Finger. But when as (for the cause aforesaid)
the superficies of the Wound had closed up, and the Pus or filthy corrupt
mattier was gotten together about the Nervous parts, there arose a great pain;
and upon this there soon followed an Inflammation and a Gangrene, and from
thence a Sphacelus. And yet notwithstanding this Woman (having had her Finger
cut off even unto the Hand-Wrist) at length recovered.

The Fourth Example is of a certain Boor nigh unto Lausanna, who had a Thorn
run into his Ankle-bone. But he neglecting the same, and the Orifice of the
part where the Thorn went in shutting up too soon, there arose first a pain;
and then there followed soon after an Inflammation and a Gangrene; and at
length a Sphacelus invaded and seized upon his whole Leg: and refusing to give
consent that the Leg should be cut off, he died within few days after.

It appears therefore from these Examples, that Narrow Wounds (albeit they
are in the Nervous parts) are so long to be kept open, until the Wound shall be
sufficiently purged. For so it is that in every Wound whatsoever there will get
together more or less of this Pus or purulent mattier, (as we shall afterward
more fully show you) and this, if there be not opened for it a passage forth,
must needs be there retained; and this by little and little grows hot, and
becomes very sharp; whereupon in the wounded part (especially if it be
Nervous) there follows a pain, which by attracting the Blood and the Humors
exciteth and causes most grievous Symptoms.

And yet nevertheless Fabricius here advises us, that the Tents are with such
Art and industry so to be sitted and fabricated, that at the least they may
hold together the gaping superficies of the Wound, until the rest of the
wounded parts (to wit, the Flesh, and the Nerves) be sufficiently purged; and
yet so, that they may not by any means hurt the Nervous parts. And that
therefore the depth of the Wound is diligently to be observed; and great care
to be taken, that the edge of the Tent (and more especially if either a Nerve,
or any thing Nervous be discovered and laid open) press not together the bottom
of the Wound. But now in those Wounds that are so narrow that they will not
receive in any Tent that is thick, and that that is slender and weak (as that
which is over flexible) is turned this way and that way, and therefore cannot
reach unto the very bottom of the Wound; in this Case he tells us that his
custom was to impose a piece of a Gold or Silver thread, (as long as the Wound
was deep) wrapped up in fine Linen* and anointed with some Anodyne and Digestive
Unguent.

When the Lips of the Wound shall in this manner be conjoined, they are wont
commonly (and indeed not amiss) to impose the white of an Egg well shaken
together, and put into hurds, with this following powder.

Take Frankincense two parts, and Dragons Blood one Part; And make a Powder. Or,

Take Bole-Armenick and Terra Sigillat. of each six drams; Frankincense,
Mastick, Sarcocol, of each two drams and half; Myrrh and Aloes, one dram and
half; Tragacanth, Dragons Blood, of each one dram; Barley Meal, and Bran Meal,
of each half a dram. Make hereof a Powder, and mingle the same with the white
of an Egg shaken together, and put upon hurds, and so imposed upon the wound;
upon which also other hurds that is only wet with the white of an Egg is to be
imposed.

Neither is this Medicament administered but for very good Reason; since that it
suppresseth the Flux of Blood, asswageth pain, and preventeth Inflammation, But
now if there be no fear at all of any such excessive Flux of the Blood, or of
any afflux of the Humors, we shall not then need to make any such provision
against it; seeing that the Hurds and those Medicaments stick so Tenaciously
unto the part, that being thoroughly dried on they contract the said part,
causing great trouble unto the same; and when they come to be removed they
excite much pain.

And now although that what we have already said might suffice, Other ways of
Sewing of Wounds.
as touching the stitching or sewing of Wounds; yet nevertheless we think it
not amiss here further likewise to add some other ways of the Sewing of
Wounds, as we meet with them in several Authors. For there is moreover another
manner also of sewing of Wounds; which is indeed performed altogether in like
sort as Leather-dressers are wont to sew their Skins together; and this is then
only fit when the Intestines are wounded and the Veins and Arteries cut
assunder.

There is yet another way of Sewing them, which is done with two Needles: and
this way Celsus used, and describes it in his 7. B. and 16. Chap. where you
may see it fully set down.

There is among the Ancients mention made likewise of Buttons: The Buttons of
VVounds.
For (as Celsus writes in his 5. B. and 26. Chap.) if the Wound be in the
Flesh, so that it gape, and that the sides thereof cannot easily be drawn
together into one, then fewing is improper, and in this case buttons are to be
imposed (the Greeks call them Agcterae) that may only a little contract the
sides, to the end that afterward the Cicatrice may be the less broad. And
because that the way and manner of Uniting the sides of the Wound by buttons
was generally so well known unto them; from thence it was, that neither the
matter of these buttons, neither the form of them was ever sufficiently
described by the Ancients, Guido (whom many follow) writes that these buttons
were made of Iron Circles as it were, or Semicircles, a little crooking on
either part; the hooks whereof being on both sides fixed and fastened within
the Lips of the Wound did answer exactly the one to the other. But seeing that
in this manner to fasten in such hooks as these, and being so fastened there to
keep them in the Skin, and especially the Flesh that is so sensible, was
nothing else but a keeping there of so many pricking sharp-pointed Needles as
it were, with an intolerable pain; it it not therefore Credible that the
Ancients by Buttons do understand any such Iron Instrument, to be fastened
within the Skin, and there exciting pains that were not to be endured. The
Opinion of Gabriel Fallopius is far more probable who (in his Tract of Wounds
in General, Chap. 12.) tells us that the Button was that kind of sewing that
above we called Intercisa, and which at this day is in very frequent Use; in
the which both the Lips of the Wound are by a Needle drawing after it a double
Thread thrust through; and upon the Wound with three turnings in both the Heads
of the Thread are drawn together; and tied up into a knot. And although that in
Authors there be mention made of Gold and Iron Buttons; yet notwithstanding we
are here to know, that the Word Button is a general word, and signifies every
Instrument whatsoever that Joyneth and keeps together any things unto which
they are applied. And so Caesar (in the 4. B. of his Wars in France,) speaks
of Beams or Rafters conjoined with Buttons.

There was yet (as we read) another way among the Ancients of sewing and
stitching of Wounds; (but this they thought not so convenient, and therefore it
soon ceased as to the use thereof) in the which they on both sides thrust
through the Lips of the Wound so many Needles drawing Threads as they thought
necessary for the Conjunction of the Wound; and then after this above the Wound
they woon'd a Thread about both ends of the Needle; in the very same manner as
Women (when they intend to keep their Needles in the Garments they are making)
roll together their Threads about both the ends thereof.

As touching the binding up of wounds, this is likewise to be observed; that we
make an exact enquiry, whether the Wound be a simple or single one, or else
whether it be reduplicated, and manifold. For it sometimes so happens, that
although there be but one Wound in the Skin, yet notwithstanding in the Muscles
under the Skin there are two or three. For if this should so chance, and that
the Surgeon should Cure only one of the Wounds, and altogether neglect the
other that lies hid, then will Pus get together in that other wound, and there
cause great pain, Inflammation, Fever, and other grievous Symptoms. Of the
truth of which Gulielm. Fabricius (in his 4. Cent. Observat. 84. and 85.)
gives us two remarkable Histories. Where he likewise teaches us, that the
hollow nook that lies hid may be opened; and there he also describes, and
plainly delineateth unto our view those Instruments that are fit and requisite
for this purpose.

Chap. 8. Of those Medicaments that are necessary for the Curing of VVounds.
ANd these are the offices of the Surgeon, which he ought to perform in and
about the Curing of Wounds; but the very uniting and sodering together of the
wounded parts is the Work and Task of Nature; which oftentimes likewise,
without any help from Medicaments, (and this especially happens in inward
Wounds) agglutinateth those things that are disjoined. And therefore, since
that Nature is the Efficient Cause of Conglutination, and Blood the matter
thereof, it is necessary that these two be rightly disposed, and in a due
temper. For first of all, the truth is, since that the faculty is not indeed
hurt in it self, and yet notwithstanding may be frustrated of its end, unless
the instrument (which here is the temperament of the part, and the innate heat)
be as it ought; therefore we are to take care that the wounded part have its
due and natural temper. And moreover (in the next place,) our endeavor must be
that the Blood that flows thereto exceed not its just quantity, neither be
less then what it ought; and likewise that it be good and pure. For the vi^ious
and bad Blood that flows thereto is so far from being fit to Conglutinate,
that oftentimes it exciteth many dangerous Symptoms. And therefore if it be
impure it is to be corrected, and the vicious Humors all of them to be
evacuated. And there is also a due and right Course of Diet to be instituted,
and all sort of meats to be avoided that afford a naughty and unwholesome Juice,
from which the Blood that is generated must needs be vicious. When we have thus
taken care in these things, then afterward in the curing of the Wound there are
also two Offices of Nature. The first whereof is, that the Pus she generateth
be in a due proportion; and Secondly, That she Conglutinate those parts that
are disjoined. For first of al, (and although that Galen make no express
mention thereof, whiles that he treats of the curing of Wounds in the
general; yet Rhaser in his 13. B. and 14. Chap. and Avicen in his 4 Sect. and 4
B. Tract. 3. Chap. 2. and Celsus in his 5 B. Chap. 26. tell us, that) there is a
certain Pus or Purulent mattier flowing forth of the Ulcer so soon as it once
begins to give any hopes of recovery; and therefore this Pus must in the first
place be furthered in its motion, and that then the Ulcer is to be Cleansed and
filled up, and at length after this is done the wound is to be closed up with a
Cicatrice. And happy experience has indeed approved of that kind of curing;
and those Medicaments that are for this end applied are commonly called
Digestives. Neither is this without Reason. For whenas even out of the smallest
Veins (when they are cut assunder) in the wounded part there sloweth forth some
of that Blood that by Nature is destined to flow unto the part, for its
nourishment, this sticking in the pores of the part, and it being so that it
cannot be carried unto the part whither it tends, it is by Nature converted
into Pus. And furthermore the very wounding it self has Joined with it some
kind of Contusion, and the part dissected is altered by the Ambient Air. And
therefore there is a necessity that what is altered should impostumate, and be
turned into Pus. And therefore in this the Physician ought to succor Nature,
and to administer those Medicaments that help forward that generating of Pus
(these Medicaments they commonly call Digestives) and afterward to apply
Sarcoticks, or such as Agglutinate. But here notwithstanding Authors seem a
little to differ in their practice. For some of them (the said Digestives and
Suppuratives being wholly neglected) presently administer those Medicaments
that dry much, to wit, Balsams, either Natural or Artificial (of which we shall
speak more hereafter) with the which they both anoint the wound al over, and
instill it likewise unto the very bottom of the wound, and by Tents also impose
it upon the same. Others there are that in the first place make use of those
Medicaments that further and help on the Pus, which they call Digestives. And
Hippocrate^ himself seems to have approved of both these ways, when (in his
Book of Ulcers) he thus writes. All the newer Wounds (says he) as well
themselves, as the parts situate round about them, are but little or not at all
infested with an inflammation if they be with all speed suppurated, and if that
the pus of the wound be no ways suppressed by some small bone, as being
intercepted thereby: or if we take care to prevent that nothing may come unto
the pus but what is necessary, and that in as small a quantity as possibly may
be; but that we dry it as much as may be with a Medicament that is not at al
troublesome. And experience has taught us, that in both these ways of curing
the Surgeon has attained unto his end, and what he desired. And yet
nevertheless, it seems not that both these Medicaments are to be made use of
without any kind of difference.

For in regard that those Digestive Medicaments so commonly made use of are
more moist, if they be without great caution and overlong administered, the
matter begins not only to be digested, but also to putrefy; and the Wound
degenerateth into a sordid Ulcer. For seeing that Nature is the author both of
Concoction, and also of the generating of flesh, the native heat and the temper
of the part (Natures instruments) are to be preserved; and we must endeavor
that the medicaments may answer unto the temperament of the part. And therefore
although that the former way of curing may have its place in those parts that
are fleshy, as being such as are more moist, and in which there is much of the
blood that is to be turned into pus sticking in the pores of the part, which
(that so the pain and the inflammation may be prevented) ought as soon as may
be to be converted into pus; which work of Nature those drier kind of
Medicaments might more easily hinder yet in the parts that are more dry those
drier Medicaments seem to be more commodious and proper; which as they may
preserve the temperament of the part, so they themselves may likewise help
forward the necessary generation of the Pus or purulent matter. And therefore
the safest way is, not always to confide in one Medicament alone, but rather
to compound them according to the Nature and temper of the part 3 and to mingle
Digestives with Sarcoticks and those that Agglutinate; since that experience
testifies that such are used with far better success then mere Suppuratives;
as Franciscus Arcaeus writes that with his Balsam or Unguent (which we shall
anon acquaint you with) applied forthwith in the very beginning, he himself
most happily cured the greatest and most grievous Wounds; the use whereof I my
self have likewise very often experienced with very happy success. And
therefore I will now subjoyn such Digestives, which are not mere Suppurative

There may then be provided Digestive Medicaments, Digestives, or those things
that further the Pus.
or such as further the purulent mattier, of the yelks of Eggs, Butter, Oil of
Roses, Oil of Mastick, Rosin of the Turpentine or Fir Tree, Wheat flour,
Frankincense, and Mastick. As,

Take Turpentine washed in white Wine, two ounces; the yelk of one Egg; Barley
Meal, and Honey, of each a sufficient quantity: And make an Unguent. Or,

Take Turpentine washed in Wine, May Butter unsalted, of each one ounce;
Frankincense and Mastick, of each a like sufficient quantity. Mingle them. Or,

Take Turpentine, half an ounce; Frankincense, one dream; fresh Butter, one
ounce; the yelk of one Egg; And mingle them. Or,

Take Citrine Wax, one ounce; Oil, four ounces; Frankincense and Mastick, of
each two drams; fresh Butter as much as will suffice, the yelks of two Eggs:
Mingle them. Or,

Take Oil of Roses, half an ounce; Turpentine, one ounce; the yelk of one Egg;
And mingle them.

So soon as ever there is any appearance of good Pus, the next thing we are to
do, is, that we Conglutinate that which is wounded and disjoined.

Now we are taught by Galen (in the 91. Chap. of his Art of healing; The Union
of the Parts how caused.
and in the 3. B. of his Meth. of Physic, Chap. 4 that the Union of the Parts
disjoined in Wounds is wrought in a twofold manner; to wit, either by a true
Union, which is by a Medium of the same kind, and not by the intervening of any
other substance; or else by a Medium of a different substance. The former Union
they call a Union according to the first Intention; because that such a Union is
intended both by the Physician, and also by Nature her self. The other they
term a Union according to the Second intention; because that both the
Physician, and Nature, when they cannot attain unto what they primarily intend;
they then do what they can.

In the former manner the soft parts and the flesh are united and grow
together; but the hard parts in the other manner; to wit, the bones, and the
Skin; of which those are united by a Callus, but these by a Cicatrice. Unto the
former Union is required a substance of the same kind, and a strong Active
faculty; which in the other are wanting. For in the Fleshy and soft parts there
is present abundance of Blood; and in these the heat is strong; and thereupon
the Blood by a very small alteration may be changed into Flesh, whereby the
wound may grow together. But in those parts that we call spermatick, and the
harder parts, (the Nature of which parts being at a far greater distance from
blood, and the Native heat of these parts being much weaker) it is not the very
same that is generated anew, but some thing like thereunto. For instead of a
Skin there is bred a Cicatrice (most like indeed unto the Skin, but harder and
thicker then it) and instead of a bone there is a Callus produced. And this
distinction of Galen (as being that which is generally and commonly received) I
my self have likewise followed (in the 5 B. of my Institut. Part 2 Sect. 2.
Chap. 4.) and even in his very manner. But it seems altogether to stand in
need of some kind of Explanation. Now this especially consists in the
division of the part into parts Spermatick, and parts proceeding from Blood; by
which it is determined, that certain parts are generated from the Seed, and
certain of them from the blood. Yea, some certain Physicians there are (among
whom Caesar Magatus in his 4. B. and 15. Chap.) who deny that the blood is the
immediate Aliment of the Spermatick parts; but they write that there is a
necessity, that if the blood ought to nourish the Spermatick parts, that then
the seed must first be made.

But it is not my purpose here in this place in many words to discuss that
Question; the which, as others, so Andr. Laurentius (in his 1 B. of Anatomy,
Chap. 21. Quaest. 7.) has so largely and fully controverted. I conceive this
to be the truer Opinion, that the first delineation of all the parts in the
Womb is wrought by the Formative faculty from and out of the Seed. Whereupon
Hippocrates (in his little B. of Originals) writes, that the Conception has
in seven days all whatsoever it ought to have; all the Members, the Regions of
the Eyes, the Ears, the Hands, the Fingers, the Thighs, the Feet, the Toes, the
Privities, etc. But now seeing that the Mass of the Seed is but little, it is
impossible that the Bulk of the whole Body should from the Seed acquire that
magnitude that it ought to have. And therefore afterward the parts take
nourishment and increase from the Mothers Blood in the Womb; and afterward the
Child being brought ^o^th into the light, the parts are augmented from the
Blood, and so even unto the end they are nourished with the blood. Which
manifestly appears even from this, that the very bones when they are at any
time shaved yield forth Blood, which is their Aliment.

But now, that which some affirm touching those parts we call Spermatick, that
they are nourished by the Seed, is a thing most false. For how can so great a
bulk of the Body be formed, nourished, and augmented from so small a Mass of
Seed? And then again, the Seed is no where else generated but in its own proper
Vessels. Yea moreover, Children (whose bones nevertheless are nourished and
augmented) do not generate any Seed. Neither is it sufficient, what Laurentius
says, that the blood variously changed, and suffering many alterations, made
white, and thickened, is nothing else but Seed. For this is most false. For
neither is the Seed any where else generated but in its own Organs; neither are
other substances Seed, although that in whiteness they are like unto Seed.

And therefore albeit that those white and more dry parts (which they commonly
call Spermatick) be generated and nourished from the Blood suffering many
Changes; yet nevertheless in very truth they are generated and nourished from
the Blood. And therefore it is true indeed that the flesh that is generated for
the agglutinating of the Fleshy part of the Wound is altogether like unto the
former, as being such into which the blood (by reason of the near alliance of
the matter, and the strength of the Fleshy parts) is most easily changed: but
yet I shall not rashly affirm, neither easily believe, that the Skin and the
bones, and the rest of the Spermatick parts may be united by any thing
Heterogeneous; and yet without any absurdity I think it may be said, that the
Cicatrice is a Skin, and the Callus a bone. For although there appears some
kind of difference between a Cicatrice and the Skin, and between a Callus and
bone; yet nevertheless they are not of a different substance; but that
dissimilitude proceeds from thence, that the blood needs many and more
laborious changes, that it may be made Skin, Nerve, or bone, then that it may
be made flesh; and the heat of these parts is the weaker, in regard that it was
weakened by the Wound. Wherefore the Formative faculty indeed generateth both the
Skin, and the bone, but such as are not of so great account as are those that
are generated in the first Formation. And yet in the mean time, although the
Cicatrice and Callus differ somewhat from the former Skin and Bone, they are not
for all this to be said to be of another kind. And that also even for this
Reason, because that the Cicatrice is not at any time generated but from the
Cutifick faculty, neither the Callus but from the Ossifick (or bone-breeding)
faculty; and therefore hence likewise it is (as we told you above, in the 2.
Part, Chap. 2.) that there is never any Skin generated from Flesh; but the Skin
is evermore generated from the Skin; and indeed oftentimes a very great portion
thereof, as is evidently to be seen in the Members that are cut off. For who is
it that will not rather call that Skin with which the Flesh of the Hand cut off
is covered, then any thing diverse and different from it? But although that the
Conjoyning and Conglutination of the Disjoined parts be the work of Nature
alone; yet nevertheless, that Nature may the more easily effect this, the
Physician comes in for her assistance, by administering certain Medicaments both
External, and Internal. The External are Sarcotick, or such as Generate Flesh;
and Kolletick, or such as Agglutinate: Touching which we have already treated
more at large, in the 5. Book of our Institut. Part 1. Sect. 1. Chap. 9. But
although (as there we have shown you) they may be propounded as diverse; yet
notwithstanding, seeing that the Conjunction of the wounded parts is wrought by
means of the Flesh; the same Medicament (as is there said) according to the
diversity of Bodies, and difference of the wounded parts, is sometimes
Sarcotick, sometimes Agglutinative, and sometimes likewise Epulotick, to wit,
such as generateth a Cicatrice.

Sarcoticks.
But now, let us see and consider, by what power and virtue those Medicaments do
afford any benefit in the curing of Wounds. Galen in his third B. of the Meth.
of Physic, and 4. Chap. is very large and full in treating of this subject; and
there he teaches us, that there are two kind of Excrements produced in our
Bodies; the one more thin; which for the most part is Evacuated by insensible
Transpiration, and sometimes likewise by sweat: the other more thick, that
sticks externally unto the Body, and such as we term Filth and Nastiness. And
so, that which is more thick, if it stick in the Ulcer is wont to make it
sordid and filthy; but that which is thin makes the Ulcer over moist, and so
becomes an Impediment unto Nature in her generating of Flesh: and therefore
(as he tells us) the filth and impurities are to be cleansed away, and the
humidity to be dried up: and so, that those Medicaments are Sarcoticks, that
moderately heat and dry, and cleanse away those impurities without any biting,
and are no ways Astringent: and that the end of Sarcotick and Agglutinating
Medicaments is, not to permit any humidity at all to breed between the parts
that are to be Joined; as the same Galen teaches in his second B. of the
Composit. of Medicam. according to the kinds, Chap. 21. And that they ought not
to be Astringent, lest that they should drive back that which flows in, and
stuff in those impurities into the part affected: and that they must not be
over drying, lest that they consume that that flows in; but only moderately
drying, that what flows unto the part may grow together into flesh. And this
indeed is almost the common Opinion touching Sarcotick and Unlnerary
Medicaments.

But some of the latter Physicians tell us that this is better performed by a
Balsamic virtue (from whence likewise they call certain Liniments that are
administered for the Curing of Wounds, Uulnerary Balsams:) But what this virtue
is, they do not sufficiently explain: which if it be rightly explained* this
Opinion will not then seem much absurd. For Galen teaches us, (and so likewise
other Physicians very frequently) that the Surgeons pains must in this most
especially be employed, that the temperament of the wounded part may be
preserved. For since that the Agglutination of the Wounded parts is Natures
work; and that Nature, in this as in all other Natural actions, uses as her
instrument the innate heat and temperament of the part; if that be as it ought,
and if it be vigorous and strong, then the Curing of the Wound is happily
performed; and by the benefit of this Native heat it has been oftentimes known
that many have recovered of the most dangerous wounds. But if the temperament
of the part be vitiated, and the part become weak, Nature can then neither
rightly concoct the Aliment that flows thereto, neither Assimilate it, nor
expel the Excrements; from whence it comes to pass, that there happens a
conflux of Humors unto the part affected, that there is an extraordinary
heaping up of Excrements in the part, and from thence many Evils and Symptoms
are attracted. Whereupon Hippocrates (in his B. of Wounds) writes, that what
is dry comes the more nigh unto that that is sound; and that by how much the
more moist any thing is the nearer it comes unto that that is vitiated, and
not sound. And therefore it seems unto me very probable, that Medicaments
Sarcotick, and Agglutinative, and in a word, all vulnerary Medicaments, do
indeed dry; and yet notwithstanding that this is not the only and primary
operation they have; since that many Wounds (if so be the temperament of the
part be safe) may likewise be Cured without the help and assistance of these
like Medicaments; and Nature of her self expeleth those Excrements that are
produced in a due and mean quantity. But it seems probable unto me, that
those Medicaments are therefore profitable and expedient in the curing of
Wounds, in regard that they do not only dry, and consume the over great store
of Humidity in the Wound; but in that they likewise preserve both the
temperament, and the innate hear of the parts (which some of the latter
Physicians call Balsam) by their virtue, nearly allied and familiar unto every
part; which virtue they semblably term Balsamic. And hence therefore it is,
that because there is not the same temperament in all the parts, and that there
is a Native heat proper unto each part, therefore the same vulnerary
Medicaments are not fit and proper unto all wounded parts; but some are
convenient for a fleshy part, others for a Nervous part that is wounded; like
as Gum Elemi is useful for all the Nervous parts; and therefore also most fit
and convenient in all Wounds of the Head, as oftentimes before we have told you.

And I am the rather likewise persuaded hereunto, even by this, that in Wounds
(especially of the Joints, where dangerous Symptoms appear to be near at Hand)
our more skilful Surgeons do not content themselves only with Unguents and
Emplasters, but upon those also they impose Cataplasms with very happy success;
the which in regard they do not reach unto the Wound it self, they cannot
therefore thoroughly dry up the Excrements that are therein; but they only
cherish and preserve the Temperament and Native heat of the part. And I have
oftentimes seen in Wounds of the Nerves, (in which by Reason of the weakened
Temperament of the part there has been an afflux of Humors, and in which by
reason of the imperfect Concoction of the Aliment thereunto flowing great
abundance of Excrements have been stored up, the German Surgeons call them
das Glied Vvasser) that by the use of such Cataplasms the Wound has been
reduced unto a better State, and has no longer voided forth so great an
abundance of Excrements. Now those Cataplasms are prepared and made up of the
Roots of Marshmallows, the Meal of Lin-seed, Fenugreek, Beans, the powder of
the flowers of Camomile, Melilote, Betony, and the like.

And yet notwithstanding, from this that we have said (to wit, that the main
and chief scope of Vulnerary Medicaments is to preserve and strengthen the
Native heat of the part,) it does no ways follow, that by one Medicament the
Wounds of all parts may be healed. But like as Galen (in regard of the dryness,
which chiefly belongs thereto) according to the various Temperament of the
various parts administreth various and different drying Medicaments; so
likewise according to the variety of the Temperament, the temper and heat of
each singular part requires diverse Medicaments; so indeed, that what is fit
and proper for one part may be hurtful unto another; and that which is proper
and useful for a fleshy part may bring much damage unto a Nervous part. For the
fleshy parts are endued with much heat; and therefore albeit those things they
are Cherished with be not so very hot, yet nevertheless they have strength
enough. But as for those parts that are bloodless, their heat is much weaker,
and therefore they are to be cherished with such things as are more hot, and
then more especially when they are much weakened with a wound. Yea it may so
happen, that although in their first Qualities some Medicaments may seem alike;
yet notwithstanding in regard of their substance (by reason of which some of
them do sooner lose their strength and virtue, and others preserve it a longer
time) they may much differ; Yea they may differ in their whole substance, and
hidden property. Now that an instance may be given of such Medicaments Galen
assures us, in his Composition of Medicaments according to the place affected,
and 1 Chap. where he inveigheth against such as deny that there are such
Medicaments. But a Reason cannot easily be rendered for such Medicaments; only
experience teaches us, that some of them are more useful and efficacious in
the curing of wounds, then other, and especially in the Wounds of these or
those parts;) although that in their first Qualities they differ but very
little. In the mean time I am of Opinion, that the manifest Qualities in such
Medicaments that work at once from their whole substance are not altogether
idle and useless; but that they are singularly useful for the drying up of that
excessive humidity that is in the Wound. And as there are Medicaments which in
the propriety of their whole substance are accommodated unto certain Particular
parts, (as some to the Liver, others to the Brain, and a third sort unto the
Lungs) so likewise it is not absurd to say, that there are some Vulnerary
Medicaments that are peculiarly designed unto certain parts; some to the flesh,
others to the Nerves, and a third sort to the Brain, etc. And most certain it
is, (as experience also makes it manifest) that Gum Elemi is singularly useful
in Wounds of all the Nervous parts, as also for the Brain; and Betony for the
head, so that it is a thing of much concernment that in the administering of
vulnerary medicaments we make a due and fit choice: and not only so, but the
Nature of the sick person is likewise seriously to be weighed; since that even
experience tells us, that in wounds some certain Medicaments are more useful
for some Natures, and again, that some other are hurtful. And this indeed is
chiefly to be discovered by experience, (if not only by experience:) and what
Galen (in his third Book of the Meth. of Physic, Chap. 8.) writes touching
exsicating Medicaments, the same is also true concerning all Vulnerary
Medicaments, to wit, that due respect is to be had unto the excrements, and the
state of the Wound. For if there be but few excrements generated in the Wound,
and that the Wound be otherwise in a good condition, this is an evident sign
and token of the excellency and usefulness of the Medicament thereunto applied;
whereas on the other side, if there be many excrements heaped up in the Wound,
it is an evidence that the Medicament administered was unfit and improper. In
the mean time, neither are the manifest qualities to be neglected; but I
conceive that of them likewise we are to make a due and fit choice, according
to the temperament of the whole body, and the part affected in particular.
Neither are we in this to neglect, but carefully to heed the constitution of
the Air; but in the hotter seasons the medicaments may be the cooler; and the
cooler the season the hotter ought the medicaments to be that we make use of-

Now the vulnerary Medicaments (both Sarcotick, Vulnerary Medicaments.
and Agglutinating) are provided, and made of the Roots of the greater
Consound, Bistort, Tormentil, the leaves of Ladies Mantle, Shepherds pouch,
Golden rod, Balsam apple, ve^^in, Speedwel, St. John's Wort, Millefoil, Sanicle,
Hors-tayl, Elm, Plantaine, Betony, Cypress, Mouseare; the flowers of Red Roses,
St. John's Wort, Pomgranates; Cypress Nuts; Frankincense, Aloes, Mastick, the
tears (or sweat) of the fir tree, Rosin Turpentine, Rosin of the pine, and of
the Larch tree, dry Pitch, the liquor of the small leaves of the Elm tree, Gum
Elemy, Gum Junip. Gum Hederae, Tragacanth, Tacamahaca, the Gum Caranna,
Sarcocol, Dragons Blood; Sealed Earth Bole Armenick; the Rinds of the
Frankincense Tree, the stone Hemati^es, and Coralls. Of which there are made
diverse compositions, Liniments, and unguents. The Chiefest of these Liniments
is that of Francisc. Arcaeus; viz.

Take Clear Turpentine, and Gum Elemi, Liniments, and Unguents.
of each one ounce and half; the fat of a Gelt, two ounces; Old Hogs Grease,
one ounce; let them melt at the fire, and make a Liniment. Or,

Take Rosin, Wax, Turpentine, Oil of Roses, of each two ounces; Frankincense,
Mastick, Myrrh, of each two drams; Make an Unguent. Or.

Take Turpentine two ounces, White Rosin, Olibanum, Colophony, of each two
ounces and half; Mastick one ounce, Saffron one dram; Wax half a pound; Common
Oil one pound and half; Make hereof an unguent according to Art. Or,

Take the Juice new drawn of Ladies Mantle, of Sanicle, of Saracen Consound, of
each alike, as much as you think good; set them to the fire, and then add, of
old Swines fat, and May Butter, of each alike as much as will suffice, and make
an Unguent. Or,

Take White Rosin three ounces, May Butter six ounces, Juice of Ladies Mantile
one ounce, Sanicle Wintergreen, of each an ounce and half, Goats beard,, Oil of
Olive, of each two ounces. Let the Juices be first boiled with the Oil until
the moisture be consumed, then add the Rosin, and after that the Butter: then
let them be strained, and stirred well together until they be cold. Or.

Take the Herb Wintergreen, Adders tongue Sanicle, Speedwell, of each one
ounce; flowers of St. John's Wort, and Centaury the less, of each six drams: let
them be cut very small, and shut up in a Glass bottle. Add Oil Olive one ounce,
the fat of a Hog three ounces, unsalted Butter four ounces; let them stand in a
hot place, or in Balneo Mariae, for eight days; afterward boil them till the
humidity be consumed, and then strain them; after this add Turpentine one
ounce, Mastick, Frankincense, and Myrrh, of each half an ounce, Aloes Hepatick
one ounce, and make an unguent.

The Unguent likewise of Caesar Magatus is very useful; As,

Take our Oil of St. John's Wort one pound, Wax washed in Balsam water three
ounces. Let them melt together in a narrow mouthed Glass vessel; when they are
melted, ad unto them of our Balsam one pound, Gum Elemi three ounces; Balsam of
Peru, Tacamahaca, Caranna, of each two ounces, (all these Gums are to be
dissolved severally and apart with our oil of St. John's Wort) Ammoniacum and
Galbanum in like manner dissolved, of each half an ounce; Myrrh, Frankincense,
Aloes, Gum hedera, of each two drams; the Roots of Consound, Birthwort,
Bistort, and Tormentil, of each one dram and half, Cretan Dittany three drams,
Water Germander two drams, Man's fat prepared two ounces; Swans fat, one ounce;
mingle them, and make an Unguent; and keep it carefully in a narrow mouthed
vessel of Glass or Silver.

Oils and Balsams: natural, as the Balsam of Tolu, Balsams.
of Peru, and the like; and Artificial; as,

Take Oil of Bays two ounces; Mastick, Olibanum, Goats sewet, of each one
ounce, and Mingle them. or,

Take the yellow that is in the middle of red and white Roses, and white
Lilyes, of each as much as will suffice; pour in unto them Oil Olive a
sufficient quantity; and then set them in the Sun (in a Glass close stopped)
for fourteen days. or,

Take Turpentine, and Oil of Bays, of each four ounces, the Oil of the yelks
of Eggs, two ounces; Oil of Roses half a pound; mingle them, and set them in
the Sun, until they shall have gotten a yellowish color. or,

Take Turpentine one pound; Galbanum, Gum Elemi, Gum Hedera, Frankincense,
Mastick, Myrrh, of each two ounces; Aloes, Xyloaloes, Galangal, Cloves,
Cinamom, Nutmeg, Cubebs, of each one ounce, Aqua vitae three ounces. Let them
be macerated together for a day and a night, and afterward let them be twice
destilled; and keep that destilled oil as a precious Balsam. Or,

Take the Liquor of the bladders of the Elm defecated and prepared, one pint;
the best honey purified three ounces, Juice of Tormentil, of the greater
Consound, and of the mean Consound of each four ounces; mingle them, and boil
them over a gentle fire to the consumption of the Juices; and then ad the
following powders.

Take Dragons Blood, Oriental Bole-armenick, Manna thuris, Horse Tail, Mastick,
of each two drams: Mingle them, and make a very fine powder, and ad it unto
those things above mentioned.

The preparation of the liquor of the Elm-bladders is thus; in the month of
May these kind of bladders are to be gathered, before there breed any Worms in
them; and with this liquor a glass vial is to be filled up, and stopped with a
linen cloth: after this a hole is to be made in the earth, two or three hand
breadths in height; and in the bottom of the hole we are to put common salt
three fingers high; upon which the vial is to be placed; and then the hole to
be filled up with earth, so that the vial appear not; and so it is to stand for
twenty five days: then the dreggs are to be separated from the clear
substance; and that which is clear is to be kept for use; which if you put of
it self alone unto the disjoined parts, it agglutinateth them.

Another Balsam.

Take Frankincense, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Gum Junip. Gum Arabic, Gum hedera, Gum
Elemi, Mastick, Dragons blood, Balsam of Peru, Tacamahaca, Caranna, of each one
ounce and half. The tears or sweat of the Fir tree, the liquor of the little
leaves of the Elm, of each one pint; Rosin of the pine, half a pound;
Tormentil roots, Roots of Bistort, of Orace, Birthwort, Consound, white
Dittany, of each half an ounce; Juniper berries, and Bay berries of each six
drams; spirit of the best wine, three pints; mingle them together, and destill
them, and receive the water, the spirit, and the oil, severally and apart; All
of them are excellent good for the agglutinating of any Wound.

Another Balsam.

Take the oldest oil you can get, four ounces; Venice Turpentine ten ounces and
half, whole Wheat two ounces, St. John's Wort two ounces and half, the roots of
Carduus Benedict. and valerian, of each ten drams; the finest small dust or
powder of Frankincense, two ounces; Hypocistis (or the excrescence of Cystus)
half a dram; Bolearmenick and (Dragons blood, of each half an ounce, the ponder
of Earthworms two drams, the greater Consound one handful, Horse Tail half a
handful; let the roots and herbs be bruised after a gross manner, and then put
up into a vessel; and then pour in white Wine unto them; and after they shall
for a while be thus infused, let the oil and the wheat be added, and all boiled
unto the consumption of the Wine. After this pressing and squeezing forth the
Liquor with all your strength, ad the powders and the Turpentine, and then
suffer it again to boil a little, and so keep it in a Glass vessel for your
use. Or,

Take Turpentine two pound, Common oil three pints, Oil of Bays six ounces,
Oil of Cinnamom, two ounces; Oil of Euphorbium, oil of Cloves, and oil of Bay
berryes, Gum hedera, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Galbanum, of each one
ounce; Frankincense, Mastick, of each two drams; Let them be together
destilled; and make a Balsam for the Wounds of Nerves. or,

Take Clear Turpentine two pound, oil of Linseed one pint, Rosin of the Pine
six ounces, Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, Mastick, Sarcocol, of each three
ounces; Mace, Ligne Aloes, of each two ounces; Saffron half an ounce: put al
these into a Re^ort, and first of al let them be destilled by a gentle fire,
and there will come forth a clear water; and a little after there will follow a
reddish oil; then augment the fire, ever and anon more and more increasing it,
unto the end of the destillation This being done, separate the oil from the
Water, and keep them both assunder. This water in a short time will become of a
reddish color, and the oil will be of the color of a Rubie. This oil is
exceeding good for Wounds, but especially the Wounds of the Nervous parts, of
the bones, and of the Veins: for it Consolidates speedily, and without pain.
Another,

Take Earthworms as many of them as you think fit: put them into a Vessel
filled up with the Moss of the wild Sloe-Tree, to the end that creeping through
the Moss they may be purged from their filth: add likewise unto them the yelks
of Eggs hard boiled, and sliced, that they may serve them for food. Of these
Earthworms thus prepared, take one pound, and let them be well bruised in
Mortar; and then add Oil of Roses one pint, boil them, and afterward strain
them; and unto the straining add of Mastick and Myrrh, of each two drams, the
Root of Orace and Sarcocol, of each six drams; Turpentine, and Honey of Roses,
an ounce and half; Mingle them. Or,

Take Oil of Olives, one pint; Turpentine, three ounces; flowers of St.
John's Wort, Mullein, of each a sufficient quantity, that there may be a Mass
made: unto which pour of the best white Wine, a measure and a half; and boil
them til the Wine be consumed. Let the species be afterward put in the Sun for
two months, that so there may be made an Oil or a Balsam. Or,

Take Roots of the greater Consound, as much as you please thereof; put them in
a new Pot, and pour in of the Oil of Olives unto a good height; boil them, and
press forth the Liquor; the Juice thus pressed forth, boil it again so long,
until there be none of the Wateriness left remaining, and then afterward,

Take Of this Oil, three parts; Oil of Turpentine, one part; Flowers of St.
John wort, and of the greater Celandine, of each as much as will suffice: let
them be mingled and melted together, and so put into a Glass Flagon; and so let
them stand for forty days in horse dung, and then you shall have a Balsam,
which you are to instill Warm into the Wound. Or,

Take Oil Olive, a pint and half; St. Johnwort, Betony, Prunella or Self-heal,
Centaury, of each one handful; let the Herbs be bruised together, and with the
Oil let them be shut up in the Glass Vessel; and then set them in the heat of
the Sun, for the space of forty days, there to digest; and afterward press
forth the liquor; which you may reserve for use.

The following Oil (as Hieronymus Fabricius tells us) is in Spain very much
commended, for all Wounds of the Nervous parts.

Take Of the oldest Oil, three ounces; pure Turpentine eight ounces, whole
Wheat, one ounce and half; Seed of St. John's wort, two ounces; Roots of Carduus
Benedict. and Valerian, of each one ounce; Frankincense powdered two ounces;
let the Roots and Herbs be bruised in a gross manner, and put into a Pot; and
then pour in so much white Wine that all may swim in the Wine, or at least be
covered therewith; and after two days infusing, let the Oil and the Wheat be
added; and then boil them all until the wine be wasted away; and presently
after having first strongly pressed forth the Liquor, add the Turpentine and
Frankincense; then let them be again a little boiled; and kept for use in a
Glass Vessel. The manner of using it is thus. The Wound being first washed with
cold white Wine, the whole Wound is then forthwith to be anointed with the Oil
aforesaid a little warm; but if this cannot conveniently be done, it is then
with a Pipe or Funnel to be conveied within the Wound; and immediately the Lips
of the Wound are to be brought together so close that they may touch, either by
a Ligature, or by sewing, or by Gluing, And then the parts that lie round about
are likewise to be anointed with the aforesaid Oil. Upon the Lips of the Wound
now drawn together you are to lay on a Linen Cloth wet in the aforesaid Oil:
and above upon this another wet in black Wine, and then wrung dry, and then
upon this another dry Linen Cloth; and then Lastly, upon all the Swathe is to be
rolled about, and fastened.

That Oil likewise which they call the Oil of Hispana is much commended; The Oil
of Hispana.
and it is thus to be prepared, and made.

Take Old Oil of Olive four pound, Oil of Turpentine, two pound; Frankincense
one pound, Valerian, St. John's Wort, Carduus Benedict. of each half a pound;
Elect and Choice Myrrh, one ounce; Cutchioneal, four ounces; new Rosin of the
Pine, three ounces; Malmesey three pintes.

Let the Valerian be gathered in the month of May, and cast away the Roots. The
St. John's Wort may be gathered in the month of July, with the Flowers and
Seeds. The Herbs therefore being broken with the Hands, and a little bruised in
a Mortar, let them be infused in the Malmsey and put into an Earthen Pot
covered over with Glass; of which said Pot let the third part remain empty of
all those things aforesaid that are put into it, for four hours. In the next
place let the Cutcheoneal (a little broken in a Mortar) together with the Oil,
be put upon the rest; and so without any Covering let them boil by a gentle
Fire, until the Wine be well nigh wasted; and here great care must be taken,
that the Herbs be not burnt in the boiling. After this let it be taken from the
fire, and while it is yet scalding hot let the Herbs be pressed and squeezed
very hard in a bag first soaked in Malmsey. And then let the Vessel in which
the boiling was be carefully cleaned; (and yet nevertheless it will not be
altogether dried, for there will still be left some of the Wine sticking to the
sides) and in the same Vessel let the Oil be again put to the Fire, with the
Oil of Turpentine, or that that sweats forth of the Fir Tree; and so soon as
ever it begins to boil, let the Mirrh bruised and beaten very small be added,
and melted in a Mortar with a little of the Oil that is in the Vessel over the
Fire. Let Rosin in like manner be added, melted with the same Oil; yet
nevertheless it must be first strained through a strainer; and then add the
Frankincense being very finely powdered; and; let all the other things be in the
most exact and curious manner mingled together; and when they have boiled a
little, let the Vessel be taken from the Fire; and when they are grown cold,
let it be kept in a Glass Vessel, without any straining at al; and so let it be
set abroad in the Sun, for fifteen or twenty days.

Caesar Magatus commends likewise the Oil of St. John's Wort, The Oil of St.
John's Wort, invented by Magatus.
of his own invention; which is thus with much labor and pains to be made.

Take the Tops of St. John's Wort, three handfuls; Adders Tongue, the greater
Consound, and Horse-Tail, of each one handful; white Wine well scented and
strong, five pints; let the Herbs be bruised and macerated in the said Wine for
the space of twenty four hours, the mouth of the Vessel being carefully and
close stopped: and then making an expression, and straining what is so pressed
forth, take the like Quantity of the said Herbs, and let there be a second
infusion, and after that a third. The last infusion being made, and the liquor
pressed forth and strained, Add then unto the white Wine,

Of old Oil six pound; the Tops of St. John's Wort, two handfuls, Adders Tongue,
the Herb commonly called Meddow-sweet, or Regina prati, the greater Consound,
and Carduus Benedict. of each one handful, the Root of white Dittany, the
greater Consound, Birth-wort, Tormentile, Bistort, of each half an ounce;
Scarlet Grain or Chermes Berry, two drams; Seeds of St. John's Wort, six drams;
and mingle them. Having bruised those things that are to be bruised, let them
be macerated in Balneo in hot boiling water, the mouth of the Vessel being well
stopped, for twenty four hours; and afterward let them boil in a double Vessel,
tell the Wine be consumed; and then pressing and wringing forth the Liquor, and
straining it through a bag first well moistened in the best white Wine, Add
thereunto.

The Tops St. John's Wort, two handfuls; Adders Tongue, the Herb Meddow-sweet,
Consound, Woodroof, (which the Latin Herbarists call Matrisylva) of each one
handful; mingle them. The Herbs being bruised, and an infusion made in a Bath
of scalding hot Water, or in Balneo Mariae, for twenty four hours; and after
this an expression being made, and the Liquor strained, (as before,) take the
like quantity of the aforesaid Herbs, and make another infusion, as above; and
so a third: and the last expression and straining being made, add to the Oil,
Leaves of St John's Wort, two handfuls; Betony, Pimpernel* Mous-Ear, the Herb
Trinity, of each one Handful; of these make three infusions, as above; the last
expression being made, and the liquor strained, Add unto the Oil,

Of the smallest Leaves of St. John's Wort, two handfuls; Consound, the lesser
Centaury, white Briony, Periwinkle, of each one handful; and here likewise let
there be three infusions in this manner: Let the Vessel (which ought to be of
Glass) be set in the Sun for three days; and the fourth day let it be kept in
Balneum of Scalding hot Water, and there let it continue for twenty four hours;
and afterward make an expression, and strain it; and unto the Oil let there
again be added, The small Leaves of St. John's Wort that have attained unto their
full ripeness, three handfuls; Centaury the less, one handful; the fruit of the
Balsam Tree, in Numb. 6. And then do as before. The last expression being made,
and the straining likewise, Add unto the Oil,

Dittany of Crete, one ounce; Roots of white Dittany, and the greater Consound,
Birthwort, Orace of Illyria, Bistort, Tormentil, of each six drams; Scarlet
Grain, two drams. Make three infusions after this manner: set the Vessel in the
Sun for six days, after that for two days let it be kept in a Balneum of
boiling hot water; then press forth the Liquor, and strain it: and thus do
three times, (as above) and in the end, the last expression being made, and
strained, Add unto the Oil

The distilled Oil of Turpentine, of the Gum or sweat of the Fir Tree, of each
half a pound; Seed of St. John's Wort, one ounce; Root of Consound, Birthwort,
white Dittany, Tormentil, Bistort, Orace, of each two ounces; Scarlet Grain,
one ounce; Mirrh, and Frankincense, of each one ounce and half; Sarcocol, Gum
Junip. Aloes, of each half an ounce; Apples of the Balsam Tree, twelve in Numb.
Balsam of Peru, two ounces; slice the Apples, and bruise all the rest, mingling
them with the Oil; and let the Vessel be kept all the Winter time under Horse
Dung; then take it forth, and press out the liquor, and straining it keep it
for your use in a Glass vessel, the mouth thereof being close stopped.

The vulnerary Balsam of Magatus.

The Vulnerary Balsam of Magatus.
Take Gum Elemi four ounces, Balsam of Peru three ounces, Gum Tacamahaca, Gum
Carranna, the liquor contained in the little bladders of the Elm, of each two
ounces; oil of Bays, Styrax liquid, Myrrh, of each one ounce and half; White
Frankincense, Gum Hedera, of each one ounce; the sweet smelling Laser, Ladanum,
Styrax Calamite, (the fattest you can get) Ammoniacum, Bedellium, Opopanax,
Galbanum, Sarcocoll, of each six drams; Roots of Birthwort, Master-wort,
Angelica, White Dittany, Consound, Acorus, Orace, Tormentill, Bistort, the
seeds of St. John's Wort, of the Citron, Citron rind, of each half an ounce,
Cinnamom, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace, of each one ounce; Mastick, Aloes, Dragons
blood, Scarlet Grain, of each half an ounce; Cretan Dittany, one ounce; the oil
of the oil Nut Ben, three ounces; Juiniper Berries an ounce and half, Wax one
ounce; Rosin of the Pine, one ounce and half; Clear Turpentine, Gum of the fir
tree, of each one pound and half; the best strong water, six pints; Mingle
them, the Gums being exactly melted; they may be melted apart by themselves,
with some of the Turpentine, and the rest that are more dry beaten and bruised
(in a gross manner) into a powder: and then let them all be cast together into
a Retort, which may be kept for three days in a Balneum of Boiling hot water;
then let it be luted and kept in the hot water, until the Clay be thoroughly
dried; afterward by a fire of Ashes or embers let the oil be drawn forth in an
Artific al manner; now first there will come forth a certain water, (which I
call the water of Balsam, and it is to be kept by it self) and then the oil,
which we call Balsam.

The oil of St. John's Wort is here likewise of singular use; and it is thus to
be prepared.

Take the Tops of St. John's wort fully ripe, Oil of St. John's Wort.
three ounces; Macerate them for three days in sweet smelling Wine and then let
them boil in a double vessel, stopping close the mouth thereof; after this let
them be squeezed hard and the liquor pressed forth: and then let a like weight
of fresh St. John's wort be cast into it; let it be again Macerated, boiled and
pressed forth; let this be thrice done; and if the wine be diminished, add
other instead thereof; after this,

Take Turpentine three ounces, old clear oil six ounces; Saffron one pound;
boil them in a double vessel unto the wasting a way of the wine and then make
an expression; and when you have purged the oil from all its settling, reserve
it for your use.

The Balsam following is greatly commended by Dr. Raimundus Mindererus.

The Balsam of Mindererus.
Take Turpentine of Cyprus, and oil of St. John's wort, of each as much as you
think good; let them be melted together; melt likewise by it self of Gum Elemi
a sufficient quantity, unto a Just consistence, and let it be added unto the
rest. When they are almost cold, add a little of the destilled oil of Wax, and
Mingle them.

Henricus ab Here ( in his Physical observations, Observat. 10.) highly
commends this Balsam;

Take the flowers of Thapsus or scorching fenel, The Balsam of Henricus ab
Here, for Wounds and Ulcers.
St. John's Wort, the leaves of Prunella or Selfheal, of each one handful; boil
them in the oil of the seed of St. John's wort pressed forth, and old red Wine,
of each alike, until the wine be altogether consumed, that is, until that a
drop of the liquor cast into the fire take the flame without any noise at all;
and so keep it for use. If you please, you may often macerate the same flowers,
and after you have set them in the Sun for forty days, or kept them hot upon
the fire, you may again press forth the liquor; which the oftener that you do
it, the more efficacious you shall find the oil; add if you think fit the Stone
called Calaminaris, made hot, and quenched first seven times in wine; and then
making it red hot, quench it in this oil.

And yet notwithstanding in the use of Balsams (especially if they be hot)
there is great caution required, (as Guilhelm. Fabricius likewise acquaints us,
in his third cent. observat. 97.) not only because that the lips of the wound
being over soon conglutinated, the Pus that is afterward generated is kept
within, and so exciteth grievous symptoms; but likewise because that those kind
of Balsams are not alike and equally convenient for the temperament of all the
parts.

Emplasters.
The Emplaster of Franciscus Arcaeus is of singular use: As,

Take Oil of Roses, of Violets, and of Camomile, of each one ounce; the soft
fat of a Hen, the marrow of legs of Veal, of each half an ounce; Earthworms
washed in Wine one ounce; New fresh butter six drams; the Mucillage of
Marshmallows half a pound; Boil them all unto the consumption of the mucillage,
and then strain them; unto the straining add Litharge two ounces and half;
vermilion three ounces; with a sufficient quantity of white wax make a Cerote;
adding of Turpentine ten drams, Mastick, half an ounce; or,

Take the new drawn Juice of Betony, Agrimony, Sanicle, Ladies Mantle, Saracen
consound, of each half an ounce; White wax and Goats sewet, of each half a
pound; the best Rosin one pound; boil them; and in the end add Mastick one
ounce, and make an Emplaster, or

Take Wax, Rosin, Pitch, Vitriol, White Frankincense, of each four ounces;
Turpentine six ounces; red Myrrh, oil of Juniper, and oil of Eggs; of each two
drams; Camphire one dram and half; make an Emplaster, adding oil of Roses as
much as will suffice. or,

Take New Wax, and Rosin, of each one pound; Goats sewet, Hoggs fat, of each
three ounces; Turpentine two ounces; Vinegar three ounces; and make an
Emplaster. or,

Take Litharge of Silver, oil of Roses, of each half a pound; Mucilage of
Linseed, and of Orace Roots, of each two ounces; Boil them unto a Just
Consistence; and afterward add Frankincense, and Mastick, of each one ounce;
Wax and Turpentine, of each two ounces; and so make an Emplaster. or,

Take Wax three ounces; Rosin and Pitch, of each two ounces; of White
Frankincense, Vitriol, Ceruss, of each four ounces; oil of Juniper berries, and
oil of Eggs, of each two ounces; Champhire a dram and half, Turpentine half a
pound; Make an Emplaster.

The following Emplasters are chiefly useful for Prickings.

Take Oil Olive two ounces; Rosin, Bears fat, Goats sewet, and Bulls Sewet, of
each one ounce and half; the fat of a Cow-heel, three ounces and half; May
butter, six ounces; Litharge of Silver one pound; the scales of Brass one ounce
and half; Mastick one ounce; New wax, or the oil of the same four ounces; and
make an Emplaster according to art.

Raimundus Mindererus likewise most highly commends his own Emplaster which
he calls Emplastrum opoteldoch magnum Colcotharnum; the description whereof,
as we find it extant in his Tract of Calcanthum, Chapt. 7. is as follows) of
which he writes that it is the best of all that are known for the healing of
new wounds, and the drawing forth of things extraneous that are fixed in the
wound; and so likewise in stinking and putrid ulcers. Viz.

Take of the newest and Cleanest Wax one pound; Clear Turpentine, or (if you
had rather) Cyprus or Venice Turpentine, six ounces; Gum Elemi three ounces;
oil of St. John's wort, oil of Myrrh of each one ounce and half; let them melt
all together; and as so soon as they begin to run abroad, add unto them these
things following; of the purest and cleanest Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum, Opopanax,
of each three drams; Colophony six drams; Choice Mummy, white and transparent
Amber, of each two drams; White Frankincense, Mastick purified, Dragons Blood,
Sarcocol purged from its excrements, of each one dram and half; Aloes Hepatick
half a dram; Myrrh one dram; let the Gums be dissolved in vinegar; and let them
be joined together in a fit manner, and according to art, stirring them ever
and anon; and when they appear to be almost cold, then by degrees, and warily
cast in of the Loadstone prepared six drams; Crocus Martis according to art
prepared without a corrosive, and Tutty prepared, of each one ounce; Lapis
Calaminaris prepared, five ounces; Litharage of Gold one ounce; Colcothar
sweetened, or the Earth of Vitriol mortifyed and dulcified two ounces; let them
be according to art reduced into an Emplaster, which when it is cold will grow
to be very hard.

The use thereof is thus; It is over live coals to be tampered with the fingers
until it become soft; and then apart of it is to be spread abroad like a Cake,
and with it the wound is to be covered al over; and daily let it be twice again
wiped and made clean, and Malaxed, and so again let it be put upon the Wound;
and thus with one small part thereof more wounds then one may be healed.

And then in the Conclusion, the wound is to be shut up with a Cicatrice: but
in what manner the said Cicatrice is to be brought over the Wound we have shown
you before, Epuloticks.
in the second part, about the end thereof: and Certain Playsters likewise made
of those things that we but even now mentioned may also bring a Cicatrice over
the Wound; when they have first thoroughly healed the same.

Very useful also are those Emplasters that are commended by Franciscus
Arcaeus, (in his second Book, and fifth Chapter) to wit, the Leonine Emplaster,
and the black. The Leonine is thus described.

Take Ceruss three ounces; oil of Roses half a pound; the Basilique Unguent one
ounce; let them boil together over a gentle fire stirring them all the while
with a spatter of wood, even until that a Cerote may be; made, unto which ad
of Verdigrease powdered three drams; then let them boil again, until they shall
have gotten a color yellow, or somewhat reddish: and then make a Cerote. Of
the black Emplaster this is the description.

Take Litharge one pound, old oil and the strongest Vinegar, of each three
pints; Mingle them over the fire, and make an Emplaster.

Chap. 9. My Judgment, touching the Method of Caesar Magatus, and Ludovicus
Septalius, in their Curing of Wounds.
ANd thus, out of what has hitherunto been said, it may plainly appear in what
manner Wounds are first of all to be bound up; and what ought to be the in
first provision and preparation that we make for the Curing of the same. But
how and in what manner we are further to order and handle them, I am now to
acquaint you. For in very truth, the Ancients who have written of the Curing of
Wounds, as also the Surgeons who have handled and healed them, do not at all
differ in those things that are further to be done as touching the same, (as we
shall presently show you) but they all of them go almost one and the same way.
And first of all some years since, Caesar Magatus, Professor of Physic in the
University of Ferrara, (in his two B. of a rare kind of healing of Wounds, in
the which he has with much diligence and accurateness treated of all things
whatsoever that may possibly be said of Wounds) promises us a new Method of
Curing Wounds; such as has not hitherunto been attempted by any; and by which
the said wounds may more speedily and happily be Cured, then they have been
formerly by the Ancients, or hitherto by any whomsoever. Ludovicus Septalius
extolleth and defends Caesar Magatus, in his 8. B. of Physic Observations,
and Animadversions. There is due unto both these their deserved praise, in
regard of their study and endeavor to advance the Art and Practice of Physic,
and to free the sick from their Diseases, and the long and troublesome way of
Curing the same. And yet notwithstanding I conceive that I shall not in the
least offend against the Public, or the Private good of any, if I shall here
in this place, without any detraction, set before you the Opinion of them both,
and accordingly weigh them, and tell you my Opinion therein.

And first of all, Caesar Magatus (in his 1 B. of Wounds, and 33. Chap.)
accuses Galen for having forgotten and omitted an Indication of the greatest
moment, and for being wholly taken up with other things that are of far less
moment; and there he writes, that Galen was sollicitous, and troubled himself
only with the Excrements that were bred; but as for the Cause from whence they
are generated, he never so much as minded the same: and that he seemed to
desire and require the wasting of the said Excrements, but then that he took no
care at all to prevent the generating of them; to wit, in a word, that he was
but little careful as touching the temperament and heat of the part. For if
sufficient care be taken for the Temperament and strength of the part; he
thinks that then there could not possibly be collected such great store of
Excrements that might require this over curious, and indeed hurtful diligence.
Now he thinks that the heat may be sufficiently Cherished and Corroborated,
if we prevent and hinder the diffusing thereof abroad, and that we preserve its
quality: and that the diffusion thereof may be prevented, if we supply the want
of that Natural Covering (such as is the wounded Skin) and this indeed by a
Medicament that in its quality comes near, and is a friend unto the temperament
of the part. For so both the heat is cherished, and the quality thereof
preserved by a Quality that is like unto it. And from all these premises he
concludes at length, that Wounds are to be more seldom wiped and cleansed then
has formerly been practiced; to wit, lest that the heat of the part be hurt by
the Ambient Air; but that it ought to be preserved safe under a continual
Covering, and so Cherished and augmented; and thereupon he propounds a new
way of Curing Wounds; touching which we shall now speak something. And indeed
what we have already said is the sum and substance of the whole matter: but yet
Nevertheless in regard that the Authors now mentioned do treat so largely
touching the thing now in question, we shall explain it a little more clearly.

Now the State of the Controversy is this; to wit, whether it be better once
(if not twice) a day to uncover and cleanse the Wound; and laying on new
Medicaments again to bind it up; or else indeed not to do this above once in
seven days at most. All the Ancient Physicians and Surgeons (unto these
very times) have followed and practiced the former way of Curing Wounds. And as
for this latter way of Curing them. Caesar Magatus (in the preface to his first
B. of Wounds) tells us that he first of all saw it at Rome, which although that
at the first he suspected it, and that it seemed unto him to rest and rely
upon a weak and infirm Foundation, and to have no very good reason for it; yet
nevertheless, that observing daily the rare and wonderful Events thereof, he
began with himself strictly and accurately to examine and search into those
Foundations and Grounds upon which it rested and relied. And there he writes
that in two things especially he found this new way of Curing Wounds to differ
from the former common way. The first this, that the Wounds were very seldom
opened: the other was this, that in this new way there was no use at all made
of Tents and Liniments: of both these we shall now Treat, and speak of them
severally.

Whether VVounds be often, or but seldom to be Cleansed?
We will yet notwithstanding first of all propound and set before you their way
of Curing Wounds. Magatus and Septalius their way of Curing Wounds.
If a Wound be to be Cured, that is in a Body otherwise sound and of a good
habit, and healthful Constitution, (in which there is neither any great Vessel,
nor yet any Nerve hurt; but that it is simply in the Flesh; and that there has
flown forth sufficient of the Blood) they then command the Lips of the Wound to
be Joined together, so as that they touch one the other. The Lips being united
and brought to touch, they then impose something upon the Wound that covers it
and so cherishes the Native heat, and withal has a power and virtue to dry,
with some kind of Astriction; to the end that so the Blood that flows unto
the part that is wounded (for its nourishment) may be thoroughly purged from al
its superfluous humidity, and brought unto a certain viscidity or Clamminess.
And for this purpose, they administer Rosin Turpentine, or Rosin of the
Fir Tree; unto which (if they be more solid) they add a certain portion of Wax,
that it may acquire a Consistence. They commend likewise for this end
Tacamahaca, which that it may the more easily be spread, they soften it with
the Oil of the Male Balsam Apple, or of St. John's Wort, a fourth or fifth part
thereof. They commend also the Balsam of Peru, unto which (if it be more solid)
they give a Consistence by adding of Wax. They use likewise the Juice that is
contained in the small Leaves of the Elm, thickened; as also the Cerote Barbarous
(as they call it) the Cerote Diapalma, and the Cerote of Betony with Tacamahaca:
or some other Emplaster made of the Juyces or Decoctions of Vulnerary Plants;
adding thereto, Aloes, Sarcocol, Dragons blood, Rosin Turpentine, and Rosin of
the Fir Tree. Of these Medicaments they spread somewhat thereof upon a Linen
Cloth that may answer the greatness of the Wound, and may likewise take in
somewhat of the adjacent parts; and this they impose upon the Wound. And then
upon this they apply as many linen Clothes doubled or trebled, as are
sufficient for the preserving of the Natural heat of the part, and the keeping
off the injuries of the Ambient Air. And the Wound being after this manner
bound up, they open it not, until the fourth, fifth, or sometimes even the
seventh day; and so (as they write) a wound (such as it may be) is now and then
Cured with once binding up; and that very frequently two or three dressings do
suffice. And yet notwithstanding, that the Linen when it is all foul and nasty
may sometimes be taken off, and clean Clothes be imposed in stead thereof, this
they allow of; provided always, that this be done without any uncovering of
the Wound. And withal they likewise make exceptions in some certain Cases, in
which this way of Curing simply has not place, (but that we ought in those
Cases to use the old way of Curing) touching which we shall anon speak further.

And that new way of Curing they prefer far before the former old manner;
Whether Wounds be often, or but seldom to be opened?
and first of al they endeavor to prove by certain Arguments and Reasons that
it is both more easy, and more safe: and then by certain Reasons they impugn
and oppose that Ancient way; and then Thirdly, they endeavor to weaken and
invalidate those Causes that are alleged by the Ancients, and whereby they
seem to be drawn unto the more frequent opening and uncovering of the Wound;
and then lastly, they attempt the answering of whatsoever has been by any
objected against this new way of theirs: unto all which we shall speak in order.

And in the first place therefore, that this their new way and Method is both
more easy, and more safe also, (and by which far many more have been and may
be Cured, then by the old common way) they first of al appeal unto experience:
and in special, Ludovicus Septalius writes, touching the Wounds of the Head;
that when in a time of great weakness and sickliness at Millain, in the space
of one year very many of those that were wounded in the Head, and were ordered
after the old wonted manner (to wit, by often opening of the Wounds, Tents,
Liniments, and more frequent Terebrations, and Scrapings) miscarried and
perished: and that afterward this new way of curing being put in practice, to
wit, by imposing an Unguent upon the Wound, anointing the Lips thereof with the
Oil of the Fir Tree, and the wound only twice or thrice uncovered, and but one
only Terebration (or piercing with the Wimble) being instituted, of fourteen
that were wounded in their Heads there died but only one of them. And Caesar
Magatus (in his 1. B. and 40. Chap.) writes, that the wounds inflicted upon
the Head (with the falling in of the bone) within the space of twenty days
were perfectly cured in that manner. And likewise that in the same manner, and
in the same space of time a wound of the head, with a cutting of the Membranes,
was healed. And that a Wound inflicted on the Head with a Leaden bullet shot
out of an Engine of War (so that the bullet pierced even to the more inward
parts of the Brain before, neither could be found, or drawn forth) in thirty
days, after two or three openings and dressings was perfectly Cured.

I. And then in the next place, Caesar Magatus (in his 1. Book Chap. 7.)
alleges these Reasons, which we will briefly propound. The First is, that
this new way of Curing wounds does best and with the most security perform all
those things that are required in Curing. The Reasons that moved Magatus to
prefer his new way of Curing Wounds before the old.
To wit, as for the Native heat, that Nature uses (for suppuration, generating
of Flesh, and the glutinating of the Wound) as its chief Agent, (and which by
Reason of the effusion of Blood, and the uncovering and wounding of the Natural
Covering is dissipated and rendered very weak, and by the external Air is
offended and altered) is made more strong and vigorous, whereas in this new way
and Method of Curing the Wounds are kept covered. For when the Wounds are but
seldom uncovered, that Artificial Covering supplieth the defect of the Natural
covering which is the Skin; and so neither the Native heat is scattered and
dissolved, neither is it at al altered by the Ambient Air. And for this Reason
Septalius wondereth that Galen should omit this main and principal scope,
(which is to preserve the Native heat) and that his care and study is only to
take away the Impediments.

And Secondly, He therefore thinks that Wounds are most happily cured in this
new way of theirs, because that in this way those things that retarde and
hinder the Curing of Wounds are soonest and best of all turned and taken out of
the way. For whereas one main impediment (among all those other that chiefly
hinder the speedy and safe curing of Wounds) is the conflux of Humors unto the
wounded part; they think that that impediment is by this their new way best of
all prevented. For since that the afflux is caused either by transmission, or
else by attraction (by Reason of the pain, and heat) both these are best turned
away by this their new manner of curing. For if the Wound be but seldom opened,
the heat is then by the covering preserved and fortifyed; neither is there any
pain excited, as it is wont to happen by the frequent handling and cleansing of
Wounds. For all those inconveniences and discommodities are avoided by this new
way of curing, whilst that the part is but very rarely moved from its due and
proper Situation, is very seldom loosned and unbound, so that likewise there
is not often occasion for its binding up; and (as he adds in the 32. Chap.)
if any wind or Humor distend the part, so that there be great pain caused
thereby, it is speedily discussed by the strong and more Vigorous heat.

Thirdly, Of all those things that impede and withstand the Cure of Wounds, the
chiefest of them is the exposing of the Wound unto the Ambient Air, by which
the innate heat is altered and weakened. But now this is prevented, if the Wound
be but seldom uncovered by opening thereof.

Fourthly, whereas Hippocrates (in his 2. Sect. of Fractures, Title 7.)
commends that Cure under which there is little or no impostumation and loss
of the bones, this appears to be so in this new way of curing: and therefore
he determines, that this is the most perfect: and this Magatus proves by an
example of his own; for that in this manner he had Cured Wounds of the Head
(wherein there was likewise an extraordinary hurt of the bone, in so much that
any one would have Judged that a great part thereof would have dropped out)
without any impostumation and abscession of the bone, or any thing else.

Fifthly, He therefore thinks that this new way of curing is to be preferred,
because that under it fewer Excrements are generated then under the common and
wonted manner; which (as he writes) is manifest by experience.

Sixthly, Caesar Magatus (in his first B. and 32. Chap.) brings this likewise
for a Reason: because that those things that are extraneous and strangers to
the Body, (and which at the first could not be drawn forth by the Surgeons,
being such as require the work of Nature,) may more easily be driven forth, if
the Wounds be but seldom uncovered; and that for this very Reason, to wit,
because that in this new way and Method the Natural heat is more rightly
preserved, cherished, and augmented; as was said before in the first Reason.

And Seventhly, in the place alleged he produces this for one of his
Reasons; that in this his new way the virtue of the Medicament that was
administered in the first dressing, is best of all continued and made to endure
even unto the perfect agglutination of the Wound; and especially if it be of
such an essence that it cannot hastily be dissipated. And as for those
Excrements that usually are here to be found, he thinks also that it cannot
be by them corrupted; since that the Excrements that are generated are not
worth a speaking of.

II. They in Like manner reject the Ancient Way and Method of Curing Wound; as
drawn thereunto both by experience and Reason. Experience indeed, because that
(as is said before) under the Ancient way of Cure fewer Patients, and with far
more difficulty, do recover of their Wounds, then under their new way. And as
for the Reasons they alleadg, they are these.

The First is this, because that under the ordinary and wonted way of curing,
The Reasons moving Magatus and Septalius to reject the Ancient way of Curing
Wounds.
the wounded part is exposed unto the Ambient Air; and by it the Natural heat
thereof may be dissolved, offended, and weakened; and that thereupon the part is
rendered the more apt and Obnoxious unto a reception of the Afflux of Humors;
and the Concoction therein is less happily perfected; and so there are
generated greater store of Excrements, that in time prove a great impediment
unto Nature in her work.

Secondly, They say, that from this frequent unbinding and loosening of the
wound, the handling thereof, and the moving of the part, the cleansing thereof,
and the laying on of new Medicaments, and by means likewise of the new binding
up, a pain is oftentimes excited, which they say may very well be the cause of
a Fluxion. For it can no ways be, (says Caesar Magatus, in his 1. B. and 32.
Chap.) but that, while we handle the part, there will be some pain excited; and
indeed the greater by how much the greater the Wound is, and the part wherein
it is endued with an exquisite sense. For we are forced in the opening of the
Wound, and the new binding it up again, to move the part from its former
Situation. We take away the Medicaments, we cleanse and wipe away the Pus, we
impose new Medicaments, and then we bind up the Wound again: al which
operations cannot possibly be performed without pain.

Thirdly, They object, that if the Wound be too often opened and uncovered
there will then Exhale much of the heat and Spirits.

Fourthly, and last of all, That Nature also as often as the Wound is loosned
and uncovered, so often is she disturbed, and d stracted from her proper work
and office.

III. Caesar Magatus, (in his 1. B. and first Chap. and Ludovicus Septalius (in
the 1. B. of his Physical Ammadversions) after this manner endeavor to
infringe those causes and Reasons, Magatus his Confutation of the Reasons of
the Ancients, for their often uncovering of VVounds.
for which it seemed necessary unto the Ancients, and at this day does seem
altogether needful and requisite, that Wounds should often be uncovered, and
new Medicaments imposed and laid on.

And first of all, this is brought for a common and received opinion, that in
hollow wounds there is evermore generated a double kind of Excrements, thick,
and thin; as it appears from Galen his 3. B. of the Meth. of Curing, and 9.
Chap. and that therefore we are always so to reckon, that it ought to be
thoroughly dried up, and wiped away; and that therefore the Wound is daily to be
opened, that so the Pus may be cleansed away, and new Medicaments applied. For
those that were at first laid on cannot long keep entire their strength and
virtues, in regard that they are dissolved by the heat of the part and also
corrupted by the mingling of the Excrements. But if the Excrements be not
thoroughly dried up, and purged forth, being retained in the Wound they hinder
the generating of Flesh, and the conglutination of the Wound; and become
likewise more sharp and Corrosive; Yea further, they often acquire a
putridness, from whence may proceed Pains, Inflammations, Impostumations,
Worms, and Gangrenes.

The Answers.
Now unto this they thus Answer; first of all, that there is no great danger
threatened from the Pus; since that there is no neccessity that there should be
any great store thereof bred in Wounds, but then only when by Reason of the
frequent uncovering of them the Native heat is debilitated. Neither is there
any need (say they) that these Excrements should be consumed by the imposing of
various Medicaments; seeing that the Wounds of the internal parts, the Liver,
the Lungs, the Tongue, and other parts, (in which we cannot possibly come to
apply Tents, or Liniments spread over with unguents) they are yet nevertheless
healed by Nature. And albeit, (as Caesar Magatus writes, in his 1. B. and 44.
Chap.) it may be admitted, that two Excrements (to wit, a thick, and a thin)
may be generated in the Wound; yet nevertheless he thinks not this a sufficient
Reason why the wound should be often uncovered. For the thin Excrement may
partly be digested by insensible exhalation; and partly driven quite forth of
the Wound by the heat of the part; and for the thick, there is so little
thereof at the very first, that it needs no at all any Medicaments to cleanse
it away; and that after in process of time it is confounded, and becomes one
with the Pus, and so is by Nature expelled forth together with the same.

Secondly, For this Cause likewise the frequent uncovering of the Wound is held
necessary, in regard that there is sometimes need of Manual operation; since
that in the Cavity of a Wound there may be collected many Excrements that
cannot possibly be purged forth by any Medicaments; but they are to be cleansed
away by the operation of the Hand.

Answer. But now Caesar Magatus (in his 44. Chap.) denies this; and there
determines, that the Excrements that are bred in a Wound may partly be
insensibly digested by exhalation, and partly by Nature sensibly expelled by
the Wound, when there is present a fit afflux, and this no ways hindered, and
detained in the Cavity of the Wound.

Thirdly, Wounds are therefore (according to the common opinion) often to be
uncovered, that so according to the various State and conditions of them
various and different Medicaments may be imposed; first of al, Suppurating or
Digestive Medicaments, then Abstersive, after that such as generate flesh; (and
sometimes likewise such as take away superfluous and proud flesh) and lastly;
such as produce a Cicatrice. Al which seeing that they cannot possibly be
effected by one only Medicament, therefore the Wound is often to be opened,
that so unto every state of the wound fit and convenient Medicaments may be
administered.

Answer. Unto which Argument Magatus (in his 1. B. and 44. Chap.) endeavors
to give an Answer; to wit, that this is indeed necessary in the old way of
curing, but not in his new way; as being such in which the care of the
Excrements is for the most part committed unto Nature her self: and in his 37.
Chap. he writes that he is wont to commit the whole work to Nature; and that
it is sufficient, that the Medicament serve instead of a covering, and
discharge the Office thereof, by cherishing and defending the Natural heat; and
that the same Medicament may in all Wounds undergo the Nature of a covering,
and serve instead thereof. And he says that he himself has observed, that
Wounds have been suppurated, thoroughly purged, and filled up with flesh, by the
help only of the ordinary and common Digestive. Now he thinks that the
Medicaments cannot perform this any other ways then by their corpulency and
bulkiness, whiles that they hinder and forbid the efflux of the heat, and
defend the part from all external injuries: but that it makes no great matter,
what quality shall be adjoined unto this corpulency; especially, in regard that
for the most part such Medicaments are made choice of that are of a temperate
heat, and most agreeable unto our Nature. And at length Magatus concludes,
that by any Medicament of a convenient corpulency, (provided that it be not
poisonous, and corruptive, or so sharp and Corrosive that it excite and cause a
fluxion) all hollow Wounds that are curable may be cured, and filled up with
flesh.

Fourthly, It is therefore also thought that Wounds ought often to be opened
and uncovered; that so it may be known, what the effect is of the Medicament
applied; and whether or no it be sufficiently drying; whether the Wound be
moist, or not, that so the driers may answer in a due proportion unto the
moisture; since that the more moist Wounds are to be cured with the drier
Medicaments; as Galen tells us, in the third B. of his Method, and 3. Chap.

Answer. But unto this Caesar Magatus, and Ludovicus Septalius give this
Answer, that for the cause aforesaid there is no need at all of this frequent
uncovering of the wound, seeing that in this new way of curing the care of the
Excrements is not to be committed unto Medicaments, but unto Nature, and the
natural heat; and our study must be only how to cherish this Native heat.

Fifthly, And for this cause also the more often uncovering of the wound
seems to be necessary, that the state of the wound may be known; and that the
Symptoms that are wont here to happen may the better be prevented; and those
things of which Hippocrates makes mention. 1. Praedict. Text 18. 5 Aphor. 65,
66, 67. 6 Aphor. 4. may be sufficiently known.

Answer. Unto which they Answer, that al those things may be known some other
way, and by other means; as namely, from the itching, the heat, the smell that
comes from it, the beating pain, the terrible Fever, heaviness in the part,
and the like: and that evermore the Eyes of the mind are sharper sighted and
see more clearly then the Eyes of our Body.

Sixthly, And for this cause likewise the wound seems to require frequent
opening, that so the Swaths and little Pillows, and the Linen clothes laid
thereon may be wiped and made clean: which Hippocrates (in his B. of the Office
of the Physician, Sect. 2.) and Galen (in his Commentary) do both of them
strictly enjoin; in regard that the filth and impurities of the Wound may
excite an Itching Pain, and at length an Inflammation.

Answer. Unto which Septalius answers, and grants that the Swaths may
indeed be changed, provided that the Wound be not uncovered.

Seventhly, For this cause likewise the Swaths and coverings of the Wound seem
to require often changing, that so the hurtful Exhalations that are bred in the
Wound may pass forth; in regard that being kept shut in they disaffect the
wounded part, and alter the temperament thereof.

Answer. But unto this also Magatus answers that there is no necessity that
the wounded part should have so many and such Linen Clothes put upon it,
neither that it should be so close and strictly bound up, but that the
offensive vapors might exhale, and not be supressed. And that if the Pus has a
passage forth, much more then may the Vaporous Excrements be scattered, and
find a passage forth: and that should they be still kept in, yet they never
bring so much hurt and damage as comes by the uncovering of the wound.

But in very truth, (that I may briefly show you my opinion touching this
controversy) I will not in the least detract from the Reputation of these men,
(Caesar Magatus, and Ludovicus Septalius) men so Famous and Eminent, that they
are not to be so much as named without due honor and respect: and yet
nevertheless I shall take the liberty to say, that here in this controversy
they seem to me to seek (as we say) a knot in a Bul-Rush: and that there is not
any sufficient cause to move them to find fault with that Ancient way and
Method of curing of Wounds; The general examination and inquiry into the
Opinion of Magatus and Septalius.
and so to extol this new way of their own. For first of all they themselves
cannot but confess that in the old way of curing (for so many Ages past) many
and the most grievous Wounds have been happily Cured. And then again, neither
can they deny this, that that new way of theirs has place only in a simple
Wound, (the wounded person being of a sound and good habit) in which there is
neither any great Vessel cut, nor yet any Nerve hurt: and we likewise admit the
same for a truth. For such Wounds as these, in regard that they have no danger
at all attending them, (and that they may likewise be Cured by Nature alone,
without any help at all from Medicaments) we do no way approve of either the
Curiosity, or the unseasonable diligence of those that without any urgent cause
at all will be often uncovering the Wound, every day, not once only, but twice
or thrice: and we grant also (as a thing very commonly known) that such like
slight Wounds (if you lay but a little Lard thereon, or some such like thing,
and with one or two bindings up) are cured of their own accord, and by the
strength of Nature. But on the contrary, they themselves acknowledge (and of
necessity it must be confessed) that there are many wounds in the curing of
which there are so many obstacles and hindrances in Natures way, that if they
be not removed by the Physician, Nature will never be able of her self to unite
the wound, and therefore that simple provision is not sufficient in those
Wounds. And they likewise altogether grant and allow of an opening of the
Wound, if there be any thing to be done therein that cannot be performed
without a Manual operation; and if there be any necessary Medicament to be
imposed, and that there be danger in the omission thereof, which they grant
ought instantly to be remedied, and prevented all that may be. For if (as
Septalius puts these cases) the body be Cacochymical, or that some one or other
of the greater Vessels be cut, or a Nerve hurt; if withal the flesh shall be
battered and bruised, (which may have need of Suppuration) if the Wound has so
narrow an Orifice that the Pus has no passage forth of it; if any bone shall
be hurt, or any Noble and principal part uncovered, (so that there shall
therefore be need of Manual operation;) if there shall be much Pus and
Excrements generated in the wound; (from whence a pain, a corruption of the
part, an Inflammation, and breeding of Worms may proceed) if proud flesh shall
abound; if there shall be present a vehement pain; if an Inflammation or a
Gangrene be feared; if any small bone, or any other substance stick fast in the
wound that is to be taken forth: or if (as Caesar Magatus in his 1. B. and 38.
Chap. puts the case) the flesh grows forth too much; if an Hemorrhage be
urgent and require it; if there be nigh at hand a Gangrene and corruption of
the part; if there be present an extraordinary putridness and nastiness of the
part; if there be many Excrements heaped up and an Inflammation of the part
nigh at hand; if any Heterogeneous and Extraneous Body stick in the Wound; if
an Impostumation follow thereupon, and that there be present any Pain, Itching,
ill savor, or any bones be broken: in all these cases they of their own accord
grant that this simple binding up of the wound (in this their new way) will not
suffice, but that the other more laborious provision and operation of the
Ancients is necessary, and to be preferred before this their new way and Method
of curing.

And therefore, since that the exceptions are too many for the Rule, and
derogate much from the same, I conceive that this their new way of Curing
wounds is very rarely sufficient, and that for the most part many destructive
Symptoms and evils (if the wound be not opened until the fourth, fifth, or
seventh day) may ensue and happen thereupon. And therefore we likewise willingly
grant, that Wounds without urgent necessity are not too often to be opened, and
over rashly to be exposed unto the Ambient Air: and yet withal likewise
understand me with this caution, that if the Wound be over seldom and but now
and then uncovered, cleansed, and necessary Medicaments laid thereon, much
damage and danger may befall the Patient. And therefore it is affirmed indeed
that this new way of curing Wounds is easier, shorter, less troublesome and more
safe then the Ancient Method: but it is not in the least proved. And be it so,
that it is less troublesome, more compendious and short, and likewise more
easy; it cannot (this notwithstanding) be proved, neither will it follow, that
it is always the more safe and secure way. For who is he that dares (or can
safely) admit of this new way of curing, in those deep and narrow Wounds that
are by pricking, and by Weapons that have sharp and not thick points; and that
will adventure to commit unto Nature such a like Wound, imposing only some
covering thereupon, and so not open it before the seventh day? For true it is
indeed, that Natures intention in endeavoring the Conglutination of the Wound
is at that time likewise right, as well as at other times and in other wounds;
but it may so happen, that the Wound may Conglutinate in the superficies,
before it be conglutinated in the bottom thereof; from whence Pus comes to be
collected in the bottom of the Wound, which brings with it many and great
dangers; and therefore such a like wound is again to be opened, as sad
experience has often taught us.

But that we may (in special) weigh and consider the Arguments on both sides,
we will first of all examine those Arguments that drew those eminent Men (Caesar
Magatus, and Ludovicus Septalius) into this Opinion.

A more special examination of the Reasons of Magatus and Septallus.
And First of all, as for the experience they talk of; the Ancient way of curing
has likewise the same to plead for it; seeing that none dares deny, that
infinite numbers even of such as have been most dangerously and desperately
wounded have been cured thereby. And yet nevertheless I hinder none; but let
every man consult experience, and make inquiry, whether he can find out any
thing that is better; yet always provided that what he has so found out may
be practiced without any damage or danger unto the sick party. But as for that
which Ludov. Septalius alleges (in special) touching the Wounds of the Head,
and that many (in a very sickly time at Milain) this way recovered thereof;
Yea, (as he writes) more then those that were cured in the former old way; he
does not here sufficiently explain himself, what kind of Wounds these or those
were. For of the Wounds of the Head, it is possible that some of them may be
mortal, and others of them curable. But Caesar Magatus, although he describes
the qualities of those Wounds in the Head, of which he brings a few examples;
yet nevertheless, he does not prove this, to wit, that those wounded persons
were cured by reason of that new way of curing; and that they might not as well
have recovered if the old Ancient way and Method had been practiced. For he
himself oftentimes very rightly inculcates, and writes very clearly, that it
is Nature that cures the Wound, and not the Physician, or Medicaments. For if
the Pus ought to be moved, this is performed by Nature; or if that flesh be to
be generated, and the broken bones to be strengthened by a Callus, these are
the work and business of Nature. If the Wound be to be Agglutinated, it is she
that must do it; and if the Excrements ought to be expelled, this is likewise
her Office. And through the strength of Nature there happen Miracles oftentimes
in Wounds; Yea (as he proves in his 37. Chap.) a strong Nature will likewise
bear out and overcome the Errors of the Surgeon committed in the Cure. And
so (no doubt) may those Surgeons that still use the old way and Method of
curing produce the like examples on their part. That Student that was run
through the Thorax (his Lungs being withal wounded) of whom we made mention, in
the 2. B. of our Practice, 2 Part. Chap. 11. and a little above, in the 3.
Chap. of the Wounds of the Lungs, was cured within the space of one Month: the
care of which Wound (in regard that it was inward) was chiefly to be committed
to Nature; and the cure thereof to be ascribed unto her, and not either unto
the old, or the new way of Curing. And Glandorpius relates that a Wound of the
Oesophagus was in twenty four days drawn all over with a Cicatrice, as you may
find the relation in his Speculum Chirurgic. Observat. 30.

And indeed I will (in the next place) most readily grant him, that those
frequent terebrations (which seem sometimes to be instituted rather for the
exercising of the Surgeons Body, then for any need the Patient has of them)
are not always safe; and that they sometimes bring more damage then benefit
unto the sick person. But yet that the Wounds of the Head are not to be
uncovered before the fifth or the seventh day, this I shall not so easily grant
him; seeing that such Wounds pass through diverse parts: and heap up diverse
sorts of Excrements; and for the most part there is Blood collected between the
Skul and the Membranes of the Brain; which is therefore with all possible speed
to be evacuated. For which cause the Terebration also and the perforation of
the Skul is sometimes necessary, lest that this Blood if it be kept in putrify,
and so cause grievous Symptoms, Yea, and (as oftentimes it does) bring Death it
self upon the wounded person: which may likewise very easily happen, if those
Wounds should seldom be opened and cleansed.

Secondly, The Reasons alleged by Caesar Magatus, (and out of him by
Ludovicus Septalius,) are of no great moment, at least they carry not that
weight in them that may persuade the rejecting of the old and usual way of
curing Wounds. First, they mainly urge this, (and indeed herein chiefly
consists the very strength and pith of this Opinion) that the heat of the
wounded part is to be preserved: and they accuse Galen for that he has omitted
an indication of the greatest moment, and that he has troubled himself more
then he needed in other things of far less moment; and about the generating of
Excrements in the Wound: whereas if the innate heat be preserved, there will be
but very few Excrements bred, and those that are, will be such as can no ways
hinder the glutination of the Wound. Where we willingly grant, and do confess,
that Nature as she is the Curer of other Diseases, so she, is the healer of
Wounds likewise; and that it is she alone (and not the Medicaments) that by the
benefit of the Natural heat does perform this glutination of Wounds; and
therefore that the innate heat, and the natural temperament of the part is
carefully to be preserved and cherished. And this (albeit that Galen has
passed it by in that place where he professedly treats of the Cure of Wounds;
but whether he has therein done well or ill, I here dispute not:) yet
notwithstanding in other places he often inculcates, that there cannot possibly
be any curing of the Wound, unless the part obtain its own Natural temper: and
those very Medicaments (which are called Sarcotick) are provided for that very
purpose, the Conservation of the heat of the part, as we said before in the
precedent Chap. But here two Questions arise; the first this, whether the
natural heat be preserved bettter in this new way, or in that other old and
wonted Method of curing; and whether or no there be any necessity that more
excrements should be generated in the old way, then in this new manner of
curing. The Second Question is this, whether the alone preservation of the
Native heat be sufficient for the curing of the Wounds? We deny both. As for
the First, it shall be shown in the following Arguments, that the more rare and
seldom opening and uncovering of Wounds is oftentimes more hurtful and
prejudicial unto the Native heat, then useful and serviceable thereto; but on
the contrary, the more frequent uncovering of the Wound, (and as often as there
is need thereof) is no way offensive unto the Native heat; and that therefore it
is not by reason of the uncovering of the Wound, but by reason of the debility
of the heat, or the constitution of the part, or the Body, that those
Excrements are generated. For when there is blood poured forth in the Wound,
from hence it is that the heat and spirit is dissipated, and the part rendered
the weaker; from whence it is likewise that in the Concoction that is made in
the part there are very many Excrements generated. And that sometimes fewer, and
sometimes more Excrements are generated in the Wound, this is not therefore
because that the Wound is more seldom or more frequently opened and uncovered,
but because the whole Body, and the wounded part are more or less disposed unto
the generation of the said Excrements. But as for the Second, to wit, that the
innate heat alone is not always sufficient for the curing of the wound, this
is apparent; since that there oftentimes so many impediments and obstacles cast
in Natures way, that unless they be by the Physician removed, and that indeed
very frequently, even every day, Nature can by no means attain unto her end and
drift. The Pus first of all, and the Excrements that are collected in the
wound, are to be evacuated; and sometimes a passage forth likewise made for them
(as often as need requires) by Tents; and those Medicaments that cherish the
heat, dry up the Excrements, and hinder the generating of them, and help
forward the Glutination of the wound, are often to be laid on; since that when
they are once laid on they are soon defiled with the Pus, and Sanies, (that is
to say, the thick and thinner Excrements of the wounds) and thereby weakened;
and the virtue of them is likewise otherwise dissipated by the heat of the
part. And albeit that Galen (where he treats of those Medicaments that are
necessary for the curing of Wounds) makes no particular mention (in special)
of those Medicaments that cherish and preserve the Natural heat, (which that he
ought to have done, I deny not) yet notwithstanding he elsewhere very
frequently tells us, that the heat and temper of the wounded part is to be
preserved; and that unless the temper of the part be in a right frame and
Condition, it is not possible that the Cure of the Wound should ever succeed
happily; and those very Medicaments themselves that he often propounds for
the drying up of the Excrements of the wounds, do Cherish the heat: and as I
said in the foregoing Chap. it seems to me, that those Digestive, and
Sarcotick, and Glutinating Medicaments, are made and provided, rather for the
conservation of the native heat, then for the doing of any thing else.

The second Reason that Magatus brings for his new way of Curing wounds, is
this, that there cannot be excited any Afflux of humors, since that in this way
the heat of the part is preserved, and that by the often handling of the wound
there is not any pain caused that may excite a Fluxion. But (as we shall
further show you in the following Reason) the truth is that in this more rare
and seldom opening of the wound the heat of the part is not better preserved
then in the former old way. But then as touching the pain that may be excited
by the more frequent uncovering of the Wound, the Cleansing and purifying
thereof, the imposing of new Medicaments, and the new binding of it up, it is
the part and office of the skilful Surgeon so to handle the wounded part,
that the least pain (and as little as possibly may) be excited. Neither in the
evacuation of the Pus is the part to be pressed down hard together, but the
said Pus is most lightly and gently to be wiped away; unless happily the Wound be
sinuous and full of turnings. For in such wounds the pressing together of the
Sinuous winding part is both useful and necessary; yea moreover, for the better
pressing forth of the Pus from the very bottom of the Sinus, there are likewise
little pillows or Cushions to be imposed. And then the benefit and commodity
that arises from that short and momentany pain will not only countervail, but
likewise far exceed the discommodity and inconvenience.

Thirdly, Neither is this that he alleadgeeth for his third Reason, of any
weight or moment; to wit, that in this new way the wounded part is more rarely
exposed unto the Ambient Air, then in the ordinary and usual way. For the good
and Benefit that proceeds from the Cleansing of the Wound and the imposing of
Necessary Medicaments, is far greater then the hurt and damage that is brought
thereunto by the admission and letting in of the Ambient Air. And this
discommodity may likewise in great part be prevented, if the Wound be not
uncovered in a cold Air, but in that that is somewhat warm or temperate; and
that this be no oftener done then urgent necessity shall require; and that
before ever we begin to open the wound, all things Necessary and Requisite for
this new binding up be at hand, and in such a readiness, that the whole business
may be performed with all possible speed.

Fourthly, Neither is this any sufficient Reason for the preferring of this new
way of curing before the old, to wit, that in a wound of the head the bone that
was impostumated, and no hopes but that it would be lost, has yet in this new
way been preserved. For it is not as yet proved, that the same might not as well
have been in the Ancient way and Method of curing; and it is daily observed,
that in the use of the old way, those bones that seemed to be impostumated and
like to fall out, have yet again been Agglutinated unto the rest.

Fifthly, Magatus affirms, indeed, that under that new way there will be
fewer Excrements collected then under the Ancient way: but he does not prove
this; and he evermore presupposes that the innate heat is more rightly and
better preserved in the more rare and seldom opening of the wounds then in the
frequent uncovering of the same. And we grant indeed, that by the vicious and
faulty concoction of the part, many the more Excrements may be bred therein;
but this notwithstanding we deny, that these Excrements proceed only from the
debility of the heat caused and contracted from the Air; in regard that there
may be very many causes thereof, to wit, the abundance of vicious humors in the
Body, and the conflux of them unto the wounded part, some of the greater
vessels hurt and pouring forth much blood, a contusion and bruising of the
part; and many other such like.

Sixthly, Unto the sixth Argument we Answer, and grant indeed, that there is
also a more happy expulsion made by Nature of small bones, and other Extraneous
bodies, if the innate heat of the part be strong and vigorous: but then
notwithstanding this is yet again to be proved; and it is not to be
presupposed, that the Native heat is more rightly to be preserved and
corroborated in this more rare uncovering of the wound; as we said before, in
answer unto the first Argument.

Seventhly, and lastly, Magatus alleges likewise this for an Argument (but
without any proof at all) that the virtue of the Medicament at first imposed
for the perfect agglutination of the Wound will the better endure and be kept
entire: touching which hereafter in the causes for which Wounds are often to be
uncovered, (in the first Reason) we shall speak further.

And now likewise (in the next place) those Arguments for which they reject the
Ancient Method of curing Wounds, are by us well to be weighed and considered.
And as for what concerns experience, the question is still in Controversy, and
not as yet determined, to whether of these two ways the better is to be
ascribed; seeing that it cannot be denied that hitherto infinite numbers have
in the old way been cured. And here we are to take special notice, that many
things in the curing of Wounds are oftentimes attributed unto Art, and the skill
of the Artist, that are rather to be ascribed unto Nature, that is the alone
curer of Wounds, as of all Diseases whatsoever. And Caesar Magatus himself
confesses, (in his 1. B. and 31. Chap.) that a strong and vigorous Nature
corrects likewise many errors that have been by the Artist committed,
sleighting and overmastering those things that might have proved prejudicial
unto her through the ignorance and inconsiderateness of the Surgeon: and
this (he says) that himself has frequently found by experience, whiles of set
purpose he took little pains, nor much troubled himself thereabout, as being
minded and resolved to observe what Nature in those stronger bodies was able of
her self to perform; and that therefore he sometimes administered those
Medicaments that were not altogether so fit and convenient, and that yet
notwithstanding the sick party by the help and assistance of Nature recovered,
and became sound again.

But now as for those Reasons that he objecteth against the Ancient way, the
first of them is this; that the wounded part is too often exposed unto the
Ambient Air, from whence its heat is weakened, and so thereupon great store of
Excrements bred and treasured up. But as for this that is so often imputed unto
the Ambient Air frequently admitted into the Wound, and that for this cause
alone the greater abundance of Excrements are collected, this is only said, but
no ways proved. For these Copious and abundant Excrements do not proceed from
the Air, but they have other causes. For that small and inconsiderable appulse
of the Air (which yet notwithstanding, as I have said, is by all means
possible, and as much as may be, to be avoided, and the operation therefore to
be performed in a warm place) it cannot cause so great an alteration. And
moreover also, the Excrements are likewise collected, because that the Blood
and Humors fallen forth of the Vessels are necessarily converted into Pus and
Sanies (that is to say, thick and thin Excrements) although the temperament of
the part be sound and unhurt. But that the very temperament of the part may be
hurt even by the Wound it self, as also by the cutting and opening of the
Vessels, and likewise by the efflux of the Blood and Spirits, is a truth that
cannot be denied: and Caesar Magatus himself (in his first B. and 9. Chap.)
takes upon him to prove the same at large. And this very weakening of the part
(by Reason of the wound inflicted) and the change and alteration of the
temperament, is the cause, that not presently and on the very first day the Pus
is generated in the Wound, but for the most part on the fourth day, to wit,
when Nature has recovered and gotten her strength again, and the heat of the
part is renewed. And furthermore, the Bodies on which Wounds are inflicted are
not evermore exactly found and pure, (but oftentimes Cacochymical) albeit they
may seem exactly sound; which although they receive but some very light and
slight wound, yet this in these Cacochymical bodies degenerateth into an
Ulcer, by reason of the vicious humors that abundantly flow unto the wounded
part.

As for what is in the Second place objected, that from the frequent loosening
of the wound, the often handling and moving of the part, a pain and thence a
fluxion may be caused in the part affected with the Wound, unto this objection
we have already before given an Answer. To wit, that the experienced and
skilful Surgeon may very easily prevent the said pain: and although that
some pain should chance to be excited from the uncovering of the Wound; yet
nevertheless the inconvenience and pain that would arise from the reteining and
not cleansing away of those Excrements might prove far greater, and of a more
dangerous Consequence.

Thirdly, Magatus (although without cause) fears, lest that in the uncovering
of the Wound there should happen a dissipation of the spirits and Native heat.
For if there be any such dissipation of the Spirits and heat, this happens
together with the very effusion of the blood. But then so soon as this flux of
the Blood stops, the orifices of the Vessels do again shut close, so that
there needs no fear at all of any such dissipation of the Spirits; and Nature
being otherwise sollicitous and careful about the preservation of the spirit
and the Radical heat, expels the offensive and hurtful Excrements and still
reteineth those that are useful; as we may plainly see it to be done in
Critical Evacuations.

Fourthly, and lastly, they object this also, that as often as wounds are
unbound and opened, so often is Nature disturbed and distracted from her proper
Office and Work. But there is no ground at all for this fear. For Nature cannot
in so short a space of time (as while the Wound is opened and bound up again)
possibly be disturbed, unless there happen a very great and extraordinary
alteration. But it will be rather disturbed, if the Wound be not cleansed from
those Excrements.

III. Caesar Magatus and Ludovicus Septalius do not solidly confute those
causes by which the Ancients, and all the Surgeons even unto our very times,
were moved and drawn unto this often opening and unbinding of Wounds.

For First of all, that they determine and conclude that Wounds are therefore
often to be uncovered, that so those Excrements that are necessarily generated
may be evacuated; this (say these) is not indeed Requisite, and altogether
needful; in regard that the thin Excrement may partly be digested by
exhalation, and partly be driven out of the wound by the heat; but as for the
thick, (if any such be generated) it is confounded and mingled together with
the Pus, and so by Nature expelled together with the said Pus. But experience
it self teaches us that this is most false, that the thin Excrement is always
digested by exhalation; seeing that oftentimes we find that it rendereth the
Wound exceeding moist, and that there flows forth great store thereof. And
for the thick Excrement, although it be mingled with the Pus, yet
notwithstanding it is not of its own accord wholly evacuated; or if it be
evacuated, it is but very slowly; and therefore being retained it acquireth an
Acrimony, and so causes a pain, and a new afflux; and therefore it is speedily
and seasonably (before this shall happen) to be evacuated and cleansed away; and
for this Reason the Wound is to be uncovered as often as need shall require. For
neither indeed does Nature her self expel these Excrements. Nature (the truth
is) does separate the useful Excrement from that that is altogether unuseful.
But when the Excrements are thus separated, the useful from the unuseful, and
stick in the Cavity of the wound, Nature has then no more that she can do, for
it is not in her power to expel them; but the Excrement either of its own
accord, and by reason of its weight flows forth; or else it is thrust out by
the flesh growing underneath it; and this if it be not done, it is left still to
remain in the wound. Neither also can the wounded part be always kept in such
a Situation, and so placed, that the Pus by its weight tending downward should
of its own accord flow forth. For all wounds whatsoever that are inflicted in
the fore parts of the Body are altogether unfit for such a Situation as is
requisite for a Spontaneous efflux of the Pus or Noisome purulent Mattier;
seeing that it is no ways convenient, that the Patient should lie upon his
face. And so likewise the Wounds of the hinder part, although that they be so
Situated that the Pus may easily flow forth from them, yet nevertheless, a
lying upon the wounded part is no ways fit and convenient, but painful, and
troublesome, in regard that the whole bulk of the Body presses and weighs
down the part affected. And in Wounds of the Head that pierce through the Skul,
it is much more difficult to find such a Situation, that all the Pus of its
own accord and by reason of its gravity should easily slow forth, albeit the
Wound be but seldom uncovered.

But Magatus will not yet yield for all this, but in the 33. Chapter throughout,
of his first B. he endeavors to prove that it is not necessary, that Wounds
should be often uncovered, to the end that the thick Excrements should be
cleansed away; and he endeavoreth likewise to demonstrate, that the thick
Excrements, as also the very Pus it self, may be evacuated without the use of
abstersives. And first of all indeed he alleges this out of Galen, that he
writes (in the 13. B. of his Method of Curing, and 5. Chap.) after this
manner. But if there be some notable Pus contained in the suppurating particle,
it is not expedient (as some do) forthwith to cut and make an incision, but
rather we ought to attempt an exhalation by Medicaments avayleable for this
purpose; the use whereof may be conjectured from the affect it self. From hence
he concludes, that there is no need of Abstersives, where the Pus may be
dissipated by Discussives. But, (that I may not now dispute this question,
whether or no we may safely and securely endeavor in Impostumes to wast and
consume the Pus with Discussives alone) be it so indeed, that this may possibly
be done; yet (as he himself writes) for the effecting of this there will be
need of Medicaments that are strong and prevalent, and fit for this purpose.
But when (I pray you) shall such like Medicaments be administered in Wounds, to
the end that the Pus may be discussed? He writes moreover, that in
Impostumations when they are broken, oftentimes the Sins; though they have
been very notable, and such as have sent forth great store of Pus) have been
filled up with flesh, no Abstersive at all having been put into the Cavity
thereof, but only some Medicament laid unto the very mouth of the same; of
which it was not possible that any thing should reach so low as the bottom
thereof. But unto this I answer, that this is not always done; but that there
is oftentimes need of casting in Abstersive Medicaments; or if such may not be
administered, that then the Sinus is to be pressed together, that the Pus may
both flow and be pressed forth; and that this is often to be done, and for this
Cause the Wound is also often to be uncovered; and that the Pus is by no means
to be detained in such a Sinus. And lastly, He writes that even internal
Wounds may be also cured, although the impurities and Excrements thereof be not
cleansed and done away. But I answer, that neither is this always done, but in
those parts only in which there are but few Excrements collected, and such as
have an open and prone passage forth of them. Otherwise it the Excrements be
long detained, those Wounds are not to be Cured; and this we see to be often
done in the Lungs, in which from the Excrements retained Ulcers and at length
the Phthisis or consumption is generated. And indeed, oftentimes the Pus and
Excrements stick so close and fast unto the sides of the Wound that they cannot
possibly of themselves flow forth, but that they must of necessity be cleansed
away by a manual operation.

Thirdly, That therefore the Wound is often to be uncovered, that so according
to the various state of the Wound, sometimes digestives, and sometimes
abstersives, sometimes those that generate flesh, and sometimes again those that
wast and eat away superfluous and proud flesh, may be adminstred: unto this
indeed Caesar Magatus answers, that there is no need at all of that change of
Medicaments, in regard that the whole business is to be committed to Nature.
And that it is sufficient, if there be only a covering imposed upon the wound,
that by its corpulency may prevent and hinder the efflux of the Radical heat,
and that may preserve and cherish the same, and that therefore with one only
Medicament diverse times a Wound may be healed. But here false Principles are
presupposed. The First is this, that Nature of her self alone is able to
perform all those things that are necessarily required for the healing of a
Wound. Indeed it is true, that Nature does concoct, separate such things as are
of a heterogeneous and different quality, and generateth flesh; but the
Excrements when she has separated them, she cannot alone and of her self expel
them; but they are oftentimes so pertinacious that they will st ck unto the
part, do she what possibly she can. Neither do they also flow forth of
themselves, and of their own accord; or is the Member indeed so to be placed,
that they may of their own accord flow forth, as a little before we likewise
told you. And therefore then in that Case there is need of Medicaments that may
keep them from being over nasty; yea and oftentimes also of a Manual operation,
whereby they may be thoroughly cleansed. Another of his false Principles is
this; that Nature in her work stands in no need of any Medicaments
whatsoever, that so she may be helped and assisted thereby; which that it is
false even experience it self teaches us; wherein we see most manifestly that
Digestives that in the beginning are of singular use, in the progress of the
Disease prove very hurtful: and this Caesar Magatus himself likewise
confesses; for in his 1. B. and 37. Chap. he writes that he had observed that
by the use of a digestive the most grievous Wounds inflicted by Bullets shot
from Guns have been suppurated, thoroughly purged, and filled up with flesh; but
that afterward by reason of the over great humidity there has grown a flesh
upon it that has wanted Corrosives to eat it out and consume it. His third
principle (that by consequence follows from hence) is likewise false; to wit,
that one only Medicament is sufficient all the whole time of the Disease,
provided that by its Corpulency it may be unto it instead of a Covering. For if
this should be so, and were indeed true, then instead of an Emplaster we may as
well put any piece of Leather upon the Wound, or make use of one kind of
Emplaster for another, so that it be not deadly and poisonous, sharp, and
Corroding: and yet notwithstanding he never as hitherto heard of any wise
Physician that ever did thus. And in this very point likewise Magatus expressly
contradicts himself, who (in the ^6. Chap. of the same B.) writes most
truly, that not every kind of covering (how ever it be made and provided) is
fit for the defense and corroborating of the Natural heat; or that it is
convenient for the temper of every part; and that, what is a very fit and
convenient covering in one part may in another part be altogether unfit,
inconvenient, and indecent, yea likewise that it may be a very hurtful and
dangerous covering.

Fourthly, Whereas it is the common Tenet, and that we are usually taught, that
therefore likewise Wounds ought often to be uncovered, that so the virtue and
effect of the Medicament may be known what it is, and whether the Wound be
moist, yea or no, that so Convenient driers may be laid thereto, according as
there shall be occasion; unto this Caesar Magatus answers that there is no
need at all of any such ado, or that we trouble our selves so much thereabout,
in regard that the whole business and the issue thereof is to be committed to
Nature. But he does not well in so determining. For the truth is, that Nature
does indeed evermore intend that which is best, but yet notwithstanding she
cannot always obtain what it intends; either because she is weak, or else in
regard that she is oppressed and overwhelmed with too great an abundance of
that Object on which she acts: and therefore both the temperament of the
wounded part is to be cherished with Medicaments, (and these indeed some at one
time, and some at another;) and the Excrements also by which Nature is
oppressed and overburthened are to be dried up, and evacuated. And therefore we
conclude, that it is overrash and altogether unsafe to Commit the whole
business unto Nature, and to stand looking on as an idle Spectator; since that
it may easily so happen, that overmuch Humidity abounding in the Wound it may
soon degenerate into an Ulcer.

Fifthly, And for this Cause likewise somewhat the more frequent uncovering of
the Wound is held to be necessary, that so the State of the Wound may be known,
and the Symptoms likely to happen thereupon may be prevented. Caesar Magatus
rejects also this Cause, and asserteth, that from other Signs, (to wit)
Itching, Pain, and the fear scent that comes from the Wound, we may give a
shrewd guess; and he positively determines that an Artificial Conjecture is
the best; and that we may more rightly make our conjecture by the Eyes of our
mind, then by those of our Body, since that they are sharper sighted then
these. But those conjectures are oftentimes very uncertain: yea somthings may
now and then happen unto a Wound that will no way be taken Notice of but only
by ocular inspection, and such are the Fungi of the Brain, Worms in Wounds and
flesh growing upon them. And though it be true that at the length there will
some certain signs discover themselves; yet it is no way safe, that the
Physician stand as an idle Spectator, until such time as those signs (to wit
Pains, Fever, Noysom smells, and the like,) shall happen, and manifest
themselves. For when these once come upon the Patient, he is then most commonly
in the greatest danger; which by ocular Inspection might have been easily
foreknown, and safely prevented: and oftentimes in the space of one day, yea of
a few hours, some grievous evil may befall the sick person. And so Paraeus
relates, that he had seen Wounds, in which (unless they were daily opened, and
new Medicaments laid on) Worms would continually be breeding.

Sixthly, And for this cause also the wound is to be frequently uncovered, that
so the Swaths, little Pillows, and Linen Clothes; may be made clean. But Caesar
Magatus and Ludovicus Septalius slight, and account of this as of a thing of
no reckoning: or if we may a any time change the Swathes, they allow it only,
with this Proviso, that the wound be no uncovered. But these should have
considered with themselves, that if the Swathes be soul and unclean, much more
the Wound, and the coverings nearer unto the same, must needs be Nasty and
unclean, since that the sanies or thin Excrement does first and most of all
defile those things that do nearest touch upon the Wound.

Seventhly, And Lastly, whereas even for this cause the more frequent opening
of the Wound seems to be necessary (as is also the change of the Swathes, and
little Pillows,) that so the stinking Vapors in the Wound, (bred of the Pus and
Excrements) may the better exhale, (which if they be still detained and shut up
in the wound, they affect the wounded part, and much change and alter the
same:) unto this Septalius Answers, that the Wound is not to be bound up with
so many and such Linen Clothes that those Vapors should be suppressed; and if
that the Pus find a passage forth, he thinks then that those Vaporous
Excrements may much rather be blown abroad, and dissipated: and if they be
altogether retained that they are not likely to bring so much damage unto the
Patient, as may befall him from the uncovering of the Wound, and the alteration
of the Ambient Air.

But in whatsoever manner the Wound is bound up, (which yet notwithstanding
they themselves grant that it ought so to be bound up, that it may be defended
from all external injuries) those Vapors may easily be detained, yea they may
insinuate themselves into the Linen Clothes, and the Swathes; and hence they
may offend the wounded part by their stench and noysomness. And this is that
very thing that is now in Question, whether all the Pus may be evacuated,
unless the Wound be often uncovered. The alteration also that is caused from
the external Air cannot be so hurtful and offensive, (in regard that it
partaketh not of any ill quality) as is that which proceeds from those putrid
and stinking vapors arising from the Pus and Sanies.

Whether there be any use at all to be made of Tents, or Pensils, in the Curing
of Wounds.
The other thing where in Caesar Magatus, and Ludodicus Septalius dissent from
the Ancients, and from other Physicians and Chirurgeous, is this, that they
assert, (and endeavor to maintain this their opinion) that there is no use at
all to be made of Tents in the Curing of Wounds. Magatus to prove this (in his
1. B. and 5. Chap.) uses these Reasons.

The Reasons the move Magatus to reject the use of Tents.
The First Reason is this; because that Tents are neither therefore to be
instituted, that they may keep open the mouth of the Wound, neither that by
them Medicaments may stick unto the sides of the Wound. The former of these he
proves in this manner, that before the Wound is conglutinated the orifice
thereof is always patent and open; so indeed, that if we desire and endeavor
it never so much, yet we are not able to shut close the mouth of the Wound. And
he thinks likewise that there is no need of Tents for any other use or
purpose, since that the Medicaments may be so melted, that they may very
conveniently be instilled into the Wound.

The Second Reason is this, because that they are injurious, and by their
weight very troublesome and grievous unto the Nature of the wounded part:
whereupon it is likewise that Nature is always laboring to expel them.

The Third is, because that they distend the part, press it together, excite
pain, and thereupon produce new fluxions.

The Fourth is, because that these Pensils and Tents may be filled with base
corrupt Humors, and so defiled therewith, that they may acquire an ill quality,
by which they may hurt the wounded part: and they do moreover hinder the
Evacuation of the Pus, and cause that the said Pus acquire and get it self a
depraved and Malignant quality.

Fifthly, They say that Hippocrates and Galen when they write of the curing of
Wounds, do never make any mention of these Tents; as we may see in Galens 14.
B. of the Meth. of Curing, Chap. 4. and in Galen his B. of Fracturers, Sect. 3.
Comment.

The Reasons of those that make use of Tents in the Curing of Wounds.
But now on the contrary, Those that make use of Tents, give these Reasons for
their so doing. The First is this; that in the wounds the use of Tents is
therefore necessary, that by the help of them the orifice of the Wound may be
kept open, and a passage may be made for the Pus (...) flow forth.

The Second is this, that for this cause T^^rs are to be made use of, that so
by mean^ of them the Medicaments may every where touch the Wound, and that they
may pe^^trate even to the very bottom thereof.

Thirdly, For this Cause likewise T^^^s seem to be necessary, because by them
it man be prevented, that the upper part of the Wound be not closed up before
the dee^^^ parts thereof be filled up with flesh.

Unto these Reasons they Answer; unto the First thus, The Answer of Maga^us
(...) the said Reasons.
that there will not be more Excrements ge^^rated in the Wound (if there be a
due Course taken in the curing thereof) then what may ca^^^y be expelled forth
by Nature. And then that although Excrements should be generates, that yet
Tents do rather shut up the pass^^^ forth of the Pus, then any ways keep it
op^^. And unto the Second they Answer, that there is no need of Tents, since
that the Medicaments (if they be liquid) they will of themselves penetrate unto
the bottom of the Wound; neither therefore is there any ^^^d of so often
repeating and imposing of (...) Medicaments. Unto the Third they Answer, that
the continual efflux of the Excrements by the external wounded parts does h^^^r
the meeting together and uniting of the Lips, before the Cavity be filled up
wi^h flesh.

But that I may briefly show you my opinion touching this Controversy, My^^en
Opi^^^a
I do indeed willingly grant them, that in such Wounds as are superficial,
straight, and such as generate but little Pus, Tents are not at all necessary;
neither is the curing of the Wound rashly to be retarded by the putting in of
the Te^^s. But if the Wound be deep, and oblique, so that there be no right and
straight passage for the slowing forth of the Pus, and that there be much Pus
generated; in this Case Tents seem to be altogether necessary, that so by them
there may be made an open and free passage forth for the purulent mattier; and
that a way may be left by which the Medicaments may penetrate unto the more
inward parts of the Wound; and that by this means the orifice of the Wound may
be kept from Conglutinating and closing tog^^her, until such time as that which
is in the b^^tom of the wound shall be first Conglutina^ed: which if they be
neglected, and that the Pus and Excrements be still retained in the Wound, they
may easily prove the Causes of the extremest pains and dangers; as a little
above (in the 7. Chapter,) we gave you some instances and examples of this very
thing, out of Guilhelm. Fabricius his Observations.

Answers unto the Reasons of Magatus.
Now as for what they Answer unto these Arguments, and what they likewise
object, they are neither of them of any great moment.

For First of all, whereas it is said, that Tents are not necessary, that by
them the Wound may he kept open, since that the orifice is of it self always
open, this we altogether deny. For oftentimes Wounds (according to the various
Situation of the Patient, that he then had when he was wounded) are oblique,
and full of turnings and windings; so that although the sides and lips of the
wound be not as yet closed up, they yet nevertheless so touch and lie one upon
the other, yea and oftentimes so press one another that there is no open
passage left for the Pus to flow forth.

Secondly, For this very cause, and when the Wounds are not straight, the
Medicaments cannot so easily penetrate unto the bottom And albeit that the
wound be not writhing and oblique; yet notwithstanding it will not always be
Convenient to instill into the Wound Medicaments that are over fluid, seeing
that they may be easily washed away again by the Sanies or thin Excrement: but
there will be oftentimes occasion to make use of the thicker and more viscid
sort of Medicaments, which being conveyed into the Wound by the Tents will
stick so much the longer and more firmly unto the wounded parts; and thereupon
they will the more rightly put forth their Virtue and efficacy

Thirdly, That the superior orifice of the Wound is never Conglutinated before
such time as the inferior Cavity is closed up (and that therefore the orifice
of the Wound needs not to be kept open with Tents) this is false; and
experience very often teaches us the Contrary: and Guilhelm. Fabricius (in his
4. Cent. Observat 7.) recites two Examples of Wounds, whose orifices were very
suddenly healed; and yet the Wound within all this while not cured; from whence
it happened, that there was abundance of Pus collected within; and from thence
many grievous and dangerous Maladies excited. And whereas they say, that the
continual efflux of the Excrements will cause that the orifice of the wound shall
not be closed up, herein they contradict their own former presupposals, when as
they asserted before, that there would be altogether very small store of Pus
generated in the Wound.

Fourthly, The Tents ought not neither to be over thick, that so they may not
press the part, nor distend it, nor by any means whatsoever cause unto it any
trouble, grief, or pain, and that they likewise shut not up the passage of the
Pus or purulent mattier. And if now and then any such thing should happen,
(such as that that Ludovicus Septalius in his 8. B. of Animadversions, Number. 10.
alleges out of Hippocrates in his History of a certain person at Massilium)
the Errors of the Artists are not to be imputed unto the Art it self; when as
happily they uncovered not the Wound so often as was requisite. And yet
nevertheless we are here to give you to understand, that albeit we are to use
our utmost endeavor, that Wounds may be Cured without all kind of trouble and
pain; (or at least that they may be healed with as little as possibly may be:)
yet notwithstanding it is not to be expected, that in the curing of Wounds
there should be at any time a total and absolute freedom from all pain and
trouble, no more then there is in the curing of other diseases. And indeed if
al things were to be omitted and for born that are any ways the Cause of any
trouble whatsoever; then the sewing of the Wound, as likewise the Swaths, and
binding up of the Wound were all of them to be omitted. But the Rule is good in
this case, that always of two Evils the less is to be chosen.

Fifthly, Neither are Tents therefore to be omitted, because that being defiled
by the Pus they may hurt the wounded part. For as often as they shall be thus
fouled and made nasty, they are to be drawn forth; and this very thing impugns
the rare and seldom opening of the Wound.

Sixthly, And last of all, although that Hippocrates and Galen, where they
treat of the Curing of Wounds, do not make express mention of these Tents; so
neither yet do they forbid the use of them: but rather out of the precepts of
Galen as touching the Curing of Wounds it may be proved, that the use of Tents
is oftentimes by him allowed and approved of.

All the premises being therefore thus agitated and discussed Pro and Con, the
thing seems to come to this; and the whole sum and substance of this
Controversy amounts to thus much; that light and slight Wounds, and such
wherein there is not much Pus generated, may be committed unto Nature; and that
it matters not much if such Wounds as these be but seldom concovered. But yet I
would not in the least persuade any Man, that in those Wounds that are more
grievous, and in which there is generated great store of Pus and Excrements, he
stand as an idle Spectator and Trisler, doing little or nothing himself, but
committing the whole business to Nature; in regard that from the neglect and
omission of the necessary opening of the Wound, there may more danger and
damage arise in one day, then can afterward be removed in a whole Month.

And so likewise for Tents: as on the one side where there is no need of them,
I would not persuade to the putting of any into the Wound, (much less that
there should be such Tents made use of that may cause pain, excite a fluxion,
or hinder the flowing forth of the Pus;) so on the other hand, where necessity
urges, and the Causes before mentioned require the use of them, there I
conceive they cannot possibly be omitted without damage and danger. But yet
nevertheless in regard that experience perfecteth Art, (example showing us the
way;) I shall not withstand or oppose any man in his making trial and
experience even of this way likewise, so that it be (as I have said before)
without any danger unto the Patient; and as Magatus himself advises, (in his 1
B. and 40. Chapter about the end thereof) beginning always from those more light
and easy, and from these by degrees proceeding unto those that are more
grievous and difficult.

Chap. 10. Of the VVeapon Salve.
THose things that have been (in the precedent Chapter) spoken touching the
opinion of Caesar Magatus and Ludovicus Septalius, as concerning the curing of
Wounds, put me now in mind of that Unguent they commonly call the Weapon Salve.
For as those siple Wounds of the flesh (as has been said in the foregoing
Chapter) are Cured by the benefit of Nature alone, without any other great
provision, without any frequent opening of the Wound, and without the applying
of many Medicaments: So those Wounds likewise that are said to be cured by this
Weapon-Salve, my Opinion is, that they are cured by the help and assistance of
Nature alone. But in regard that there are many who have asserted the contrary;
therefore we think it not amiss in this place to make some enquiry into this
Opinion of theirs; and to tell you what I conceive is to be thought as touching
this Weapon-Salve.

Now we shall First of all give you the descriptions of this Unguent or
Weapon-salve; and then we shall acquaint you with the use of it, and what
Arguments are usually brought for the defense thereof. Now most are of Opinion,
that Paracelsus was the first that found out this Weapon-Salve, and therefore
the invention thereof is by very many ascribed unto him; but whether he were
the first that we find to have made mention hereof or not, of this there is no
question, but that he has been very forward in the divulging of it.

Paracelsus himself (in his 1. B. Archidox. Magicae) has this description of
it.

Take The Moss of a Dead man's Skul, two ounces; Pa^^^cisus his description
thereof.
Mummy half an ounce; Man's fat, two ounces; Man's blood, half an ounce; Oil of
Linseed, two drams; Oil of Roses, and Bole-Armenick, of each one dram; mingle
them, and make an Unguent.

Into which he puts a piece of Wood that has been soaked in the Blood that
comes from the wound, and then thoroughly dried; and every day constantly he
covers the Wound with a new Swathe that had been thoroughly moystened in the
Urine of the wounded person. But then for the anointing of the Weapon, he
adds yet further, Honey, one ounce; and Bulls fat, one dram.

John Baptista Porta (in his 8. B. of Natural Magic, and 12. Chap.) writes
thus of it. The Weapon Salve (says he) was a good while since by Paracelsus
given to Maximilian the Emperor; who having made trial of it esteemed it very
highly all his Life after: of which there was some bestowed on me by a certain
noble person then living in this Emperors Court. If the Sword that gave the
Wound were brought, or a piece of Wood wet in the blood of the said Wound, the
wounded person was then cured, albeit he were never so far off.

Take Vsnea, Porta his description of the weapon salve.
or the Moss that grows upon a skul left in the open Air, and man's fat, of
each two ounces; Mummy and man's blood, of each an ounce and half; Oil of
Linseed, Turpentine, and Bole Armenick, of each one ounce; let them be all well
mingled together in a mortar; and then preserved in an Earthen Vessel somewhat
long and narrow. Dip the Sword into the Unguent, and so leave it; let the
wounded person in the morning wash the wound with his own Water; and so adding
nothing at all thereto, let the wound be bound up; and it shall be cured
without any pain.

And Crollius himself likewise attributes this Unguent or Weapon Salve unto
Paracelsus; Crollius his Description.
and he calls it the Sympathetick Unguent of Paracelsus; and thus he describes
it.

Take the fat of a Bore Pig or Brawner, and Bears fat, of each four ounces; The
older these Creatures are the better it their fat. Let both these fats first of
all (for the space of half an hour boil in red wine over a gentle fire. After
this it is to be poured out upon cold water and the fat swimming a top is to be
taken off with a speon, and whatsoever sink to the bottom throw it away. Then
afterward,

Take, of Earth worms washed in Wine or Water, two sextaries; let them be put
for a while into the Bakers oven in an Earthen pot covered, where as they must
be baked, so you must have a great care that they be not burnt; and after this,
beat them into a powder.

Take Of this Powder, the dried brains of a Brawner, Red Saunders that smells
sweet, Mummie, and the Haematites or Blood stone (as he calls it) of each one
ounce. After this,

Take Vsnea, or Moss from the skul of one that died a violent death, let this
Moss be cut off from the skul in the increase of the Moon, and she being then
in a good house, as that of venus (if it be possible) but not of Mars, or
Saturn, the weight of two filberds or thereabout. And all of them being bruised
together, and well mingled with the fat, let there be an unguent made according
to art; and then in a Glass vessel stopped (or if you think good, in a Box) let
it be carefully kept for use.

If after long time the unguent happen to be over dry, it may be a new
moystened and softened with the aforesaid fat, or virgin honey. Let the Unguent
be made, the Sun being in the sign Libra.

The Use of this Ungruent.
Now as touching the Efficacy and use of it, he thus writes: This cure is
performed by the Magnetic attractive virtue of this Medicament, caused by the
constellations, which through the medium of the Air is brought unto the wound,
and Joined therewith, that so the spiritual operation may be drawn forth into
effect. Its wrought (I say) by means of the Astral and Elementary conjunction.

There are therefore three things that by this unguent cause so admirable an
Effect. 1. The Sympathy of Nature. 2. The influence of the heavenly Bodies,
perfecting their operations by the Elements. 3. The Balsam, which being endued
with a virtue of healing is naturally applied unto any man, without any
difference. With this unguent are cured all Wounds, by what weapon soever they
be inflicted and whatsoever the s^x he, (and yet so notwithstanding that
neither the Nerves, Arteries, nor yet any one of the three more principal
members be hurt) so that the Weapon may but possibly be had, although the
patient be many miles distant from us And in regard that it is of a
Couglutinating, Suppurating, and renewing Nature, it does not permit (if it be
rightly applied) any hurtful symptom to follow upon it.

The manner of applying the Unguent, or Weapon salve.
First, Let the Weapon wherewith the man is Wounded be anointed every day once,
if necessity require it, and the wound be great: but otherwise it will be
sufficient, if the Weapon be anointed every other, or third day; and then let
it be kept in a Clean Linen Cloth, and in a place a little warm but not over
hot, lest that any damage should thereby be brought upon the Patient: We must
likewise be very careful that the Weapon fall not down from on high, neither
that the wind blow upon it in a cold place; for if this should happen the
Patient will run mad.

Secondly, Before you anoint the Weapon, Consider, whether the Wound were made
with the point, by pricking: and if it were, let the Weapon be first anointed
upwards, (and not below) and so descending toward the point thereof; for
otherwise much hurt may be brought upon the Patient.

Thirdly, But if thou can not certainly know how deep, or in what manner the
Weapon entered into the flesh, thou may then anoint it all over; but
otherwise it will be sufficient to anoint that part of the Weapon wherewith any
one is hurt.

Fourthly, There is no Necessity of sewing the wound together after the manner
of Barber Surgeons; but every day only to bind it up with a clean linen Cloth,
first wet in the Patients Urine.

Fifthly, That day that any one anoynts the Weapon, let him abstain from Venery.

Sixthly, Before the anointing of the Weapon, let the Wounded persons blood be
with all speed stanched.

Seventhly, In fractures, and ruptures of bones, you may add unto the unguent
some of the powder of the greater comfry, or the roots of black, Hellebor.

Having the weapon wherewith the Patient was hurt, if thou be desirous to know
whether the Patient be likely to live, or to die of his Wound; thou art to make
the trial in this manner. Take the weapon and make it hot over the coals, so
hot that thou can hardly endure thy hand upon it; and then sprinkle upon it
some powder of Red Sanders, and the blood stone; and if the Weapon then sweat
drops of blood, the patient will die; but if not, he will escape it.

But if we would know whether the Patient order himself aright in his drink and
other Requisites: this may thus be known, if there be in the weapon spots of
blood, he is disordered; but if no such spots, then the Patient orders
himself aright.

We are moreover to take notice; first, that if we have not the Weapon, (or
instrument, whatsoever it were) yet nevertheless that any violent opening of
the Skin, and hurting of the flesh, by which any Blood goes forth, may be
Cured with this unguent, so that a little piece of Sallow Wood be moystened in
the bloody opening; and after that the Blood sticking thereto be dried (not by
the heat of the Sun, or the fire, but of it self, and own accord) it be then
put into the above mentioned Unguent, kept close covered in the Box, and there
left.

Secondly, If the Wound should be great and deep, it may then be cleansed every
morning, and bound up with a new Linen Cloth, without any other use of
Extraneous Oils, Unguents, and the like; and then this wound (how ever it were
inflicted) will heal of it self; and it suffices that the little piece of Wood
once only moystened in the opening of the Bloody wound, be then put into the
Box of Unguent (as aforesaid) and there left to remain, until the Wound be
perfectly Cured.

Thirdly, But yet notwithstanding, as often as any new Wound is to be healed,
there is always required a new piece of Wood.

Fourthly, But if it be so that the Wound will not bleed, it is then with the
Wood so long to be scarified, until the blood flow forth: and so likewise in
the curing of the Toothache; the pained Tooth is so long to be scraped with a
Penknife, until it bleed; and then the Penknife after the blood is dried up,
it to be anointed with this Unguent; and so the pain is presently assuaged. If
a Horse be pricked with a Nail in his Foot, let the Nail be first of all drawn
forth, and anointed with this Vugment, and the Horses Foot shall immediately be
cured, without any suppuration at all.

And so in this same manner all living Creatures having flesh and Bones may be
Cured.

The description of Gabelchoverus.
Oswaldus Gabelchoverus (in his Practica Germanica,) thus Describes it.

Take the fat of a Boar, and of a Bear, of each one pound; and these being
melted he pours them into red Wine, Unto this fat he adds powder of the
Boodstone, one ounce; Red Saunders, six ounces; Earthworms prepared two
drams; Vsnea or Moss of a dead man's Skul, as much as may be gotten; and then he
mingleth them, and makes an Unguent: touching the use whereof he writes
almost the very same that Crollius does.

Another Description.
Others have this Description. of it.

Take the Lard of a Brawner (melted on the fire, and poured forth upon cold
Water) as much as you think good; the powder of prepared Earthworms, the
powder of the Boodstone, and of Red Saunders, and Vsnea or Moss of a man's
Skul, of each as much as will suffice, and mingle them at the Fire.

Johannes Wiltichius leaves out the Vsnea or Moss, and he thinks the matter
not great, whether it be put in, or left out of the Composition. Neither does
he add the Mummy, or the fat, or the Blood. And this others likewise do. And I
my self knew one, who undertaking such a Cure, Compounded (as often as he
pleased) this Unguent only of the fat of a Porker, and a few other things,
without any of the said Vsnea, or any thing else taken from the Body of Man.

That Polypragmatick Johannes Colerus (in the 18. B. of his Economy, Colerus
his Description.
and 154. Chap.) gives us this Description.

Take the fat of a Brawn, and of a Bear, of each half a pound; Moss of a Man's
Skul, one pugil; Earthworms, one quart; Boodstone, two ounces; Red Saunders,
and Root of the greater Consound, of each three ounces; mingle them, and with
Wine make an Unguent.

Neither do they all agree as touching the time wherein they would have this
Unguent to be made. Crollius requires the preparing of it, the Sun being in
the Sign Libra. Others do include this time within narrower bounds yet; and
they will have it to be only the tenth and eleventh day of September. But
others there are that allow us any time for the providing of it.

But now as for the manner of using this Medicament; it having been so fully
and largly described and set down before out of Crollius, I hold it needless
here to repeat it. The Sum is this in a word; The manner of using it.
the wound it self is not to be anointed with this Unguent, but the weapon; or
the instrument what ever it be wherewith the wound is inflicted: or if this
cannot be had, then any other weapon, or wood, (but more especially that of the
Sallow Tree) or any thing else put into the Wound, and there died and stained
with the blood of the wounded person. And they likewise conceive that it
matters but very little, (or not at all) whether the wounded party be present,
or many miles distant; neither have they any regard at all unto the wounded
person, but only unto the weapon, that this be anointed. But yet nevertheless,
some there are who give in charge likewise, that the Wound be every day washed
and made clean with Urine or Wine.

But now lest any one should doubt of the effect of this Medicament; they first
of all appeal unto Experience: and Rudolphus Goclenius the younger writes that
he is able to nominate Emperors, Kings, Princes, Earls, and Lords, (whose
Authority and Credit was no way to be called in question) that were ready to
give their testimonials touching the efficacy of this Unguent.

Reasons alleged for the Weapon-salve:
Moreover the Patrons of this Unguent think (as they tell us) that there may be
natural causes rendered of this Action. And Crollius term al ignorant and
simple that doubt of the efficacy of this Medicament, or that refer this Cure
unto Sorcery. But now that they may prove that this Cure may be performed in a
Natural way, they first of al take a great deal of pains to prove, that there
are some actions to be instanced in, that are not wrought by the intervening of
any Corporeal contact, but by an occult Sympathy, and Magnetism (as they call
it.) And so the Lodestone draws Iron, albeit that it touch it not
corporeally; and it is moved toward the Pole. The Stars do also Act upon these
inferior Bodies, without any the aforesaid Contact. The Torpedo or Cramp-Fish
affects the hand of him that holds the Spear. There are some likewise that
can by no means endure to be in the Room with a Cat shut up in a Basket; and
although they see her not, yet they can by no means brook her presence; so
that, unless either the Cat be carried forth, or themselves removed into some
other Room, they presently fall into swounding sits. Dogs likewise know their
Masters footsteps, as also the treadings and traces of wild beasts, by which
they follow and pursue them. The shade of the Yew-Tree is very hurtful unto
mankind. And very many more of such like instances and examples that may be
observed in Nature, they heap up, to prove that there may be Natural occult
Actions without any Corporeal Contact: which (because that they are most
manifest in the Lodestone) therefore from it they call them all in general
Magnetic: Actions.

Another thing that they presuppose and take for granted, is this, that there
is a certain spirit of the world, diffused all the world over; which spirit (say
they) is the Director and Vehicle of al occult powers and Actions; and which
conjoyneth and keeps together all the parts of the world; and causes a sweet
and admirable agreement and harmony between them.

But Thirdly, As for what concerns the virtues of the Weapon-salve, they tell us
that there is in it a twofold virtue, one in the Unguent it self, to wit, of
Consolidating and agglutinating of the Wound; and the other that that is in the
Weapon anointed, and which carries that power unto the wound. They derive this
former virtue from many things of which this Medicament is compounded, and from
the influence of the Constellations, as also the Astral and Elemental
Conjunction. And therefore (as we told you before) some there are that never
make this Unguent but at such a certain time of the year, and position of the
Stars. But the other virtue they derive from the Natural Balsam, which together
with the Blood sticks upon the Weapon or instrument pressed upon the Wound,
but first besmeared with the Blood of the wounded person. For this Balsam (say
they) by reason of that Sympathy it has with the Wounded part communicates
unto the Wound the said virtue of the Medicament, by the Mediation of the
spirit of the World. And for the confirming of this they produce likewise other
examples. The Zenith (as they term it) of young Maidens being cast into the
fire (they say) very grievously hurts the virgin from whom it came; and that
the Secundines (or after births) if they be ill handled will cause great damage
and danger unto that Woman out of whom they flowed. Although they do not
likewise here sufficiently and clearly explain themselves. For Crollius
writes, that this Cure is performed by the Magnetic attractive virtue of the
said Medicament caused by the Constellations; which virtue (say they) by the
Medium of the Air may be brought unto the Wound, and conjoined therewith: and
then immediately he adds that there are three things that by this Medicament
Cause so admirable an effect. 1. The Sympathy of Nature. 2. The influence of
the Celestial Bodies, performing its operations by the Elements. 3. The Balsam,
that being endued with a healing virtue is Naturally put upon any one
whatsoever, without any distinction of either Person or Sex.

Reasons against the defenders of the Weapon-salve:
But in very truth (that we may briefly open unto you, and show you our Opinion
touching this Unguent) that which in the first place rendereth it very
suspicious, is this, that they give us not one only way for the composition of
this Unguent but very many; and in some of them those things are omitted and
wholly left out, from which others derive all the virture of this Medicament; as
is apparent from the many descriptions above mentioned. And so Wittichius
leaves out of the Composition the Vsnea or moss, the Fat, and Blood of man;
which yet nevertheless others make the very Basis, and Foundation of all the
virtue of this Medicament; and it is with them the principal part thereof. And
yet nevertheless they will all of them promise you the very same effect: and
every of them extolleth his own as sit and proper for all Wounds, whatsoever the
Weapon be wherewith they are inflicted; and whether they be by pricking, or by
Cutting, or by any thing cast at the party, or by a fall; albeit that Goclenius
indeed and Crollius do except those Wounds that are in the Nerves, Arteries, or
any of the more principal Members, as the Heart, Brain, etc.

What others object against the Composition of this Medicament, to wit, that
the Authors of this Unguent require the Vsnea or Moss that is cut off from the
Skul of a Man hanged, as also joining therewith Mummy, Man's Blood a little
warm, and Man's fat, and that in the Man's Blood and fat they think the marrow
and pith of the whole business (that is to say, the whole virtue of this
Unguent) to consist; which these Judge to be superstitious; this Objection I no
ways own, neither will I defend it; it being so well known, that Man's fat, and
Skul, Mummy, and Vsnea, are made use of by other Physicians (without any
superstition) in the Curing of Diseases. And yet notwithstanding of this I must
here admonish you, that (seeing that Magitians and Wizards (as will appear out
of Apuleius upon the 2. and 3. B. of Ovids Metamorphosis; and Nicolaus
Remigius, in his 1. B. of Daemonolatry, and ^6. Chap. and 2. B. Chapter 1. and
others also that have written of witches and Sorcerers) seeing (I say) that
these are wont in their sorcery to use man's Blood and Flesh, and other parts of
Man's Body, every one ought to be careful (who will make use of such
Medicaments) that he do not superstitiously use the said Medicament, for the
procuring of a Natural effect; and so thereby gratify the Devil, (who is the
enemy of Man's both Soul and Body) and so unawares do him Service; which may be
done, if he use such Medicaments for those effects that are not in the Natural
power of those things; and therefore if those effects shall follow, they are to
be imputed and ascribed unto the Devil, (by such like superstitious practices
laying snares for mankind,) rather then unto the thing it self.

As touching the effect of this Medicament; that it does not evermore answer
the desire and expectation, we are shown by Guilbel. Gabricius, in his third
Cent. and 25. Observation. And be it so, that (as many great and eminent
persons have testified) diverse who have made use hereof have recovered: yet
nevertheless these can attest no more but this, that the person was wounded,
that unto him there was administered this kind of Cure by the Weapon-Salve, and
that this person recovered: but that he recovered by the virtue of this
Medicament, this they cannot testify. For there may be oftentimes many things
conjoined with some effect, that are not the Cause thereof. And therefore, as
it does not follow, that such a person walking it Lightened, therefore his
walking was the cause of the Lightening; so no more will it follow, this
wounded person was healed, and he applied the Weapon-Salve, therefore the
Weapon-Salve was the cause of the cure; unless it be demonstrated, that from
the said Unguent this effect necessarily followed. And in nothing indeed is the
fallacy of the cause more frequent then in Physic; where oftentimes the
healing of some Disease is attributed unto this or that Medicament; whereas the
truth is, it proceeded not from the said Medicament, but either from Nature her
self, or else from such other Medicaments as were administered before, together
with, or after the said Medicament whereunto the Cure is ascribed. And a very
great difference there is between Physic and other Arts. For in other Arts the
effect being upon something that is solid depends wholly upon the Artificer:
and if there be any thing well or ill done by him, all this is to be imputed
and ascribed unto the Artist, unless it so fall out, as happily it may, and
often does, that by reason of the unfitness of the subject matter, (for as we
use to say, a Mercury or Statue is not made of every piece of Wood) or else by
reason of some fault in the Instrument, somewhat may happen to be done amiss;
since that, as we told you before (in the first B. of our Institutions, and 1.
Chap.) the subjects of other Arts do nothing at all, but only obey the will of
the workman: whereas in Physic, the subject matter thereof has a certain
innate power; by which (being assisted by the Physician) for the most part of
its own accord it tends unto health: from whence it is that by Hippocrates
(6. Epid. Comm. 5. Text 1.) they are said to be the Curers of the Diseases of
Nature.

So that the whole business in short comes to this, that the State of the
Controversy here is not, whether in a person wounded, and recovered again, the
Cure were done by the Weapon-Salve; but this, whether or no the Weapon-Salve
were the Cause of the healing of the Wound; touching which we are now to make a
little further enquiry.

Now it being so that Nature (as we showed you above) is the Cause of the
Wounds Conglutination, but without the virtue of any Medicament, (under what
Notion or Consideration soever,) and that oftentimes likewise even by Lard (or
some other thing of no great moment) laid on, many Wounds without the help of
any other Medicaments, or any assistance from the Physician, have been Cured;
therefore, in the Cure likewise that is by some thought to be done by this
Weapon-Salve, the Conglutination of the Wound is to be ascribed unto Nature
alone, as the next and principal cause. Which being so, and the truth thereof
being such that it cannot be denied, now in the next place we are to enquire,
whether in the said Cure the healing of the Wound be to be ascribed unto Nature
alone; or else indeed whether or no there be not likewise some Concurrent
efficacy of the Weapon-Salve. Unto me the former seems the more probable,
therefore, because that it is a truth most certain (as but now we told you)
that Wounds are oftentimes Cured by Nature alone without the Concurrence of any
Medicament; the truth whereof is sufficiently attested likewise by internal
Wounds, unto which there cannot possibly be any Medicaments administered. And
hitherto tends the whole business in the curing of Wounds (according to
Caesar Magatus his way, touching which we have spoken in the foregoing Chapter)
to wit, that the whole work be committed to Nature, that the heat and temper of
the part (it being the instrument) be kept entire, and that without urgent
necessity it be not molested and disquieted by Medicaments. And sometimes we see
that such dangerous Wounds chiefly and especially by the benefit of Nature,
without the application of any Medicament, (or such as is of no great moment)
are cured; so that it seems to be ascribed rather unto a Miracle, then the
Medicaments. Of which very thing the Observations and Examples are every where
sufficiently known. Neither yet notwithstanding are the Patrons of this Unguent
so bold as to extend the virtue thereof unto al Wounds; for (as a little before
we told you) Crollius and Goclenius do except the Wounds of the more principal
Members, as also of the Nerves and Arteries: and there was never yet found any
that durst make use of this Unguent in Wounds caused by Gun shot. And who is
there that dares deny that other lighter and sleighter Wounds may be cured by
Nature alone? And if any thing extraordinary, and that which seems to exceed
the power of Nature, happen at any time in the said Cure by the Weapon-Salve,
we ought well to consider, and look unto it, whether it be not wrought by the
assistance of the Devil, thereunto engaged by a Compact and agreement, either
explicit, or implicit.

And now therefore it being a known truth, that Nature alone (and as the next
Cause) may agglutinate Wounds, and that Medicaments (as above we showed you) do
perform nothing else then the preservation of the native heat, and the Natural
Temperament of the part, or the removal of those impediments that hinder Nature
in her work; we are now in the next place to see, whether the Weapon-Salve can
perform those things.

Where we instantly meet with this first difficulty, to wit, Whether the Weapon
Salve can Act at a distance?
whether possibly the Medicament that is not anointed upon the Wound it self,
but upon the Weapon, or any thing else that is besmeared with Blood from the
Wound, can yield any benefit, especially if the wounded person be absent, and
many miles distant from the anointed Weapon. And indeed to prove this, they use
two Reasons, as we also told you formerly: the first is this, that there may be
actions from occult and hidden qualities, and at a distance, (which they call
Magnetic actions) because that by the spirit of the world the virtue of the
Unguent may be conveyed unto the Wound, as we see it to be done by the Sympathy
and Antipathy of many things.

But neither proves the thing that it ought to prove. For first of all, albeit
we grant that such Actions there are, and that those things that mutually Act,
and are passive, do not always corporeally touch one the other; yet
nevertheless, that this is so in the Weapon-Salve, and whether or no any virtue
can be derived from the Weapon anointed unto the Wound at so great a distance
and interval of places, this is yet to be proved. For it does not follow, there
are such admirable actions of other things, and therefore also the Weapon-Salve
has such a virtue. And that this is not done, he shall easily perceive that
will but consider those other Actions of this Nature, that are performed at a
distance. Since that the operation follows the being of a thing, it is
therefore necessary that between the Agent and the Patient there should be a
certain conjunction, and mutual Contact. But now, in regard that the things
between which the Action is do not all of them touch one the other with their
Bodies, there is a necessity that they should touch in some other manner. And
this is twofold: Action at a distance twofold:
for either the thing that is said to act at a distance, sends forth something
from its own Body and substance, (which the Ancients called Effluvium or
Aporrhoia, and Physicians where they treat of Contagion, call it Miasmos;
touching which see further in the fourth B. of Fevers, Chap. 4. and the 2. B.
of our Institutions, Part 2. Chap. 12.) to wit, when there flow forth of the
Body the smallest imaginable parts, and Atoms, and by the Medium of the Air
(or some other body,) are transfered unto another body, and affect it with that
virtue which it has in common with the whole entire body. But now as for such
small bodies as these, they have no Regular motion at al, but according to the
motion of the Air they move inordinatly this way and that way, and by every
blast they are variously dispersed; like as we may see in the smoke of Candles
when they are extinguished, and of other things when they are first lighted and
kindled. But other bodies there are that Acting at a distance do not indeed
send forth from their own body any thing that may be transferred unto another
body, but only they send forth a species as we may call it; and in this manner,
by means of these sensible species, as light, sound, smell, and the like, even
the distant bodies are affected. And very probable it is, that there are more
of these like sensible species then what are perceived by our senses. And this
is commonly said so be done by a virtue, or virtual contact. And yet
nevertheless virtue does always presuppose a substance from which the said
virtue flows. So the flame being extinguished, the illumination or light that
comes from it that also cease. And moreover secondly there is likewise a fit
subject required, through which it may be propagated; which if there be not, the
Action cease. And so an opacous and thick body being interposed betwixt the
light body and our sight, the Illumination cease. Thirdly, this virtue is
likewise diffused orbicularly, and at a certain distance; Naturalists term it
the sphere of Activity; which in some things is greater, and in others less.
The greatest of all is in light or lucid bodies, but a less in those bodies
that yield a sound. But yet the greater the lucid and lightsom body is the
greater also is its sphere of Activity: and hereupon it is, that the stars of
all other bodies do scatter and disperse their light from them furthest in
distance and widest in breadth.

We are now therefore to make enquiry (in regard that it is of a certainty that
the Weapon salve with which the Weapon is anointed, is in body absent and
distant from the wounded party) whether the weapon-salve touch the Wounded body
either of these two ways; for a third way there is none. Neither can this be
done by Accident and some quality; since that an Accident does not pass from
one subject to another, neither diffuse it self at a distance, and unto any
other body. Now I say that this is not done, neither indeed can be, either of
these ways.

The Weapon-salve does not Act by sending forth any small bodies.
For first of all, those Atoms or Effluvious bodies that flow forth, having no
certain motion of their own, but moving inordinately hither and thither, this
way and that way, how can these possibly directly and in a straight line tend
unto the wounded person? Neither is there any Cause, that we should here fly
unto and plead the likeness of Substance. For although that those smallest
bodies do at the length apply themselves unto others of their own kinds, (as we
may plainly see in thunder and lightning) yet notwithstanding when they at
first exhale out of the body they wander up and down inordinately, this way and
that way. And much less may we have recourse unto the spirit of the World, by
whose carrying and conveying whereof these smallest bodies may from the weapon
anointed at length come unto the wounded person, and the wound it self. For
those things are indeed spoken of the spirit of the world, but they are not
proved; yea but rather they are opposed by reasons strong and weighty. And
furthermore, since that this cure extends it self very far in length, and (as
they will have us believe) at the distance of some miles; if this were done by
the effusion of those small bodies, seeing there is so very little of the
Unguent, and yet much less of that natural Balsam that sticks unto the
Weapon, that Unguent with the Balsam would easily fly abroad into the Air, and
there vanish; and so the very foundation of the cure being taken away and gone,
the cure it self must needs cease.

The Weapon salve does not Act by any species,
But if they will say, that his Action is performed by the species, or Magnetic
action, they ought first of all to prove that there are such species in this
Unguent; (for indeed Nature has given unto some simples and things natural,
not compounded by art, a virtue of sending forth such like species as these we
speak of) and then they must show us what the nature of them is, and what their
sphere of Activity. For it is no way credible, that the virtue of this Unguent
should extend it self for twelve miles round about, and so orbicularly. As for
what concerns the Loadstone, (from which they are wont to term these magnetic
actions) the Lodestone does indeed attract the Iron although it be at some
distance from it; but if very far removed, and beyond the sphere of its
Activity, it does not attract: and the very same is likewise well known to be
done in other such like occult and magnetic Actions. For the Loadstone, and
other the like bodies, do put forth their virtues in a straight and direct
line, which yet nevertheless are not extended in infinitum (as we say) and they
are oftentimes likewise intercepted by the interposing of other things. So the
Sunbeams by the coming between of an opacous body are excluded. Who then can
believe, that from so small a pittance of the Unguent, and so little of the
blood, there should break forth so many of these small bodies or species,
through the chest in which the anointed weapon is shut up, and that they should
thence be carried so great a distance, (even twelve miles) that they should
penetrate through Mountains and Walls, and tend directly unto the wounded person
close shut up within his Chamber, or in bed, and that there they should pass
throw those many double swathes wherein the wound is wrapped, and so insinuate
themselves at length into the wound it self? The Loadstone is moved unto the
Iron; but this unguent is not anointed upon the Wound, but upon the Weapon. And
the Loadstone indeed being but only moved toward the Iron, draws it; but now
in the right using of this unguent, what a company of Ceremonies and
superstitious practices there are used we have shown you before. And in other
respects also there appears a very vast difference between the Loadstone and
this Weapon salve. The Loadstone is a natural body and so has its Natural
Effect, wh ch it evermore works in one and the same manner. The Weapon salve
is a Composition out of many things; and by some it is made one way, and by
others after a different manner, and of other things, as before we have shown
you. And the Unguent ought also to effect many things, to wit, perform all
those things that are Necessary for the curing of the wound, preserve the Wound
free from pain, and likewise bring pain upon it if it be not rightly preserved,
or if it chance to be defiled. For if it ought to perform all that that is
otherwise the work of Nature in the curing of Wounds; there will be then
altogether a necessity that it perform many things; to wit, that it concoct
whatsoever is to be concocted that it expel the Pus and excrements, and that it
generate flesh. Yea moreover it ought to perform the office both of the
Physician, and also of the Medicaments, which is indeed very various. For
neither are all those bodies that are Wounded a like disposed; some of them
being sound bodies, others Plethorick, and a third sort Cacochymical; the parts
likewise are various, as flesh, Nerves, Membranes; which require Medicaments of
a different kind; the virtues of all which this unguent ought to sustain. And
if a man shall at one and the same time (as it very often happens) receive
dvers wounds in different parts of his body, and from different weapons; the
question then will be, whether it be sufficient to anoint one of the Weapons
only, and whether or no the virtue thereof will be conveyed unto al these
several wounds; or whether or no all the weapons are to be anointed; and
whether each particular unguent will do its own office, and this tend straight
and directly unto that wound that was inflicted by this weapon; and that
unguent likewise unto another wound made by that other weapon?

A reason should likewise be rendered why the unguent should not perform the
same while it is in the box, which they say it performs when it is anointed
upon the weapon. For they have no ground to say that by the benefit of that
balsam that is in the blood the virtue of the Medicament is carried and
conveyed unto the wound. For if all that whole blood were resolved into Atoms,
it would not be sufficient to fill up all that so great a space. Neither have
they as yet proved, that the blood can send forth out of it self any such
species. And if by the benefit of the blood the virtue of the Medicament may be
carried unto the wound, why should it not then likewise carry to the wound the
virtues of other things, into the which out of wounded persons the blood is
oftentimes abundantly poured out, which yet we see that it does not.

But now as for those things that they alleadg in special touching the
Secundines, and the first menstruous blood of Virgins, and as for their
asserting that if this blood be not rightly handled, there is much hurt and
damage brought unto those maidens, these things are to be imputed unto the
superstition of these young Women. And if in woman kind the Secundines being
cast forth into some unclean places bring damage unto these women from whom
they came, why is not the like done in bruit Creatures, whose Secundines or
after births being cast forth and buried in dung do oftentimes putrefy? And in
what place soever you dig and bury these secundines, they yet notwithstanding
rot and putrefy. And why also do not the Molae (or false conceptions) which
women use to burn, bring any hurt and damage unto the Woman from whom it
proceeded? And why should the first menstruous blood if it be burnt bring
damage unto the virgin, and none of the rest?

These things being as we have said, and the case thus standing, there is no
need of any further tedious dispute touching those virtues that this unguent is
said to have in curing the Wound, seeing that it is hitherto sufficiently
proved, that there comes no virtue at all from this Unguent unto the Wound.
And if this Unguent had indeed any virtue at all in it either of preserving and
cherishing the temperament or the innate heat of the part (they commonly call it
the Balsam) or of drying up the Excrements, it would better and more
commodiously exercise and put forth this virtue, being anointed upon the
wounded part it self, then upon the Weapon. And besides all this, if (as some
will have it) the virtue and strength of this Medicament consist in the Blood
and fat of Man, why then do some of them likewise apply it unto the Wounds of
other living Creatures, to wit, of Horses, etc.? For how great is the
Difference between a Man and a Horse?

But that Crollius and some others (that I may not here altogether omit the
mentioning of this also) derive the virtue of this Medicament from the Heaven,
and therefore command the preparing of it in such a certain position of the
Heavens: Neither will that at al patronize this Cause. For they have not as yet
proved, that there is in the Heavens or any of the Stars any virtue at all to
heal Wounds; or that if there were any such virtue in these, that it does so
mingle it self with this Unguent, that as if it were in a manner bound and shut
up, it may be carried up and down about with us, and drawn forth into use and
Act when we please.

And so likewise as touching the manner of using this Medicament, this also
has no Foundation to uphold it, neither does it want for superstition. For
first of al, seeing that they place the whole Cause of the Cure in this, that
the virtue of the Medicament is derived unto the Wound by the benefit of the
natural Balsam that is in the Blood; why then do they anoint only the Weapon
with the which the man was wounded, or some other Weapon, or a piece of Wood
bloodied with the Blood of the Wound; and why do they not as well anoint his
shirt, or the other Garments of the wounded party, or a Stone, or any thing
else what ever it be upon which the Blood has been spilt or poured out: and if
not, there is then some implicit underhand compact with the Devil to be
suspected. And moreover, why if the wound be made with the pricking of a Sword
do they anoint the Sword in the point thereof toward the hilt; but if the wound
be made by the Cut of a Sword, then they anoint it from the edge toward the
back: and if it appear how far and deep the Sword penetrated into the wound, so
far they anoint it, and no farther; but if it does not appear how far it
pierced, they then anoint the Sword all over: all which are no better then
Superstitious Ceremonies, and of which no Reason can be rendered. For if the
power and faculty of the Medicament be Natural, what does this or that manner
of using it in the anointing make to the thing it self, and whether or no does
it add any new virtue and quality thereto? If the virtues be Natural, there is
no need of any such Ceremonies; as it plainly appears in all Natural things
whatsoever. The Lodestone draws the Iron; and the Iron being touched with
the Lodestone is moved unto the North Pole, without any of the aforesaid
Ceremonies. And furthermore, some there are that anoint the Weapon once every
day, others every Second, or Third day; and some content themselves with once
only anointing. And some there are, who (that so they may not Err in the
anointing) wholly dip and plunge the Weapon (or Sallow Wood, that now and then
serves in stead thereof) into the Unguent kept in along Box, or little Chest,
until the Wound be perfectly healed; but they altogether neglect the Weapon it
self, that dip the Arms (or that they make use of in their stead) all over in
the Unguent. But others there are that keep the anointed Weapon in any
temperate place what ever it be; and others likewise shut it up in a little
Chest. But al of them generally are exceeding Cautious in this, that the Weapon
be never kept in any place that is over hot, or over cold, and that it be not
polluted with filth and impurities: for if this should happen, the Cure will by
this means be hindered, and a most grievous pain in the Wound procured unto the
sick person: All which are merely frivolous and superstitious. For seeing that
(as it is before sufficiently proved) there cannot possibly be any action of
the Weapon-Salve upon the wound at a far distance, and interval of place from
the Wound; so likewise we say, that it cannot possibly excite any pain. And
therefore we conclude, that if this at any time happen, it is then caused and
procured by the help and assistance of some evil spirit. And most certain it
is, that the Blood of wounded persons is not always poured forth into clean
places, but oftentimes into places very noysom and unclean; and that in the
Winter time it is frozen; and that the Bloody Linen Clothes are washed with
warm Water, and the wood be sprinkled with the Blood oftentimes burnt, and yet
nevertheless the sick person does not hereupon feel any pain, or suffer any
damage whatsoever.

And furthermore we say, that they attribute unto this Unguent things
altogether impossible, and those virtues all which are never to be found in any
one Natural Medicament. For they affirm that by this Unguent may be Cured all
wounds whatever, whether inflicted by downright cutting, or pricking, by a fall,
or any thing cast at the party. But great is the diversity of Wounds according
to the various Circumstances that attend them; and therefore there is not
required one only Medicament, but diverse Medicaments are required unto the
Curing of them. A Wound inflicted by a sharp and keen Weapon is Cured without
the generating of much Pus: but in that which is from a blunt Weapon,
whatsoever is bruised must of necessity al of it convert into Pus. And there is
also an exceeding great difference of the parts. In a fleshy part (especially,
when the man is of a sound and healthy Constitution) the Wound is easily Cured;
but much harder is that Wound to be cured that is inflicted upon the Brain,
Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments, (especially the greater ones) such as are those
in the Hams. They promise the Patient likewise that the Cure of the Wound shall
be altogether without pain: which in all parts to perform is a thing altogether
impossible. For certainly if a Nerve be pricked, there is no man that can make
good his promise, that here in this no pain shall afflict the Party.

And that we may now conclude whatsoever may be further said in this
Controversy; the Curing of the Wound that is ascribed unto this Weapon-Salve,
(as has been said) is for the most part to be a attributed unto Nature, whose
work alone it is to Cure not only light and trivial Wounds, but oftentimes also
Wounds most grievous and full of danger. Which appears even from this, that
there are so many several desciptions given us of this Unguent; and that there
have been some, who instead of this compound Weapon-Salve have made use of Lard
only, or Hogs fat, and yet notwithstanding the Wound, have been Cured; which
Johannes Colerius testifies (as before we alleged him) that he himself had
seen; as we may find it in the before cited place of his Oeconomicks. But now,
if upon the administering of this Medicament some most grievous Wound shall be
healed, which may seem altogether to transcend the power of Nature, this comes
to pass by the power of the Devil himself, drawn thereunto by some compact
either explicit or implicit. Neither is the suspicion hereof any ways to be
lessened, or removed, by what is said by some, to wit, that all the simples
that make up the Composition of this Medicament, Unguent, or (as it is commonly
called,) Weapon-Salve, are all of them altogether Natural; and that in the
Composition hereof, or the anointing therewith there are neither Characters,
nor Conjurations, nor Charms and Enchantments made use of. For the Devil does
oftentimes hide and conceal the Compact that he makes not only under Characters
and Consecrations, or a certain form of words, but likewise even under things
Natural, if at his command (which is done indeed in the first and explicit
Compact, wherein others that administer and apply the same things implicitly
and inconsiderately may likewise involve themselves) things that are Natural be
made use of for other purposes then what they were Created for by God; and
oftentimes Diabolical and Magical Actions are concealed and obtruded under the
veil of Magnetic Actions. And therefore, although it be granted, that by this
Unguent the wounded person is healed (which yet nevertheless is, as we have
said, wrought by the benefit of Nature) yet it is not impossible, but that the
Devil, that he may destroy the Soul, by Gods permission in many things may help
the Body after a certain manner: yet it is very Credible, in regard that he is
the implacable enemy of Mankind, and evermore ready and provided to do them
all manner of hurt and mischief, that he may seduce and draw men (as far as
lies in his power) from God the Creator, and Author of all good; and from the
Means by him ordained, unto things superstitious, and unwarrantable practices.

Chap. 11. Of Altering Medicaments, and Vulnerary Potions.
WE told you before, that there are two sorts of Medicaments that are made use
of in the Curing of Wounds, external, and internal. Touching the external we
have hitherto spoken; we will therefore now in this Chapter handle the
internal. Now those are of two Sorts; some only altering, and some in special
called vulnerary. Altering Medicaments, are Coolers, Thickners; and such as are
but lightly (lest they might otherwise breed obstructions) Astringent: which
are to this end administered, that they may hinder the Humors that they easily
wax not hot, become fluxile, and receive a putridness. And such are made of
Succory, Endive, Sorrel, Plantane, Tormentil, Roses, Purslane, Water Lilly,
Borrage, Saunders, Juice of Citron, Juice of Pome-Granates, Hartshorn,
Margarites, and Coralls: out of which there are made Decoctions, distilled
Waters, Syrups, Electuaries, and Potions.

Whether Vulnerary potions are to be made use of.
And moreover there are made use of certain Medicaments, potions more espcially,
that are termed vulnerary. Touching which notwithstanding Authors differ
amongst themselves. For some of them (among whom is Balduinus Roussaeus, in his
Medicinal Epistles, Epist. 66.) do indeed admit of them in those wounded parts
unto which these kind of Potions do reach, as the Gullet, Stomach, and
Intestines, and then they have in a manner the place of Topic Medicaments; but
in the external parts they reject them, The Nagative.
for these Causes. First, Because that in the writings of Hippocrates and the
Ancient Physicians they find no mention made of these vulnerary potions.
Secondly, because that by Reason of the distance of the Situation, they will
not believe, that these potions can possibly penetrate unto the extreme Limbs,
or the Head; nor yet unto the greater and thicker Guts, unto which therefore
when they are wounded Medicaments may more commodiously be injected by
Clysters, then given to drink; yea they conceive that those Astringents that
for the most part are mingled therewith may hinder that those Medicaments may
not penetrate unto the more deep and inward parts. Thirdly, Because thac there
is a great difference between the Medicaments out of which these potions are
prepared; since that some of them are hot and opening, as Betony, Speed-well,
Mugwort, Avens, Carduus Benedictus, etc. as also Cold, and Astringent, as great
Comfrey, Winter green, Hors-Tail, Burnet, Tormentil, etc. So that it does not
sufficiently appear of what faculty the Medicaments ought to be, out of which
these potions are prepared, and what virtues these potions have in them.
Fourthly, whenas yet notwithstanding they are most of them Astringent, they
think that being administered they bring more hurt then good and benefit unto
the Patient; in regard that they obstruct the Liver and the other more noble
bowels.

But in very truth, it is not indeed to be denied, that among the more Ancient
Physicians (to the best of my Remembrance) we scarcely meet with any mention
made as touching these Medicaments: and yet among the Physicians of latter
times very frequent and common has been the use of them. And yet nevertheless
those things that Galen has in the 5. of this Method, Chap. 9. touching
potions in Wounds of the Thorax, those things (I say) seem to come very near
unto these, and to suit and answer unto these potions. And the Author of the B.
de Dynamidiis, Tit. de Plaga) makes mention of these potions; who administreth
out of Wine Mouse-Ear, Plan^^n^, Strawberry Leaves, Avens, Pimpe^nel, Ground
Ivy, Betony, Agrimony, And in his Title, touching the Curing of Wounds, he
prescribes Mouse-Ear, Agrimony, Ground Ivy. And in the Antidotary of Mesues,
about the end of the 11. Distinction, after the Emplasters, there is extant
such a potion.

Take Avens, Root of Mug-wort, Pimpernel, Camomile fiv le^^^d G^^ss, Black
French Horchound, Violets, Hemp stalks, the tender top^ of the Bramble hush, of
each one handful; Madder, according to the weight of all the other. Let all
these boil in Wine unto the one half; and afterward let them be strained; unto
the straining add^^ third part of Honey; and then boil them again, and strain
them.

The truth is, Christophorus Georgius (in his Comment.) writes that this
Medicament is no where to be met with in Ancient writings, or Books; and
Johannes Manardus (in his Comment upon this place) writes that he knew not by
what accident this mixture had crept into this place, and that the potion wa
added unto the Emplasters. And yet nevertheless, the same Christoph. G^orgius
de Honestis confesses (in the same place) whether it be Missues his potion, or
any ones else, that it is to be found described in many other Authors: and
Johannes Manardus (in the same place) writes, that these kind of Potions are
very useful both for new and old wounds; and that he himself had more then once
made trial of them; and that with them alone he had cured the worst and most
desperate Ulcers. And these have been likewise used by others, and those not
only Empiricks, but also most learned, able, and skilful Physicians and
Surgeons; Guido (part 2. of his little Surgery, Chap. 9. John de Vigo,
Lib. 3. Chap. 10.) Johannes Anglicus, Nicolaus Massa, Epist. 38. Johannes
Tragant. B. 2. of his Chirurgical Institutions. Johannes Andreas a Cruce, of
Wounds, Tract 2. B. 4. Chap. 4. Fallopius, in his B. of Wounds, Chap 24. Petrus
Andreas Matthiolus, in his fourth B. upon Dioscorides, and Chap. 16. Ambrose
Parry B. 18. Chap. 28. Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente, in B. 2. of his
Surgery, Chap. 23. Ludovicus Septalius, in his 8. B. of Medicinal
Animadvers. Number. 181. And others (a great many more of them) whom experience
taught, that these potions were exceeding useful in the Curing of Wounds. And
therefore, to oppose and thwart experience, and to reject, or neglect
Medicaments approved of by long use and practice* it is a thing no way fit to
be done. For as Galen writes (in his 5. B. of the affected places, and 3.
Chap.) It is better (says he) to seek out how things that are done are wrought
and affected, then to deny that they may at all be done. Neither is this
sufficient for the rejection of Medicaments, that there has bin no mention
made of them in the Books of the Ancients; for many most useful Medicaments
have been found out by those of latter times, that the Ancients were altogether
ignorant of. Neither are they administered for that end that Topics are, or
those potions of which Galen makes mention, in his 4. B. of the Meth. of
Curing, Chap. 7. And therefore albeit that they do not externally reach so far
as the wounded parts, as other Topics; yet nevertheless, they may through the
Veins penetrate even unto the very Wounds themselves. Neither by Reason of
their astringent virtue which certain of them have from those Medicaments is
there any cause to fear that therefore they cannot penetrate unto the exterior
Members; or that they are likely to breed obstructions in the Bowels. For this
inconvenience may easily be Remedied and avoided by the admixture of other
things that have in them rather a power of opening, then binding. Neither
lastly, are the virtues of all Medicaments to be valued only from the first
qualities, and such as arise from, and depend upon them; but from the
properties that arise from the whole substance, which are suggested unto us
only by experience. But now the virtues of these Medicaments, although they
cannot easily he defined, but may be manifested by experience; yet
notwithstanding in this all Authors agree among themselves, that these ought
not to be made use of in the beginning, and when there is as yet no danger
appearing by reason of the Wound, and that Topics are sufficient for the full
and perfect Cure; as likewise where there is present a fever and an
Inflammation; which by the use of these (they being for the most part hot) may
easily be augmented: but as for other Causes so especially for this, to wit,
the vicious Constitution of the part, Wounds oftentimes do not easily receive a
Cure; and thereupon it is that they may happily and succesfully be made use of,
not only in Wounds, but likewise in Ulcers and Fistula's. For it is a thing
that is very much Material, how the wounded part and the blood therein are
disposed; and what things soever they are that hurt the Wound, they all of them
are for the most part communicated unto the Wound by the fault of the Blood; as
Tragautius tells us in the 2. B. of his Chirurgical Institut. Chap. 12. And it
being so, as we see, that some kind of meats are more fit and Convenient for
wounded persons, and some again offensive and hurtful: why may we not therefore
give the Patient to drink such Medicaments as cause that all things in the
Blood and about the affected part may be rightly disposed, and in good order?
Touching which, Ambrose Parry (in the place before alleged) thus writteth:
Nature being assisted (says he) by such a potion, has often seemed to me to
work effects wonderful and Miraculous, in the recovery of bones rotten and
impostumated, and the Consolidation of Ulcers. For these potions albeit that
they do not by the Belly purge away the Noxious and offensive Humors; yet
nevertheless they are very efficacious in the cleansing of Ulcers, and the
preserving and free^ng of them from all that filth of the Excrementitious
Humors, the defecating and carrying away the dregs of the Blood, and the
purging of the Wound from the thin Ichorous Excrements, and all impurity; in
the agglutinating also of broken bones; and the restoring of the Nerves unto
their pristine Union. And pre^ently he adds this further; by this admirable
and laudable Medicament the flesh and any other substance that is lost and
perished may readily be restored and made good again, and the part restored
unto its former Union. And Pet. Andraeas Matthiolus ( in his 4. B. upon
Dioscorides, Chap. 16.) says thus: By such potions I have seen healed as well
the Wounds of the Thorax as those of the Intestines, which were thought to be
mortal, and altogether incurable by any help and means whatsoever. And this
these Medicaments do altogether and without fail perform, to wit, that they
consume the excessive humidity of the blood that is wholly unfit for
agglutination; that they supply a due and fit matter for the generating of
flesh; and Thirdly, that by their moderate astriction they prevent and hinder
the afflux of humors unto the wounded part. And Guido of Gauliacum (Tr. 3.
Doct. 1. Chap. 1.) writes thus in the style of his Age: In Ancient Ulcers
(says he) in case of any parts Fistulated and Cancerated, as also in Blood
congealed in the interior parts, and in case of Sanies gotten together in the
Breast and Intrinsecal Glandules, and in Croakings of the Guts, I have sometimes
used these potions. And out of him the very same has Johannes Tragautius (in
his 2. B. of Chirurgic. Institutions:) and Johannes Andraeas a Cruce writes
very confidently, that in these cases he himself was wont to make use of these
potions; and most of all in Wounds of a long continuance, when they have come
to be Fistulated, and refractory against all other Remedies. And Ludovicus
Septalius (in the place alleged) writes thus: When we once perceive (says
he) that great store of excrements are from day to day generated, either by
reason of Errors committed in point of Dye^ or by reason of the overgreat
abounding of naughty and vicious Humors in the whole Body, or else by reason of
something amiss and faulty in the Wound; the Body being first evacuated, and the
time of the Inflammation passed over, we thought good oftentimes to make use of
some vulnerary potten for many days together, until we saw that the matter was
wholly consumed.

Now the simples out of which they are made and prepared, are diverse, Johannes
Andraeas a Cruce writes that there are only four Herbs that may be extolled
and commended for this use, to wit, Ladies Mantle, Avens, the Herb Periwinkle,
and the Herb Trinity, which is a species of Trifoyl or three Leaf Grass. But
indeed there ar^ many more Plants in use for the making of these potions; to
wit; The Materials of vulnerary petions.
The greater and less Consound, Sanicle, Saracennical consound, Agrimony,
Winter-green, Speed-wel, Mug-wort Plantane, Savine, Horse-Tail, Adders Tongue
five leafed Grass or Cinquefoil, wild Tansey, Vervein, the Red Cabbage, Neep or
Neppe, (some calit Cat Mint) Golden Rod, the lesser Centaury, St. John's Wort,
Tansey, Vipers Bugloss, Rupture wort, Water Germander, Straw Berry Leaves, the
Roots of Tormentil, Pimpernel, both the Aristolochies or Birth-worts, white
Dittany, Valerian, Bistort, Gentian, Rubarb, Rhapontick, the Flowers of Lillies
of the Valley, of St. John's Wort, and Roses, Crabs Eyes, Sperma Ceti (commonly
called Parmacitty) the Lentisk Wood, Mummy, Mace, Bole-Armenick.

Of these there are made diverse Compositions, but more especially potions and
pouders And yet nevertheless in the preparing of these there is in the general
to be observed; to wit, that those Plants which are appropriated unto the
wounded part or the parts nigh unto it (as for instance, in the Wounds of the
Head, Betony, Roses; in the Wounds of the Breast, Speedwell; in the Wounds of
the Liver, and about the Liver, Agrimony; in the Wounds of the Reins, or about
the Reins, Straw-berry leaves) are to be made choice of.

Potions.
Take Red Mug-wort, one ounce; Leaves of Tree Ivy, the Herb Winter-green, the
greater and less Sanicle, Ladies Mantle, Saracennical Consound, of each one
ounce; Daisies, half an ounce; let them be cut small, Vulnerary potions.
and infused in half a pint of the best Wine, and clear running Water, one
pint and half: let them stand in the Balneum shut and close covered, by the
space of three hours, in the heat: and then after this let them be taken forth,
and stand all night: in the morning add, Sugar four ounces; Nutmeg, Crabs Eyes
Mummy, of each two drams; and make a potion. Or,

Take Ladies Mantle, Sanicle, Saracennical Consound, wild Ivy, red Mug-wort, of
each one handful; pour in unto these four measures of the best Wine; boil them
in a close pot over a gentle Fire, until the fourth part be consumed and wasted
away. Or,

Take Winter-green four handfuls, the Leaves of ground Ivy three handfuls, the
Roots of white Gentian four ounces; when you have cut them small, put to them of
old stale Beer as much as will suffice; let them stand al night, and afterward
destil them. Or,

Take Sa^racennical Consound, (all of it, both Root and Leaves) one handful;
hoyl them in good Wine, until a third part be wasted away; and give the Patient
Morning and Evening a draught of this to drink. Or.

Take the Herb Tormentil, Straw-berry leaves, Sanicle, Matrisy Iva or Ladies
Bedstraw, and Winter-green, of each one handful; boil them in beer, and give it
the Patient to drink. Or,

Take Herb Winter green Herb Periwinkle, the Herb Bugle, Mug-wort, Pimpernel,
and Agrimony, of each two handfuls; boil them in Wine unto the one half; and
give the wounded person a draught of this Mornings and Evenings. Or,

Take the Lentisk Wood, and Oak Missletoe, of each two ounces; the Roots of
Consound, Aristolochy, Centaury, Valerian, Madder, Tormentil, and Bistort, of
each half an ounce; Common Water Chalibeated, (that is to say, wherein steel
has been often quenched) six quarts; mingle them, and make an Infusion
according to Art for twenty four hours; and afterward let them boil in a
double Vessel, until the one half be wasted; and when in the boiling it is come
to the third part, then add of Parsley Roots, the tops of the Bramble Bush,
Hemp, Mous-Ear, Herb Trinity (a species of Trifoyl or three leaved Grass) Herb
Climer or Periwinkle, Horse-Tayl, Straw-berry leaves, Flowers of Valley
Lillies, of each half a handful; Rhapontick, two drams; Cinnamom, half an
ounce; but in the end of the Decoction add of Aromatic Wine, three pints; and
then having pressed forth the liquor, and strained it, with Sugar make a sweet
and pleasant drink. Or,

Take Quajacum Wood prepared four ounces; the Rinds of the same Wood, and
Sarsaparilla, of each two ounces; Citrine-Saunders, and Tormentil Root, Bistort
Root, Valerian Root, white Dittany Root, and Consound Root, of each half an
ounce; Common spring Water, two Gallons; mingle them, and make an Infusion
according to Art, for twenty fours hours; after this let them boil in a double
Vessel, unto the consumption of the third part; and then add, of Horsetayl,
Betony, Mousear, Cretan Dittany, Wintergreen, Wild Tansey, topps of the Bramble
bush, herb trinity, and Strawberry leaves, of each half a handful; Cinnamom
half an ounce; let them boil together, until there remain three Quarts; and in
the end of the boiling add of the best White Wine, three pints; and then making
a strong expression of the liquor, and strayning it, make thereof with honey or
sugar a sweet and pleasant drink for the Patient. But if the Wounded person
should have a fever hanging upon him you must then leave out the Wine in the
aforesaid decoction.

The following Potion likewise of the Nobles of Berine is very much commended;
by which al one (as it is commonly reported,) the most grievous wounds are
oftentimes cured; of which mention is likewise made by Guilhelm. Fabricius, in
his 4 Century, Observat. 84.

Take Wintergreen, Golden rod, Mugwort, Sanicle, Red Beets, of each as much as
you think good: the Plants are to be gathered in the Month of August, then
dried in the shade, and afterward beaten into a powder; take equal parts of
the powder and mingle them; then,

Take Of this powder one spoonful; let it boil in one measure of White Wine:
give the wounded person a draught of this blood-warm, thrice a day; and so
continue it until the consolidation of the Wound; Give the Patient (if he be
weak) two spoonfuls hereof. Aanother Potion.

Take Clary, Wintergreen, Periwinkle, Sacracennical Consound, Ladies bedstraw,
Sanicle, Speedwel, Ladies Mantle, tree Ivy, Mugwort, of each three handfuls;
Album Graecum (or if you will, white Dogs-tird) picked up in the month of March,
two ounces and half; old beer a little tart and sourish, the proportion of one
little earthen Cup; let them stand digesting for fourteen days; and afterward
let them be destilled; and reserve it for use in glasses well and close stopped:
of this you are to give three spoonfuls at a time, thrice every day.

And for this use and purpose there are likewise powders to be provided.

Pouders.
Take Nutmegs one ounce; Crabs Eyes one ounce and half; make a powder; and give
half a dram, or a dram at one time with wine or,

Take Red Corral, three drams, Margarites, Spodiums of each six drams; Crabs
eyes two ounces, Mingle and make a powder. Give unto the wounded person of this
powder one dram at time in Wine or Water.

And such like Electuaries may be provided likewise: As,

Electuaries.
Take Conserve of Red Roses, and Betony of each two ounces; Tormentil and
Consound, of each one ounce; Mace two drams; Red corral one dram; Crabs Eyes
prepared half a dram, and with the syrup of sorrel make an Electuary. or,

Take Juice of Plantane, Horstayl Sanicle, Mouseare, Speedwel, of each two
ounces; the greater Consound roots roasted under the embers and passed through a
hayr sieve one ounce; white Sugar one pound; boil them to the Consistence of an
Electuary; and in the end ad Conserve of Roses one ounce; Tormentil half an
ounce, and mingle them.

And yet nevertheless, we are not so to trust and conside in those potions, as
to neglect al other Topical Medicaments. For if we should thus do, the Wounded
person may possibly fall into some great danger and hazard; of which we have a
very remarkable history in Guilhelmus Fabricius his 4 Cent. Observe. 83.

Chap. 12. Of the Diet of Wounded persons.
The Diet of wounded persons.
And thus much may suffice to have been spoken touching the Chirurgical part,
and the Medicaments Necessary in general for the curing of Wounds. It remains
now that we speak some what of the Diet that is to be observed by wounded
persons. Let the Air be temperate, or a little inclined to Warmth; touching
which Celsus (in his fifth Book. Chapt. 26.) thus; the Place (says he) in
which the wounded person shall lie, it ought ta be somewhat warm. But a cold Air
is greatly hurtful and an enemy unto all Wounds. And although that a hot Air be
convenient enough for the wound; yet in regard that it heateth the body, moves
much the humors, and rendereth them fit and apt for motion, and so may easily
give an occasion for fluxions, which are otherwise too apt to happen in Wounds,
therefore it is not fit and allowable for wounded persons; touching which
Celsus thus, in his fifth Book, and Chapt. 26. The most opportune time (says
he) for the cure is the spring; or at least, that time that is neither
fervently b^t, neither yet over cold. For the truth is that both overmuch beat
and too much cold, they do both of them infest and offend Wounds. But now if
such an Air may not be had that is naturally such, it is to be made such by the
help of art. Let the Air be likewise pure; and that which is stinking, or any
ways impure is carefully to be avoided.

The food of the Patient.
And as for the meat and drink of the Patient, (since that from the blood both
the flesh and whatsoever else is Necessary for the agglutination of the wound
is generated) they ought to be such from which good and pure blood may be bred;
and such as may not afford the least occasion and matter for many excrements,
and dangerous Symptoms But meats of an ill Juice must heedfully be eschewed,
such as Garlic, Onyons, Swines flesh, Pease; and the Patient mist altogether
abstain from meats that are hot, sharp, tart and biting, and of an ill Juice;
and he may only feed upon those meats that yield a good Juice, and are of easy
concoction. And let the food he takes be such for the quantity thereof that it
may be concucted by Nature and such as may supply a moderate quantity of blood.
For if too great abundance of blood be generated, it supplyeth matter fit for
fluxion, inflammation, and other symptoms. And indeed his food that he takes
ought to be in such a quantity, that there may flow unto the wounded part so
much blood as was wont to flow thither while the part was sound and without any
distemper; seeing that the wounded part if it be rendered weak and infirm is
not able to concoct and assimilate so great a quantity of blood as it did
before; whereupon there will be generated either an inflammation, or great store
of excrements, and so the wound will be made over moist. Let his meats likewise
in the general be so ordered, that they may restrain the flux of humors, rather
then excite it; and they ought to be altogether such, that if there be any
thing amiss in the blood, and humors, it may rather correct then further
augment the same. And if any evil accident shall befall the Wound, all endeavor
ought to be used, that so the food may oppose and with stand the same. And yet
nevertheless it is not one and the same kind of diet that is fit and proper in
all wounds. For if the wound be in a fleshy part, and that there be no danger
of an Inflammation, then a more plentiful diet may be allowed: but if the wound
be in the Nervous parts, and that there be danger at hand of an inflammation,
then a more spare diet is to be prescribed, that so there may flow unto the
wounded part the less store of blood, and the matter of the inflammation may be
withdrawn and kept back. And indeed, by how much the danger in the wound is the
greater, by so much the more spare ought his diet to be* but so soon as the
danger of the wound is diminished, then his diet may be by degrees augmented,
so that he may feed somewhat more fully, but yet still with a due moderation. And
therefore, albeit that Hippocrates (in his B. of Affects) says, that Wounded
persons ought to be pinched and afflicted with hunger; this is not simply so to
be taken; but that we are always to heed the danger of the wound, and
especially of the inflammation conjoined therewith; and according as this
danger shall be greater or less, so the diet prescribed may be more full, or
ought to be more sparing, as we may see out of the same Hippocrates, in his
Book of Fractures, comment ^. Text. 44. and Comment. 3. Text. 12. as also out
of Galen, in his Commentary upon those Texts of Hippocrates. But yet
notwithstanding there is some consideration and respect to be had unto the Age,
time of the year, Region, Custom, and Temperature, according to that 17.
Aphorism of the first Section.

As touching the Patients drink; in our Regions Beer may fitly and conveniently
enough be drunk; His Drink.
I mean, that drink that is made either of Barley or of Wheat: and this is to be
made sometimes weaker, and sometimes stronger, according to the state and
condition of the wounded party, and the wound it self. Wine is not allowable in
those wounds that are dangerous, and where there is present, or the danger of
an Inflammation threatened and near at hand; in regard that it may (by reason
of its heat and thinness) be a vehicle or means to convey the humors unto the
part affected. And therefore Hippocrates (in his Book of Ulcers, text 1.)
writes in this manner. A small and moderate quantity of Meat, and the drinking
of water, is mostly fit and requisite in all Wounds whatsoever; but yet rather
in those that are new and fresh then in those that are old and of a long
standing; and then especially when in the wound there is present an
Inflammation, or if there shall be any feared; or when there is any danger lest
that any thing may be vitiated; or when the wounds of a joint are attempted by
an inflammation; or when there is any fear of a convulsion at hand; and lastly,
when the Belly has received a Wound. And therefore for those that have been
long accustomed to drink water, (and where there is no great plenty of beer)
either simple and pure water may be administered unto the patient; or else a
Medicate water, destilled out of the juice of Pomgranates, Coriander seed,
Citron rinds, of Barley water, or the water destilled out of the whole Citron.
When the danger of the inflammation as past, then that wine that is thin and
weak may be allowed the patient how and then. In wounds that are more grievous
and full of danger, Medicate drinks may be provided and made of vulnerary herbs.

As for what Concerns the motion and rest of the body; Motion, and rest, which
of them fittest for those that are wounded.
Rst is most convenient for wounded persons; but more especially for the
wounded part. For motion moves and scatters the humors, and rendereth them
apt to flow; and the moving of the wounded Member exciteth a pain in it: and
yet nevertheless, for the Patient to walk casily and gently (his legs being
sound, and unhurt) it will be no way amiss, but very good for him so to do:
touching which Celsus (in his fifth Book. and Chapt. 26.) thus gives us his
opinion. The best Medicament likewise (says he) is Rest and quietness: and to
More and walk (unless for those that are sound, and in health) is not so fit
and convenient: but yet nevertheless, it is least dangerous in those that are
wounded in their head, or Arms; but more unto such as are wounded in their
inferior parts. But motion or walking is then least of all convenient, when the
wound is either in the Thigh, or the Leg, or the Foot.

The Commotions likewise, and all perturbations of the mind are carefully to be
avoided; Affects of the mind how they are to be ordered
and more especially, wrath and Anger. And therefore those persons that may be
an occasion of incensing and provoking to anger the sick person, are not to be
permitted to come where he is; nor so much as any mention to be made of them in
his hearing. But the Patient ought rather to be moved and stirred up unto a
moderate and fitting mirth and cherefulness, and all possible tranquillity and
calmness of Mind. And of all other things that are prejudicial unto the Patient
at this time, the use of Venus and the company of women is the most hurtful.
Immoderate and overlong watchings are also very offensive; in regard that they
inflame, and cause a commotion in the humors. The sick persons belly must be
kept open and soluble; and if it chance at any time to be stopped and shut up, it
is then again to be opened and loosened with mild and gentle Clysters.

Chap. 13. Of keeping the flux of humors from the Wounded part.
And thus much touching the general cure of Wounds; which yet notwithstanding
is sometimes to be varyed according to the variety of the subjects, the Nature
of the wounded part, and the condition of the diseases, and the symptoms that
flow thereupon; and of this we shall now speak.

And first of all indeed, it oftentimes happens, that the body that is
wounded may not be exactly and perfectly sound; but that it may be either
Plethorical or cacochymical; so that there may be great cause to fear, lest
that either great abundance of blood or the vicious humors that have been long
treasuring up in the body may by occasion of the wound rush unto the affected
part, and there excite various evils. And therefore we are to use our utmost
endeavor to hinder and prevent the afflux of the humors unto the wounded part.
Now this flux is especially prevented, if care be taken to hinder all those
causes that may excite the said flux: and moreover al those things that may
overmuch and pr^ternaturally heat the wounded part, excise a pain therein, or
render the same soft, loose (and so consequently the more apt to receive the
flux) or overheat the humors, disperse them, and so render them the more fit
for motion, are wholly to be removed, and taken quite away And such a care and
orderly course there ought also to be taken in point of diet, that it may not
in any wise generate either too great abundance of blood, or had and corrupt
humors.

And furthermore, we are likewise to succor and help the weak and infirm part
by those things that corroborate and strengthen it; the pain (if there shall be
any) is to be mitigated; if there be present any heat, it is to be altered; and
at length the overgreat abundance of the blood is to be lessened, and the
vicious humors to be evacuated: and this may fitly be done either by
vene-section, or else by purgation.

And therefore, if blood abound in the body, Venesection, or blood letting
so that therebe cause to fear the afflux there of unto the wound; it is in
this case (unless it has already before much flown forth) very fit to open a
vein, and let forth a due quantity thereof; Touching which Celsus (in his fifth
Book, and 16. Chap.) says thus; The Physician ought to take forth some of the
blood, thereby to cause a dryness; And presently he adds; let the blood
therefore flow forth more abundantly, that so there may be the more abundant
dryness: but if it flow not forth sufficiently, let the vein be opened as much
as may be; if it be so that the patient has strength enough to bear this loss
of blood. And this is chiefly to be done in great wounds, in which there is
cause to fear an Afflux of the blood, by reason of the pain of the Wounded
part; and here in this case blood is likewise to be drawn forth, albeit that it
does not over-greatly abound in the body: whereupon Hippocrates (in his Book of
the Joints) in the bruising and wounding of a Rib, prescribes the taking forth
of blood out of the Arm; where Galen in his Comment upon the place, adds;
Although (says he) there be no extraordinary store of blood abounding in the
body, yet in those; kind of blows and bruises we must have recourse unto vene
section, and letting out a due quantity of blood. And in his second Book or the
composition of Medicaments according to the places) he commends in the first
and chiefest place) venesection, for all pains of the head proceeding from a
blow.

But now that this venesection may perform the whole work, and that it may cause
not only evacuation, but likewise revulsion; the vein is therefore to be opened
a good distance from the part affected, and on the contrary side, as else where
we have told you, touching revulsion. Now this is to be done with all speed
possibly, even the very first day of the wound and indeed before there be any
medicament administered, that so the afflux of the blood unto the wounded part
may be prevented.

As for the quantity of the blood to be let forth, it ought to be according to
the store that is in the body; and according likewise to the strength of the
Patient, and his ability to bear it. And therefore if there flowed forth much
blood before, then venesection is to be omitted. But if there flowed forth
little or no blood before, then you may now let forth a due proportion thereof;
but always according to the strength of the Patient and no otherwise: which
you may best of al know by the Age of the wounded person, the habit of his
body, the time of the year, and other Circumstances; touching which we have
already spoken in its proper place.

But now, if vicious humors abound in the body then there will be need of
purging. Purging.
For it being so that the Wound is so much the more succesfully and more
speedily cured, by how much the more sound the part is, and of a good
constitution; and that the ill constitution of the wounded part does much
hinder the cure: we are therefore by all means possible to do our endeavor,
that so the vicious humors may not flow unto the part affected.

And thereupon seeing that by occasion of the Wound it may very easily come to
pass that they may flow unto the part affected: if they be found in the body,
they are forthwith to be evacuated. And this is to be done in great wounds and
where we have cause to fear lest that by reason of pain the depraved humors
should rush unto the wounded part; as also in those wounds where there is any
kind of cutting or dilating to be used, and where any bones is to be made bare
of its flesh; and in a word, in all wounds whatsoever wherein the pain is more
vehement then ordinary. But small Wounds, and such likewise as are free from
pain may be cured even without any purging: but yet notwithstanding if the
belly be bound, it is then to be opened and loosened with a Clyster.

There are some indeed that are utterly against purgations in any wound
whatsoever, Whether those that are wounded may be purged.
as fearing lest that the humors being much stirred and disturbed by the said
purgations should flow so much the more unto the wounded part. But Hippocrates
admits of them; as we may see in his fourth Book of affections, touching
Fractures, Text 48. Comment. 3. and Galen in the fourth Book, of his Method of
curing, Chapt. 4. and 6. And indeed reason it self persuades hereunto. For if
hot, thin, and choleric humors abound in the body, they render the blood very
apt for motion; and then by means of pain and want of rest they easily become
hot and are inflamed, and so afford an occasion for a fever.

But now, albeit that all the vicious humors abounding in the body, are to be
evacuated; yet notwithstanding, (as we have said) more especially the hot,
Choleric, and wheyish humors are to be evacuated; which are more apt for
motion and flowing; and such as make much for the generating of inflammations
and Erysipelases, and such as do very easily excite fevers. Even at the very
first beginning a purgation is to be appointed, to wit, before ever there be
any afflux excited, and that any fever shall happen. But if there has already
happened any fever, purgation cannot then so conveniently and safly (but
indeed with some kind of danger) be instituted and appointed.

And therefore to purge (in Wounds) there are most fitly and safely to be
administered, Manna, Syrup of Roses Solutive, Rheubarb, the Leaves of Seen: and
of compositions, Tryphera Persica Elect. de Psyllio, Elect. of Roses of Mesues.
But we must abstain from the hottest purging medicaments; lest that there
should thereby be excited an afflux of humors, that might dispose the wounded
part unto an imflammation. But in what manner the purgation is rightly to be
ordered, we have elsewhere already shown you.

Chap. 14. Of the Wounds of the Veins and Arteries; and of the stopping the
Haemorrhage in Wounds.
AS touching the wounded parts themselves, oftentimes by reason of them there
is something that is peculiar to be done in the Curing of wounds. How and after
what manner the Cure of the wounds of private parts is to be rightly ordered,
we have already told you in those places which we shall afterward alleadg. In
the general, the wounds of the Veins, Arteries, Nerves and Nervous parts, do
require a peculiar and proper kind of Cure.

The Haemorrage in Wounds:
And First of all, indeed, the Wounds of the Veins and the greater Arteries have
this peculiar unto themselves, to wit, that there is always some notable
Haemorrhage to accompany them; which oftentimes causes Faintings and
Swoundings, and other dangerous Symptoms. But now the Blood flows either out
of the Veins, or out of the Arteries; and of these, sometimes indeed out of the
greater, and sometimes out of the lesser; and either out of one alone, or else
out of many. And although that the wound inflicted upon the Vessel be the prime
and principal Cause of the Haemorrhage; yet it happens (and that very often
also) that the blood may indeed now and then be stopped for a while, and yet it
may afterward suddenly break forth again; and this more especially chances
upon the Commotion of the mind and provocation to anger. And so likewise the
presence of the Patients Adversary, that gave him the wound, makes greatly for
the causing of a new and fresh Haemorrhage in the Wound: for which very Cause
it is sometimes found by experience, that the Blood that was before stanched and
stopped, begins again to flow forth a fresh. And I my self remember, that one
Brother having wounded another, and while the Wound was binding up the Brother
that gave the Wound coming in to visit the other, (albeit that they were now
reconciled) the Blood suddenly brake forth afresh; and this without doubt from
the secret commotion of the mind; for upon his departure, and being forbidden
to give any more visits, the Blood again stanched.

Signs Diagnostick.
But now, seeing that the Blood flows either out of the Veins, or else out of
the Arteries; that which flows forth of the Veins is more thick, more black
and dark, and less hot; and it flows forth without any great violence and
rushing, and with an equal pulse, and does far less deject the spirits, (all
things else being answerable) then that which comes forth of the Arteries. But
now that that comes out of the Arteries may rather be said to leap forth with
violence, then to flow; and in the pouring out it is more hot and fervent, more
thin, more yellow, and more frothy; and it is evermore accompanied with some
notable change and alteration in the Pulse, together with a weakness and
dejection of the Patients strength. If it be one of the greater Vessels that is
opened, then the Blood flows forth in the greater abundance, and with so much
the greater violence; but with far les, if it be one of the less Vessels that
is opened, and wounded. But now, what Vein or Artery it is that is wounded, and
whether only one or more of them be wounded, this must be known from those that
are expert in Anatomy.

Prognostics.
1. An overgreat Haemorrhage in Wounds is very dangerous: for the Blood is the
Treasure of the Life; and when the vital spirits are called forth, it causes a
weakness of the Pulse, (it being so small that it can hardly be discerned) as
also a frequency and inequality thereof, and sometimes an intermission therein,
a fainting and swounding, a Syncope, an extreme Coldness and Chilness of the
outward parts, and inordinate sweats, a Convulsion, sighings and sobbings,
Deliries, and at length death it self. And hence it is that Hippocrates (in the
5. Sect. of his Aphorism. Aphor. 3.) says, that a Convulsion or Sighing
happening upon an abundant flux of the Blood is always very evil and
dangerous. And in the 7. Sect. Aphorism. 9. that a Deliry, or a Convulsion also
happening from the abundant flowing forth of the Blood is evil and full of
danger. And indeed it is so much the more dangerous, if a Convulsion be joined
with a Deliry, and that the Deliry happen not alone without the Convulsion.

2. And this is more especially caused by the effusion of the Arterial Blood,
in regard that with it there is very much of the heat flowing in, as also the
vital Spirits that are most chiefly Necessary for the preservation of the life,
poured forth and dissipated.

3. And moreover also, for this reason the Wounds of the Arteries are more
dangerous then the Wounds of the Veins, because that they are more difficultly
Cured and Consolidated, by reason of their hardness, their perpetual motion,
and the violent rushing forth of the Arterial Blood.

4. And those Wounds of the Arteries are yet likewise far more dangerous (and
bring a long with them a greater Haemorrhage, and such as is more difficult to
Cure) that are inflicted according to the length of the Artery, or rransversly,
or obliquely, then those in which the whole Artery is cut assunder, as
experience it self testifyeth; so that indeed, (and as the Physicians are wont
to persuade) if the Haemorrhage cannot otherwise be stopped and stanched, in
regard that the whole Artery is not cut quite through, it is then wholly to be
cut assunder in a transverse manner. For if that the Artery be thus transversly
cut in twain, it will again be contracted, and its orifices will again close
and shut; and thereupon they will the more easily meet and grow together again,
and the sooner be covered and shut up by the circumjacent flesh lying round
about it; neither will the Wound so gape and stand so wide, while the Artery is
dilated. But if that the Artery be Cut long ways, or obliquely, (or if it be
wholly cut assunder any otherwise then transversly) since that it is moved with
the continual motion of the Dilatation and Contraction, by this motion, and
especially the distention, the Wound is more dilated, and in every Diastole it
gapeth; whereupon the Blood is poured, and leapeth forth with violence and
rushing.

The Cure.
As in every over great Haemorrhage, so likewise in this that proceeds from a
wound, we meet with a twofold indication; the one, that which the wounded
Vessels themselves suggest unto us, which requires a Union and Glutination.
The other that which the Haemorrhage suggesteth; which if it be excessive and
overgreat (so that it dejecteth the strength and powers of the Body) requires
that it be stanched, even before ever that the Vessels be shut up, and united.
For whereas unto the Union of the Vessels there is some space oftimes required,
(so that the Patient may in the mean while run a great hazard of his Life) the
Blood is therefore immediately to be stanched.

That the Flux of the Blood therefore may be stopped (although that the Wound of
the Vessel be not as yet grown close together) al those things are to be
performed which may hinder and inhibite the motion thereof. Now the Flux of
Blood it impeded, if with convenient Remedies, and the binding up, the orifice
of the wound be closed and shut up. In which manner if the Blood cannot be
restrained, and that it also break through the Wound closed and shut up in any
manner whatsoever, and all by reason of the impetuous violence of the Blood,
then all those things that do any ways help forward the violent motion of the
Blood are to be removed, such as are, the overgreat abundance of the Blood
stirring up and continually provoking the expulsive faculty; Anger, drinking of
Wine, hot and thin Humors (as it were) continually boiling up, and over violent
motions of the Body: as likewise of an Artery, if it be not wholly cut in
sunder, the motion thereof, the declining and downward Situation of the
member, and the like; and hitherto also may be referred the pain and heat in
the part, which attracteth the Blood; and in this case that that violently and
impetuously rusheth unto the wounded part is to be turned another way.

And first of all therefore, that the orifice of the Wound may be closed and
shut up, we ought to use the utmost of our endeavor that this may be done. Now
this is to be effected two ways; either by the Joining together of the Lips of
the wounded Vessels; or by the stopping of the orifice of the Wound. The Lips
of the Wound may be joined together, either by pressing together with the
Fingers the orifice of the Wound, so long until the Blood be clotted, so that
the thick and clotted Blood may it self obstruct and stop the orifice of the
Vessel, that so the Mouth and Lips of the Vessel may touch and close together;
or else the orifices are to be drawn close together by Swathes. But now, it is
very rare that we may keep our Finger upon the orifice of the Wound until the
Blood be clotted, so as to stop and obstruct the said orifice: neither has
this any place in the wounded Arteries, since that the Arterial blood, by
reason of its thinness and heat, and the motion of the Artery, does not easily
(if at al) Clod in the orifice of the wound. Neither also may the Veins (if
they lie deep) be easily drawn and kept close together by Swathes, neither yet
may their orifices be pressed together with the Fingers. And therefore the
safest Course is, that we do the best we can that so the orifice of the Vessel
pouring forth blood may be stopped. And this that it may be done artificially,
let the orifice of the Wound be shut up and closed with the Finger, as much as
possibly it may be done; but if it be so that the orifice it self of the Vessel
cannot be reached unto by the Fingers, then that branch of the Vein that
pours forth the Blood there in that place whereby it rendeth to the Wound, is
first of all (in the place nearest unto the Wound) to be pressed very hard
together with the finger; and the Wound to be cleansed from al humidity; and
then after this there is immediately a Medicament that will stop and stanch the
Blood to be imposed. Which that it may be rightly and duly performed, the wound
is not only to be laden and rashly oppressed (a thing wherein I have seen many
Surgeons greatly to offend) with too many astringent Medicaments; but we
ought to use the best of our endeavor, that the very orifice of the wound be
instantly (and that very close and strictly) shut up. For unless this be done,
albeit there be never so many of these kind of Medicaments imposed; yet
nevertheless if the orifice of the vessel be not close shut up, and obstructed,
the blood will by it break forth, and so make void all the labor and pains the
Surgeons have been at, and all the former provision (be it never so great)
that they have made. Now for the stopping and stanching of the blood in this
manner, there is hardly any thing to be named that will more conveniently do it
(as daily experience testifies,) then that kind of Mushrom dried (they
commonly call it, Crepitus Lupi, or Woolfs fart) that usually grows, and is
to be found up and down in Vineyards. For it being of a nature most dry, as it
will no way admit of the flowing forth of the blood (which those Medicaments do
that are naturally moist, and therefore they are but little or nothing useful
for the stanching of the blood) so it will ikewise cause that it subsist and
stick fast in the vessel. But now this is most especially useful and
beneficial, if it be first with a thread tied together, and a weight laid
thereon, or else pressed down and kept close together with a press wrung down
hard upon it. For so, when it comes afterward to be imposed upon the wound, it
again dilateth it self, and so stops up the orifice of the wound.

What Medicaments they are that stanch the Blood.
But if it be so that you are not minded to confide in this one only remedy,
then those powders that are known to be Astringent ought first to be strewed
and sprinkled upon the wound. Galen above all other Medicaments (for the
stanching of the blood) commends this that follows: and in the fifth book
of his Method, and Chapt. 4. he writes that it is absolutely the best of all
that he knew, and that he should much wonder, if it should be any ones chance
to find out a better. It is as follows;

Take Frankincense one part, Aloes one part and half, Make a powder, and of
this powder mingle a sufficient quantity with the white of an Egg, to the
consistence of honey. Make up this mixture in those soft hayrs (or flix) of a
hare; and so lay it upon the vessel, and the whole wound. And afterward in a
fit and convenient manner bind up the wound with a swath; and then at length
open and unbind it again on the third day. While this Medicament yet sticks
unto the wound, put yet another upon it; but if the former liniment begin of
its own accord to fall off; then with the singer gently pressing down the root
of the vessel (to wit) that nothing may flow forth of it, take away that with a
careful hand, and put on the other. For so long as the Medicament shall be
softened by the blood, the fluxion cannot be said to be well and sufficiently
stopped. See Galen in the place before alleged. There are nevertheless other
ponders that are likewise very useful As.

Take Bolearmenick, Dragons bl^od, Frankincense, Aloes Succotrine, of each
alike, equal parts, and make a powder.

Guilhelm. Fabricius commends this following, as having often made use of it
with very good success.

Take of the finest wheaten meal three ounces; Dragons blood and Frankincense,
of each half an ounce; Oriental Bole, and sealed earth of each two drams;
Parget six d^ams; water frogs prepared one ounce; Moss of a man's skul half an
ounce; the soft flix of the hare cut very small, one dram; the powder of the
whites of Eggs carefully dried in the Sun; the froth of the Sea dried likewise
in the Sun, a new sponge tosted and torrefyed at the fire, of each half an
ounce; Mingle them, and make a very small and fine powder. or,

Take Moss of the wild sloe tree, the root of the nettle, and of the herb
Dragon, of each half an ounce; Make a powder, and strew it upon the wound, or,

Take Vitriol powdered, as much at will suffice; put it into a little linen
cloth, and lay it upon the wound. or,

Take Aloes, Frankincense, the finest wheat flower, Spiders cobwebs,
Bolearmenick, the soft flix of a ha e, of each one dram, make a powder. Or,

Take A dead Nettle, and having beaten it into a very fine powder strew it upon
the wound.

Neither are we to desist from the use of those Medicaments, until the flesh
that is bred is so produced about the vessel, that it shut up the orifice
thereof. For unless this be done, there will yet be always great cause to fear
an haemorrhage.

Magatus his Water against the hemorrhage.
Caesar Magatus (in this first Book and 61. Chapt) writes that this water
following, (being well mingled together with the whites of Eggs thoroughly
beaten) does perform wonderful effects.

Take Juice of Plantane, of the sour unripe Grape, of Quinces, of sharp and
tart Pomgranates, vinegar made of black wine, of each one pound; the Juice that
is newly pressed forth of Asses dung one pound; the whites of thirty Eggs well
beaten together. The herb Horstail, Strawberry leaves, Mousear, Adders tongue,
the herb Trinity, winter green, the herb Perewinkle, Wild Tansey, Bears ear,
the leaves of al these new and fresh gathered, one handful; the new and fresh
Roots of the greater consound one pound; the greater Centaury half a pound;
Pomgranate Rinds and flowers, unripe Galls of the Oak, Gum Arabic, Tragacanth,
Sarcocol, White Frankincense, of each half an ounce: Roots of Tormentil,
Bistort, Bolearmenick, Sealed earth, Dragons blood, Earth of Samus, of each of
these three drams; bruise what is to be bruised, and powder those things that
are to be powdered, and so mingle them: and after a three days maceration, in a
double vessel let there be a water drawn forth according to Art. But I doubt
much whether or no this destilled water will have in it any considerable
Astringent virtue; in regard that that part of simple Medicaments in which the
astringent power does chiefly lie can hardly ascend through the Alembick.

More efficacious is that water that is destilled from Alum, after the manner
following.

Take of the best Alume as much as you please; The Alum Water.
powder it and put it into a Bulls or Ox bladder and so put it into a kettle of
hot water, that the Alume may be dissolved. Destil this water by an Alembick;
and continue the work so long, even until the feces reside in the bottom. And
these are again a new to be dssolved in the Ox bladder, until the whole
substance of the Alume shall by destillation be convertedl into water.

But if the blood shall not be stanched by these Remedies; Whether in case of an
Hemorrhage we may use Causticks.
there are some that use Causticks, that bring a crustines over the Wound, and
so by the benefit of it shut the Orifice of the vessel. But the truth is, this
way is not safe enough, but full of peril. For seeing that so much of the
Particle as is burnt into a crust, so much there falls away of the Natural
flesh from the part; when the crust falls off the orifice of the vessel is
again left naked, and bare of flesh; so that there is oftentimes a new
haemorrhage excited, and not easily stanched. Of these we may most safely make
use of such of them as being burnt retain still a caustic virtue, and being not
burnt have in them a notable astringent power, but very little of the Caustic
faculty, whereby they burn: and such a like medicament is crude vitriol; which
therefore some (crude as it is) do beat into a powder, The virtue of vitriol in
an Haemorrhage.
and so sprinkle it upon Wounds, for the stopping of the haemorrhage. But
others there are that dissolve it in water, and then they moysten linen
clothes, and lay them upon the wound. And moreover Calcanth (which some call
shoomakers black) either pulverized, or else dissolved in a convenient liquor
is of singular use in wounds, where the orifice of the vessel cannot be closed
either by compression, or by that mushrom before mentioned (which they commonly
call Crepitus Lupi) or even by burning, be there never so great need thereof.
But this Calcanth (especially if dissolved in liquor) penetrateth even through
the very vessel that is hurt. But here notwithstanding we are to beware that
the nerves (if any be near) be not hurt. And therefore into such like deep
Wounds (if there be any Nerves in the wounded part) other Medicaments that have
a power to stanch blood are rather to be cast in by clysters that have little
ears affixed to them, or some other fit and convenient instruments..

In the interim notwithstanding, it will be likewise very requisite to
administer certain general or (as they call them) universal, remedies that make
for the stopping and stanching of the blood, to wit, drawers back,
intercepters; and certain internal Medicaments that stay the blood.

Those things that draw back, are first, Venesection.
venesection, appointed in the contrary place; which may then only be put in
practice when the hemorrhage is not great, and the strength of the Patient but
little impaired. But yet nevertheless, that so the Patients strength may be the
better preserved, and the revulsion performed with the more expedition, the
blood is not at once to be evacuated, but at several times.

But if the Patients strength will not bear venesection in this case,
Cupping-glasses both dry, and scarifyed (as need shall require) are to be
applied in the remote and opposite places.

But now Intercepters are administered, Intercepters.
to the end they may drive back and incrassate the blood while it is in flowing
unto the part; and that they may make more narrow those ways and passages by
the which it flows. But now such intercepting Medicaments are to be applied
unto the vessels by which the blood tends unto the wounded part; and so above
upon the part, toward the root of the vessel; and more especially (where it
possibly may be done) in the exterior parts where only the veins lie hid under
the skin, and are not covered with much flesh: touching which Hippocrates (in
his fifth Section, Aphoris. 23) gives us this advice. We ought (says he) to
make use of some cold medicament, in those persons that have at present any
blood flowing from them, or that are likely to be troubled therewith; and this
medicament is not indeed to be applied unto the same place, but unto those
places from whence it fl^weth. and if there be any inflammations or burnings of
the parts that tend unto a red or bloody color (by reason of the fresh and
flourishing blood that now appears therein) unto these very parts let it be
administered. Now these intercepters are made of Medicaments that are cold and
Astringent, as Posca (a compound of vinegar and water) harsh wine, the water of
Roses of Plantane, of the Oak, and of night shade; Barley meal, the powder of
Myrtles, B^learmenick, Dragons blood, Mastick; the flowers of red Roses,
Pomgranate flowers, and the whites of Eggs, of which there are diverse
Medicaments to be made: the forms whereof are above propounded and set down (in
the first part, Chap. 5.) among the defensives, in an inflammation. The
Medicament being laid on, the part is to be bound up with a swath, that may
bind close the vein toward the root thereof; and the ligature is not to be
loosned before the third or fourth day; or indeed, it is not to be untyed until
the blood be thoroughly stanched. Avicen (in his Quart. Quarti, tr. 2. Chapt.
18.) tells us of this following medicament, that has in it not only a power of
burning, but likewise an astringent faculty; and a virtue also to generate and
breed flesh: As,

Take Chalcanthum, Parget made into a very fine powder, and sifted through a
hayr steve, of each twenty drams; Frankincense powdered six drams; Aloes, dry
Glue, of each eight drams; Arsenick four drams; (I had rather here take M^rcury
sublimate, in regard that many who are ignorant of things Chemical and
Metallic, of ten times when sublimate in general is mentioned, (and Mercury
sublimate is evermore to be understood) there instead thereof these do
substitute and appoint Arsenick:) let them be al beaten into a very fine and
small powder, made up in a liniment, and imposed upon the orifice of the vessel.
Some there are that unto this Medicament do add Dragons blood, and the
excrescence Hypocistis.

But those internal medicaments that stanch blood, are either such as cool and
thicken the blood, or else they are those we call Narcoticks. The coolers and
thickners are prepared of Myrtle, Roses, Purslane, Lettice. Berberries, Ribes,
Succory, Quinces, Pomgranates, Tormentil, Corals, Bolearmenick, Sealed Earth.
Out of which may be made Powders, Waters, Syrups, (and from these potions) and
Electuaries.

There are likewise some certain things that are said to stay the blood by an
occult and secret property: and thus Strawberry Water is much Commended in all
haemorrhages. And the Root of Corn-rose (or Cockle) held under the tongue
stops the hemorrhage. And some there be that for this purpose commend unto
us the roots of that Cichory that has a white flower. And some there are that
order the Patient to hold in his hand the Jasper Stone, or the Blood Stone.

Stupefactives are not over commonly to be administered; neither indeed at all,
unless the strength remain firm and entire; for fear lest that the powers being
already much weakened, and failing by reason of the over great loss of blood,
should by these stupefactives be farther dejected: but if the Patients strength
will admit of it, then we may administer one grain (or two at the most) of Opiat
Laudanum. But now that the blood when it is stanched may so remain, for this
the situation of the wounded part makes very much; which ought to be such,
that the Member may look upward, and be free from all pain. For pain does very
easily attract the blood, and cause it to break forth again; and the blood does
more easily flow unto a declining and downward place.

If yet the blood by this means be not stanched; they tell us that we are then
to cast upon the vessel pouring forth the blood something to tie it withal; and
especially toward the root thereof, by which the branch looks toward the Liver,
or the Heart; and that the veins or Arteryes are to be made naked and bare, to
be laid hold on with a hook, and then presently with a thread (of silk
especially) to be tied, and the thread to be drawn very hard and close upon
them; and then they appoint that the wound be filled up with flesh, before the
bond be quite taken off. For if the flesh shall not first of al have filled up
the place that is about the vessel, and have shut the very orifice of the
vessel it self, the bond falling off, the haemorrhage will again easily follow.
But the truth is that these things are more easily required and commanded, then
they are put in practice and performed. If a vein or an Artery wounded and
pouring forth blood be wholly cut assunder, the blood is then the more easily
stanched: for the vessel is drawn back, and on both sides contracted within it
self; and so its orifice is covered and shut up by the bodies that lie round
about it.

But the best, safest, and most easy way (if it be rightly ordered) of
stanching the blood, is that which is wrought by Medicaments that stop and stay
the Blood, and shut up the orifice thereof; as they were before propounded by
us.

When the Blood shall be stopped, the Wound is scarcely to be opened before the
third day. And if the Wound be unbound, yet notwithstanding if there be yet any
further fear of the Bloods breaking forth again, the Medicament is not wholly
to be taken away; if it be not as yet moystened and vitiated by the purulent
and sanious matter. But if by these it be made so moist, that it is ready of it
self to drop off, another is in this case to be laid on, if there be yet any
further flux of blood feared. And yet notwithstanding we are herein to deal
very Cautiously, and with all manner of Circumspection; and with the one hand
that part of the Vessel toward the Root thereof is to be pressed down close
together, that so the flux of blood may be restrained; and with the other hand
the Medicament is to betaken off, the moist Wound to be clean and dried, and a
new Medicament laid on.

But now if the internal Vessels shall be so wounded that they can neither be
tied together by any ligature; neither yet obstru^^ed and shut up by any
Medicaments laid thereon; then Medicaments out of those things that have in
them a virtue to cool and thicken the Blood (and which were but even now
mentioned by us) are to be provided; and a Diet that is like and answerable
thereunto (as we have said) is to be prescribed.

Now when the blood shall be fully stanched, and shall become clotted, then we
must use the best of our endeavor to prevent the putrefying of it; but that it
be rather dissolved: which in what manner it is to be performed, we have
declared before, (in the 2. Book, Part 2. Chap. 6. and above in the first Part,
and 16. Chap.) where what we have written may be seen at large: for in this,
Chapter it is our purpose only to treat of the stanching of the Haemorrhages of
Wounds.

The Diet.
The Diet is likewise so to be ordained, that it may stop and stanch the Blood;
and to this end, Meats are to be provided, of Rice, of Amylum or the fine flour
of Wheat, Barley, Pears, Ribes, Quinces, Services, Medlars, Lettice, Endive.
The Patient ought to abstain from Wine. He must likewise keep himself from Rage
and Anger, all Commotion of the Mind, and over vehement motion and Exercise of
the Body; and therefore his Adversary that gave him the Wound is not to be
admitted into the Room where the Patient is.

Chap. 15. Of the Wounds of the Nerves, and Tendons, in general, and of the
pricking of the Nerves.
ANd moreover, the Wounds likewise of the Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments, are
for the most part of such a Nature that something in the Curing of them may fall
out that is peculiar and proper to them alone. And first of all, as for what
concerns the Nerves, as also the Tendons, (for what we shall speak touching the
Nerves may likewise be applied unto the Tendons) they are of another Nature
then the flesh; and therefore also (as we shall afterward show you) they
require other Medicaments then the wounded flesh does; and furthermore they
have a very quick and exquisite sense, as the Tendons likewise have; and
thereupon if they be hurt they bring great Pains and Convulsions. Now the
Wounds of the Nerves are twofold; to wit, Pricking and Incision; according as
the wounding Instrument inflicteth the Wound, either by a Prick, or a downright
Cut.

Signs Diagnostick.
Now the Wound of the Nerve is known first of all, from the Consideration of
the wounded place; and from Anatomy, which acquaints us with the Nerves that
are in every Member, and how they enter and are Situate in them. For which
cause, it is likewise to be considered, whether the wound be in the Heads of
the Muscles, or in the ends of them: and whether the wound be above upon the
Joints, or else in the very Joints themselves: for if it be in the Heads of the
Muscles, it betokens that a Nerve is wounded; but if it be in the ends, and
near the Joints, it is a sign then that a Tendon is wounded. And moreover, from
the vehement pain that immediately after the receiving of the wound infesteth
the wounded person, unless the whole Nerve be cut assunder transverswise or
over thwart. For the Nerves have a very quick and exquisite sense; and
therefore, when these are pricked, there instantly arises in the wounded part a
vehement pain, and upon this an inflammation; and so the Brain being drawn into
a Consent, oftentimes Convulsions and Deliries are excited. But now the
Tendons, although they are not endued with a sense altogether so quick and
exquisite; yet nevertheless, even these (they being not wholly void of sense
and feeling) when they are pricked, there are also pains, and from thence
Convulsions excited.

Prognostics.
1. All Wounds in the Nerves are dangerous, by reason of that exquisite sense
they have, and their Consent with the Brain. And yet notwithstanding, a Wound
by pricking is more dangerous then that that is made by cutting, as afterward
we shall show you.

2. The Wounds of the Tendons are less dangerous then those of the Nerves.

3. That Convulsion that happens upon a Wound is Mortal, as we find it, in
the 5. Sect. Aphor. 2. Which is to be understood of the Wounds of the Nervous
parts. And yet notwithstanding, the Greek word Thanasimon, and the Latin,
Lethale, (as Galen explaineth it in his Comment) do not here signify that
which of necessity and evermore brings Death, but only that which is very
dangerous and oftentimes causes death.

4. Those that with their Wounds (as suppose, those of the Nerves) have
conspicuous Tumors, those are not greatly t^oubled with Convulsions, neither
with madness; but those in whom the said Tumors suddenly vanish (if this be
done in the hinder part) unto such Convulsions and the Tetanus do usually
happen: but if it be on the forepart that these Tumors vanish, then there will
befall them madness; a sharp pain in the side, an Empyema and Dysentery, if the
Tumors be of a Reddish co^our. Sect. 5. Aph. 65.

5. Yea, what we find in the 5. Sect. Aphor. 66. (and Which we have above
alleged touching wounds in general) has place here more especially, to wit,
if the Wounds being great and dangerous there shall no Tumor be seen to appear,
it is then a very ill sign. For in no kind of wounds are Inflammations more
easily excited, then in the wounds of the Nerves. And therefore, if there be
present any Cause and occasion of a fluxion; and yet nevertheless a Tumor shall
not happen thereupon; it is then a sign that either the matter is driven to
some other place, by repelling Medicaments, and so detained in the more inward
and deep places and parts of the Body, or else that they are by Nature her self
thrust unto some other place.

6. And yet notwithstanding there oftentimes appear no Tumors at all in such
kind of Wounds; to wit, if the Physician take away all the Causes of fluxion,
or if that Nature her self shall allay and assuage the violence of the Humor.
And there is always ground of good Hopes, if even unto the seventh day there
shall follow no evil thereupon: for it is a sign, that Nature has appeased the
motion, and the impetuous violence of the Humors: touching which, Galen (in his
third B. of the Composit. of Medicam. according to their several kinds, and 2.
Chap.) thus writes: If unto the fifth, or even unto the seventh day of the
Disease, there be neither Phlegmone so much as appearing, and that there be
altogether a freedom from pain, and that the sick person feel no extension and
stretching in the part affected, he shall after this time be safe and secure.

7. The wounded Nerves do very easily likewise conceive a putridness; since
that they have in them but a weak heat, and are of a very dry Nature, and so
may be easily hurt by those things that are moist; whereupon it is that Water
and Oil are enemies unto the Nerves. Neither is that putridness and Corruption
contained in the wounded part alone, but it is likewise communicated unto the
near neighboring parts, yea and oftentimes also unto those parts that are more
remote. Whereupon it is, that the hand being wounded, or but the Finger only,
the pains are wont to appear in the Arm and Shoulder; and that the Leg being
hurt, there are wont to be in the Thigh not only pains, but also
Impostumations; and that the Malady is imparted not unto one of the sides
alone, but even unto that also that is opposite. Yea and in the whole Body
likewise the Humors are corrupted; whereupon fevers, pains in the sides, and
Dysenteries are wont to be excited. And (that which we are here to give you
notice of, and not to pass it over in silence) there are not evermore present
signs that betoken an Inflammation or putridness; yea and oftentimes there are
likewise present no vehement pains; but that very often secretly and suddenly
the Convulsion invadeth the wounded persons. For the vicious matter being thin
and depraved is hiddenly carried by the Nerves unto the Brain, (as we see that
this is done in the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness) a poisonous Air ascending
unto the brain from the extreme parts, without any notable pain in those parts
by and through which it passes. Of which thing we meet with many examples, and
how that the wounded persons, without any pain and Inflammation, have been
suddenly surprised with a Convulsion, and have instantly died thereupon. And
therefore in the Wounds of the Nerves, although that there shall be no pain
felt, neither any Inflammation appearing; yet notwithstanding, we are not to
trust to this; but for all this the Cure is carefully to be heeded and attended.

The Cure.
Touching the Curing of the Wounded Nerves, Galen (in his sixth Book of his
Method of healing, Chap. 2.) takes a great deal of pains in treating thereof.
But seeing that in all Wounds of the Nerves pains and inflammations easily make
their approach, and threaten the patient, we must endeavor that the pain may be
mitigated, and the inflammation prevented. And therefore if need require, both
by letting forth of the blood, as also by a purging out of the sharp and thin
humors, their afflux unto the affected part is to be restrained and prevented:
but the wound it self is to be kept open, that so the excrements may the more
freely flow forth. For the Chiefest cause of pain in Wounds of the nerves is
the excrementitious matter shut up; which being over long detayned gets to
it self a depraved quality, pulls and twingeth the Nerves, and at length
putrifieth. And therefore those Medicaments that are called Enemata (although
they may be very fit and proper in bloody Wounds, and those of the fleshy
parts, in regard that they speedily close and shut up the wound, yet) here in
this case are no ways convenient. Neither is water fit and proper nor yet any
thing that is cold; since that (as Hippocrates writes in his fifth section,
Aphoris. 18.) every thing that is cold is an enemy to the bones, teeth, Nerves,
Brain, spinal marrow; but that which is warm, a friend unto them. Yea neither
ought other Medicaments that are actually cold to be administered unto the
wounded parts. For seeing that the Nerves are parts void of blood, and having
in them but very little natural and inhate heat, and endued with a most:
exquisite sense, they are soon and easily offended by any thing that is cold,
(it being biting and causing pain) as Hippocrates writes in the 20. Aphor. of
his fifth Section, and as Galen likewise teaches thus, in the sixth Book of
his Method of Curing, Chapt. 3. But yet things that are blood-warm are not
sufficiently commodious; touching which Galen (in his sixth Book of the
Composit: of Medicaments according to the kind, Chapt. 2. thus writes Let the
oil (says he) with which we cherish the wound be sufficiently hot, lest that
otherwise it offend such a wounded part. For like as that which is cold is most
of all contrary unto these kind of Affects; so likewise that that is but blood
warm is not very much a friend unto them. And a little after: and for this
Reason (says be) I my self choose rather to make use of a fomentation of oil
that is sufficiently hot, always shunning that which is but lukewarm, but
most of al refusing that which is quite cold. And yet Nevertheless, if there be
a nerve discovered and made bare, Galen then administreth rather such things as
are but tepid or Lukewarm, then those things that are very hot; as we may find
in the sixth Book of his Method of Curing, and Chapt. 3.

But although that for the asswaging of the pain, that which is hot and withal
moist is most useful and convenient: yet nevertheless, in regard that under
those things that humectate and moysten the Nerves do easily putrefy, therefore
for all Wounds of the Nerves those Medicaments are most accomodate and proper
that in their activity are temperate, (or somewhat tending unto heat) but that
in passives do dry; and that are of thin parts, that may corroborate the weak
heat of the Nerves, by consuming and drying up the excrements: touching which
Galen (in his sixth Book of the Method of Curing, and 2 Chapt.) writes in this
manner: The faculty of the Medicaments of the wounded Nerves ought to be both
thin, and also moderatly heating, and such as may dry without any pain; in
regard that this alone can draw the Sanier (or thin excrements) from the bottom
of the Wound, without either contracting, or biting of the particle. And then a
little after, the Wounded Nerves (says he) require such Medicaments that may
excite a tepid or lukewarm heat, and may strongly dry; and which from the
Nature of their own substance have both a power of drawing, and are of thin
parts. And the same he teaches us in his third Book of the Composition of
Medicaments according to the kinds, Chapt. 2. And such like Medicaments have in
them this benefit likewise, that although they are endued with a faculty of
drying, yet notwithstanding they do not conglutinate the orifice of the Wound
seeing that they have both an attractive power, and yet nevertheless are free
from and void of an Astringent faculty. And yet notwithstanding regard ought to
be had unto the nature of the Wounded person; and unto the softer and more
tender bodies the weaker Medicaments are to be administered; but unto hard and
strong bodies those medicaments that we administer may be the stronger. And
there is also regard to be had unto the matter that is to be dried up; and
according to the store of the humidity we are to make choice of Medicaments
that are conveniently drying For as Galen (in the place last allege, to wit,
the third Book of the Composition of Medicam. according to the places, and
Chapt. 2.) says that in a very copious humidity the increase thereof requires
to be dried up by a Medicament that is more then ordinary drying; if it be buy
little, then by a medicament that does this moderately; and if it be much, hen
by a Medicament that dries much; and yet nevertheless, not extremly, neither
in the highest degree. For there ought to be a proportion answerable between
the quantity of the humidity and the drying of the Medicament. And if there be
also any of those drying Medicaments, and of thin parts, (which are of fit use
in all Wounds of the Nerves) that have adjoined with them a Notable heat, and a
biting Acrimony, and thereupon may easily excite both pain and fluxions, (such
as are destilled Balsams, spirits, and oils) their heat and acrimony (unless of
its own accord it soon vanishes, as it commonly happens in the spirit of
Wine) is to be tempred and Mitigated by the mingling together of other things
with them.

Such like Medicaments as these, that are useful in all Wounds of the Nerves,
are propounded by Galen in his sixth Book of the Method of Curing, Chapt. 2.
and in his third Book of the Composite of Medicam. according to the kinds,
Chapt. 3. 4. and 7. and they shall be likewise declared by us anon, when we come
to speak of the pricking of the Nerves.

But now that the pain may be assuaged, the temperament of the part preserved,
and the Afflux of humors, and the inflammation may be prevented, there are not
only convenient Medicaments to be imposed upon the part affected, (of which we
shall speak by and by) but even all the parts also that lie in the midst from the
wound to the beginning of the Nerves are to be anointed and cherished with hot
oils, to wit, the Oil of Earth worms of White Lilyes, the Oil of a Fox, the Oil
of Costus, the Oil of Castor, and the like. And Galen commands us thus to do,
in the sixth Book of his Method, and 3 Chapt. And therefore, if the Nerve be of
those that appear in the Neck, then the Arm from the Wound even unto the
Armpits and the Neck, is to be anointed. But if the nerve be of those that are
found in the Leg, then the Groyns are to be anointed; and we must ascend in
anointing from the Groyns (by the Backbones) even unto the head and Neck.

But since that the Prognostics, as also the use of those Medicaments does
somewhat vary (according as the Nerve is wounded either by pricking, or by a
downright cut) we shall therefore speak of the Pricking and incision of the
Nerves in special; out of which those things that in the general seem necessary
to be spoken of touching the cure of the wounds of the Nerves, will the more
clearly appear.

Of the Pricking of the Nerves.
Signs Diagnostick.
Now it may be known whether the Nerves be wounded (yea or no) by pricking,
from the kind of the weapon it self, and the condition of the Wound; to wit, if
it be narrow, and yet notwithstanding a great and grievous pain follows; and
upon this a beating, an imflammation, a Fever, and a Convulsion: which
symptoms do never happen, where the Nerve is wholly cut assunder. For when the
Nerve is wholly and transversly cut in two, it no longer continues its
commerce with the Brain; Neither can it draw the same into a Consent with it;
and so there can be no pain, neither convulsion excited.

Prognostics.
1. The Pricking of the Nerves is the most dangerous among all the wounds of the
nerves: for as Galen writes (Art. Med. and Chapt. 92.) the Pricking of a Nerve
and a Tendon, by reason of the vehemence of the sense, and because that this
part is continued with the principal part the head, it is thereupon very apt
and ready to excite a Convulsion of the Nerves, and then more especially when
nothing at al breaks forth, the wound in the skin being closed and shup up.
And in his sixth Book of the Method of Curing, Chapt. 2. he says thus; Where a
Nerve is pricked, there of Necessity a pain must invade the person greater then
the pain that is in any other of the parts; and then of necessity a Phlegmone
must soon follow thereupon.

2. And yet nevertheless the pricking of the Nerve is so much the more
dangerous, by how much the body that it lights upon is impure, and ill
disposed: touching which Galen (in his sixth Book of the places affected,
Chapt. 2.) thus writes; If any one whose Wounds do easily heal be pricked with
a Needle, this man although without any Medicament, and the member altogether
bare and naked, may betake himself unto his accustomed labors and business and
yet find nor feel no hurt at al; but if any one whose Wounds are hard to cure,
shall so do, (especially if he be either Plethorical, or else oppressed and full
of bad humors that is to say, Cacochymical) this party will indeed at the first
feel much pain; and afterward likewise the part affected will be infested, not
only with a Pulse and beating, but also with a Phlegmone.

3. If in the prickings of the Nerves there appears a Tumor, and that it
afterward suddenly disappear and vanish, then a Convulsion and a Deliry arise,
as before (out of the 5. Sect. and 65. Aphorism,) we acquainted you.

The Cure.
That Indication that is common in all the wounds of the other parts (to wit,
that what is dissolved must be again united) this has likewise its place in
the prickings of the Nerves. And yet notwithstanding, in regard that when a
Nerve is pricked, (by reason of the Acrimony of the sense which it has) there
follows a greater pain then in the other parts; and upon this an
Inflammation: in the pricking of the Nerves therefore this ought to be the main
care and endeavor of the Physician, that the said pain may (if possibly) be
prevented or at least mitigated and moderated, and however that the
Inflammation be by all means prevented. Now this is prevented, if there be not
heaped up in the wound those excrements that may bring pain Now these may be
kept from heaping up, if from all parts of the Body the vicious Humors be not
permitted to flow unto the part affected, to wit, the wounded place; and if
that those which are gotten together in the wound be not suffered thereto
continue, but be forthwith evacuated: Which may be performed if the Skin, as
likewise the wound of the flesh that lies upon the Nerve, be kept open; or if
the wound shall not be open enough, that it be made yet wider, and the Skin cut
wider by two incisions made at the right Angles, that so by it there may be
opened a more free passage forth for those Excrements that are heaped up in the
Wound.

And therefore in the pricking of the Nerves there are three things principally
to be done; first the Body is to be purged from vicious Humors, the pain to be
mitigated, and a passage made for the Excrements, that so they may be emptied
forth and taken away.

But now after what manner the whole body is to be purged, we have often told
you before. But upon the wounded part there are Medicaments to be imposed,
which both mitigate the pain, and open a passage forth for the Sanies or thin
Excrements, and that draw forth the Excrements that lie hid very deep, even at
the bottom of the Wound. And if the wound be over narrow, it is then to be made
wider either by a Section made across (in the form of the Letter X) so that the
prick be the Center of the Sections, or else by Tents that may dilate the Skin,
but yet not touch the Nerve.

And yet nevertheless, for the moderating of the pain, neither is warm water,
or that that is hot and moist, thought to be convenient; (since that Water and
all cold things are enemies unto the Nerves; and those things that are hot and
moist may easily excite a putridness in the Nerves:) but we ought rather to use
Oil of a thin substance, as that of Earthworms, or such like. And it will be
likewise to very good purpose, to anoint the part about the wound with Oil
somewhat warm, of most thin parts, and not astringent. Or, if you cannot get
enough of such an Oil, then use the Oil of white Lillies, of Earthworms, or
Camomile, of Dil, or of Melilote. But if the pain shall not yet cease, and that
an Inflammation be nigh at hand, it will then be very requisite to impose some
Cataplasm to qualify and mitigate the pain; and this may be made of B^rley
Meal, Bean Meal, the Meal of the Vetch Ervum, and that of Lupines, Betony,
Camomile flowers, and Oil fully ripe. For such like Cataplasms do assuage pain,
thoroughly dry, and discuss, resist putridness, Cherish and strengthen the
Native heat; and therefore in the wounds of the Nerves and Tendons they are
very fitly administered: and especially, such are then to be made use of, when
the Nerves begin to be enflamed, and to putrify; and then those Cataplasms are
to be made with Oxymel or else with a Ley; and the same Cure (almost) is to be
instituted, and in the same manner to be ordered, as it is wont to be in a
Gangrene but now beginning.

And therefore in this all Authors agree, and Practice it self and experience
teach us this, that in all prickings of the Nerves we ought to abstain from all
things cold, Astringent, and moist; and that we are to use those things that
are hot, dry, and having a thin substance: or (as Galen says) all our Care and
Counsel must be directed and tend unto this, that the faculty of the
Medicaments be both thin, as also meanly and indifferently heating, and such as
may dry without any pain. For these alone can draw from the bottom of the wound
the Sanies or thin Excrement, without either contracting or biting any the
least part thereof.

But although that this indeed be out of doubt, that the Medicaments that are
administered unto the prickings of the Nerves have such a like faculty (as ere
while we told you of) to wit, to dry up and discuss the thin Excrements, and to
draw from the bottom of the wounds; but then whether they yet do nothing else
but this, and whether their being administered be to no other end, of this I
much doubt. And that which causes me so to doubt, is that which has been
spoken above in the eight Chapter, touching Sarcoticks. For whereas in that
place I have shown, that it is not at all absurd to determine that the chief
and principal end of all Sarcotick Medicaments is this, that they may
Corroborate the heat of any part whatsoever, that so Nature in the generating
of flesh may so much the more rightly discharge its office; this is especially
requisite in the wounded Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments. For since their heat
is far more weak then that of the fleshy parts, this heat is yet further
debilitated in those that are wounded; and therefore they are not able rightly
to Concoct and Assimilate the Aliment that flows unto them; and from hence it
is, that this Aliment is converted into Sanies; and by how much the greater the
weakness is, by so much the greater is the store of such Sanies that flows
out. And moreover in regard that the Nervous parts are endued with a most
exquisite sense, they are easily affected with a pain likewise; upon occasion
of which the vicious Humors flow unto them from al other parts of the Body. And
from hence it very often happens, that from the wounded Joints, (and
especially in the Arm, or Knee; and yet more especially, if there be present an
Inflammation) there is never any laudable Pus generated, but there flows
forth great store of this Sanies, which our Surgeons call das Glied VVassel,
or the Joint Water; and some of the more ignorant of these Surgeons think it
to be the genuine Humor of the Joint it self; and thereupon they endeavor to
obstruct and stop the afflux thereof, by I know not what kind of Medicaments;
when as notwithstanding there cannot be contained so much Humor in all the
Joints of the whole Body, as we shall sometimes have flowing forth of such a
wound in ^^e day: and the said Flux can no way be stanched, unless unto the
wounded part there be restored its own Natural Temper: of which likewise
Johannes Langius gives us notice, in his Preface to his Medicinal Epistles; and
in his first B. and third Epistle.

But now for those Medicaments which experience has taught us to be very
useful in all wounds of the Nerves and Tendons, and more especially in the
Wounds that are caused by prickings, they are, Oil fully ripe, such as is two
years old, rather then new; the Oil of Earthworms, of Rue, of white Lillies. of
Costus, of Castor, of Turpentine, (this last may be used alone of it self in
Children, Women, and such as are of a more moist and soft Constitution of Body;
but in such as have drier Bodies, there may be some Euphorbium mingled
therewith) Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Root of round Aristolochy, Dittany; and
generally all Roots that are bitter without Astriction; Propolis of Beehives,
in the same manner, either alone, or else with Euphorbium; instead of
Euphorbium S^gapenuin may likewise be therewith mingled; the destilled Oil of
Turpentine, the Sweat or Tear of the Fir Tree, and other Artificial Balsams.
Galen likewise commends an Emplaster that is made of Wax one part; Turpentine
and Pitch, of each half parts; Euphorbium, the twelfth part: touching which see
further in Galen his sixth B. of the Meth. of Curing, Chap. 2. where he takes
great pains, and is very Exact and Large in treating of the use of Euphorbium
in the wounds of the Nerves; the Sum and substance of al which is this. Whereas
no one can possibly comprehend the use of Euphorbium by measure, both by reason
of the different age of the Euphorbium, as also by reason of the Vari^us
Natures of Bodies; we ought therefore to heed what this Euphorbium is, to wit,
whether new or old, and in what proportion it is to be mingled. For the old
(which is more yellow and more Pale then the New, but more hard and dry of
Consistence) is less efficacious; and although that it keep some of its virtue
unto the third year, yet in the fourth, fifth, or sixth year, it is then so
decayed, that in the process of time it is altogether useless and good for
nothing. And therefore the new is to be mingled with a triple quantity of Wax.
As,

Take Euphorbium, one ounce; Wax, three ounces; Oil, ten or twelve ounces.

But when it is become a little old, it ought then to be mingled in somewhat a
greater proportion; and there must be added thereto one part and half (or two
parts if it be three or four years old) more then formerly when it was new:
that is to say, a double weight unto the former; or if you please it may in
weight be equal unto the Wax, in which thing notwithstanding use is much to be
heeded and attended. For if the wounded person shall complain of any biting
that he feels from the said Medicament; and the parts lying about the Puncture
shall appear to be hot, then the Puncture or Pricking it self is somewhat more
swelling then is fit, and the Lips of the wound will be some thing affected with
an Inflammation; and we may conclude that the Medicament is stronger then it
ought to be: and therefore either the strength of it is to be abated and
qualified by the admixture of the greater store of Oil, or else the older
Euphorbium is to be taken. But if the Contrary shall happen, then the strength
of the Medicament is to be augmented, either by mingling a greater quantity of
the old, or else by the admixture of the newer Euphorbium: for that mixture
that has in it a triple proportion of Wax, is the strongest; that which has a
five-fold quantity of the said Wax, the weakest; and the mixture having but a
quadruple proportion of the Wax, is in a mean betwixt both.

Galen (as we may see in his third B. of the Composit^ of Medicaments according
to their kinds, and 2. Chap.) mentions likewise other things that are to be
made use of, as live Sulphur, unslaked Lime washed; Arsenick, Sandarach,
Pompholyx, the scourings of Brass, Chalcitis (or red Vitriol) burnt. But in all
these he had only a regard unto their drying faculty; and he would only have
the Medicaments to be so made and Compounded, that they might be able to call
forth and consume the Excrements out of the Wounds of the Nerves. But unto me
(as I told you before) it seems far more probable, that such Medicaments are
to be made choice of, that may withal Corroborate and Augment the Native heat
of the Nerves, which of it self (and especially in the wounded Nerves) is very
weak.

And therefore this latter Age has found out Medicaments that are far more
safe; both such as are prepared by the Chemical Art, as also such as are
brought unto us out of other Countries; yea and such as are very ordinary at
home among our selves; and such as do their office without causing any pain
(that is easily brought upon the Patient by the use of those stronger
Medicaments that the Ancients made use of) and which may be safely applied,
whether the Nerve be naked and bare, or whether it be covered (whereas in the
Nerve that is bare all those Medicaments of the Ancients cannot be made use of
with any safety) such as are these; Balsam of Peru, the distilled Oil of Rosin
Turpentine, and the Rosin of the Fir Tree, Wax, Oil or Balsam of St. John's
wort, the spirit of Wine, Gum Elemi, Gum Tacamahaca, and Gum Caranna. All which
obtain that faculty which by Galen and the Ancients is propounded, and have in
them no Corroding quality at all; and withal obtain a Balsamic virtue (as
those of our times term it) which those other of the Ancients are void of; and
they do not only consume the Excrements, but they likewise greatly strengthen
the Native heat of the wounded part, and are all of them very agreeable and
suitable unto the Nerves. Caesar Magatus, in his second B. of Wounds, 5.
Chapter, mentions these several forms following.

Take Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, dissolved in hot water; Propolis, and
Turpentine, of each half an ounce; Oil of thin parts, two or three years old,
in which Earthworms have been boiled, one ounce and half; Mingle them, and
make an Unguent. Or,

Take Clear Turpentine, the exsudation or tear of the fir tree, of each one
ounce; Tacamahaca, half an ounce; Caranna two drams, Balsam of Peru, three
drams; Propolis six drams; our oil of St. John's wort, one ounce; Mingle them,
and make an Unguent; Or,

Take Sagapenum, Opopanax, Propolis, of each half an ounce; Tacamahaca three
drams; the destilled oil of Turpentine, or the sweat of the fir tree, one
ounce; Sulphur that has not come near the fire, one dram and ha^f; Mingle
them, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Tacamahaca, Opopanax, Propolis, the sweat of the Firtree, of each two
drams; Artificial Balsam, six drams; Mingle them, and make an Unguent. Or,

Take Artificial Balsam, our oil of St. John's Wort, of each half an ounce;
Burning water (which the Latins call Aqu^ ardens) or the water of Balsam,
three drams, and mingle them. Or,

Take Diachylon with Gums, one ounce; Tacamahaca, Caranna, Sagapenum, Propolis,
Rosin of the Pine, Ship-pitch, of each three drams; Artificial Balsam, half an
ounce; Euphorbium two scruples; Mingle them and make a cerot. Or,

Take The oldest Leaven one ounce and half, Doves dung, or Brimstone, one dram;
Aqua Ardens, or Water of Balsam, as much as will suffice; that the Medicament
may have the consistence of Honey; and so mingle them. Or,

Take Oil of Turpentine, or the sweat of the Fir tree, one ounce; Sagapenum,
Propolis, of each half an ounce; Euphorbium one dram; mingle them.

And if the Medicament that is laid on be of a thin substance, or (as the
Chemists speak) volatile, which may easily be dissipated; then we are to mingle
therewith all Turpentine and Gum Elemi; or else we must impose an Emplaster of
Gum Caranna, Tacamahaca, dissolved in the compound Oil St. John's wort.

The Diet.
There is likewise regard to be had unto the diet. The Air in which the Patient
is most conversant ought to be somewhat more warm then ordinary, since that the
Cold is an Enemy unto the Nerves; as in the fifth Sect. Aphoris. 18. And
therefore likewise the Wounds of the Nerves are not over often and without very
great cause to be uncovered; and when they are uncovered, a Candle nmst be
lighted, and a pan full of hot coals must be in a readiness; and this new
binding up must be hastened, and performed with all possible speed. Let the
sick person abstain from wine. The affected part is softly and gently to be
placed, and kept in quietness. For (as Celsus says, in his fifth Book, and
Chapt. 26.) the best of all Medicaments is Rest and quietness: and to move and
walk (unless for such as are sound) is altogether unfit and improper. Yea
moreover, we have two histories that tells us, that Laughter may bring very
much danger and damage in the wounds of the Nervous parts. These Histories we
find taken notice of by Guilhelm. Fabricius, in his first Century, Observat.
23. Let Anger likewise, and the passions of the mind be avoided. And let the
patient at this time abstain from Venery that which is of all other things most
hurtful unto him; as we are sufficiently taught by the history of that young
man in Guilhelm. Fabricius his first Cent. Observat. 22. who being now almost
perfectly well, and recovered, dyed upon this very cause and no other.

Chap. 16. Of the downright Wounds of the Nerves, as also of the Ligaments, by
Cutting.
But now if the Nerve or Tendon be wounded not by pricking, but by a downright
cut, we are then to look whether the wound be long ways, or whether it be
transverse, and overthwart: and then whether the Nerve be wholly cut assunder,
or else be but only in part Wounded; and how much of the skin lying over it is
divided.

Signs Diagnostick.
The pain, if the Nerve be Wounded by a Cut, but not wholly divided and cut
assunder, is not so great as if it be Wounded by a prick: and yet nevertheless
for the most part it is even great enough. But if the Nerve be wholly cut
assunder, there is then no pain at all felt, but yet nevertheless the sense and
feeling, or else the motion of the part into which the Nerve is inserted, is
taken away. And so likewise if the Tendon be wholly dissected, the motion of
the Member is taken away.

Prognostics.
1. If the Nerve be Wounded in the length thereof, then there is no great fear
of a Convulsion, seeing that the fibers are not so much affected: but if it be
wounded transversly, and yet not wholly cut in two, it may indeed bring upon
the person all those symptoms (to wit, pains, inflammations, a Convulsion, and
Deliryes or Dotings) which the pricking of the Nerve does: because that from
the fibers that are cut assunder the pain and hurt is communicated unto those
fibers that are not dissected and divided; and from hence proceed pains,
fluxions, inflammations, and other evils; and at length the Malady is
communicated unto the brain it self; from whence there arise Convulsion fits
and Deliryes.

2. But if the Nerve be wholly dissected, it does not indeed bring along with
it so much danger, neither is there any fear of a Convulsion: but yet
nevertheless there is another incurable Malady that follows it, to wit, a
debility both in sense and motion of that part into which the Nerve is
inserted, whenas the animal spirit can no longer be carried by the Nerve into
the said part.

3. If any Tendon shall be wounded, but not wholly dissected, it causes a
debility of motion in that part that it moves: but if it be altogether cut
assunder, then the motion of the said part is altogether abolished and taken
away.

4. If there flow forth great store of Sanies or thin excrement, it is then a
sign and token of that ill constituion of the part affected; and that it is
inflamed, and altogether in great danger. Now this Sanies flows forth
according to the various disposition of the part affected, sometime resembling
as it were water, and sometimes like whey of milk; and sometimes as it were white
and milkie; but that which flows forth of the Tendons is more glutinous, like
unto the white of an Egg. And I well remember that in a certain Student there
issued forth of his knee that was much wounded (day by day) a certain matter
like unto the white of an Egg, but that it was somewhat whiter, and a little
thicker; (and yet nevertheless altogether such as Celsus describes in his
fifth Book, and Chapt 26. which he calls Meliceria, because that it is like
unto white honey;) which flowed forth in that abundance, that an Eggshel could
scarcely contain it.

The Cure.
The way and Method of Curing these Wounds is in the most the very same indeed
with that which we mentioned in the foregoing Chapter; yet notwithstanding
there are some things that are peculiarly to be attended. As first of all,
those Nerves that are wounded by a downright cut are most commonly left naked,
and bare of any skin to cover them and therefore we are to use our best
endeavor, that they may not be exposed unto the external Air, in regard that
the external cold Air (as we have often told you) is an enemy unto the Nerves.
And therefore we are to do the utmost of our endeavor, that (as much as possibly
may be) they may be covered with their own proper covering, and the skin that
lies upon it; and therefore if the Nerve be wounded according unto its length,
then with a swath the lips of the Wound are to be drawn together and
conjoined; but if the Wound be transverse, and that necessity so require, there
is then a suture or sewing of the lips to be attempted; and yet great care must
be taken, and all diligence used, that (if the suture or stiching be wrought
with the needle, which yet notwithstanding may easily be avoided, as we told
yon before) the Nerve it self be not touched with the Needle. For if in the
sewing it should chance to be pricked, the very same symptoms may happen that
are otherwise wont to arise in the pricking of the Nerves. And yet nevertheless
the wound is so to be drawn together, that there may still stand open a free
passage forth for the Sanies; which (if need so require) may be done with a
Tent; lest that if the said Sanies be retained and kept in, it should corrupt
and putrify the nerve. The nerves also when they are wounded will not bear
those stronger biting Medicaments, of Euphorbium, and the like. And therefore
in such kind of Wounds as these Galen was wont to use a Medicament of quick or
unslaked Lime often washed with much oil of roses mingled therewith; as also
that Medicament of Pompholyx, if it be mingled with good store of oil of Roses.
But those Medicaments that have been found out by those of latter times are
safest of all other; of which we have already made mention in the Chapter
immediately foregoing. But then the Wound it self may be externally covered with
the Emplaster Diachalcites, or Diapalma, or the Nerve Emplaster, or any other
that shall be known to be sit and convenient. Galen (in his third Book of the
Composit. of Medicaments according to their kinds and the third Chapt.)
propounds and mentions these kind of Emplasters; and there are many
likewise of them extant in the writings of the latter Physicians; of which we
have also in the former Chapt. 8 (touching vulnerary Medicaments) made mention;
and given you some of the Chief of them. And this Unguent is also very good and
useful; which they usually term the Unguent for the Worms.

Take Centaury the less, the lesser Plantain, Hounds tongue, Mouse-care, the
greater and lesser Consound, the herb horse-taile, and Milfoyl, of each of
these one handful; of Earthworms half a pound, Common oil one pound, Wine one
pint and half, Vinegar four ounces. Let them be al well mashed and thoroughly
mingled together, and so let them stand fermenting for seven days together.
And then after this, add thereto, of the sewet of a Ram taken clean from the
skin one pound; ship pitch and Rosin, of each one quart. Gum Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Opopanax, dissolved in Vinegar, of each half a dram: let them be all
boiled together over a moderate and gentle fire, until the wine and the Vinegar
be all consumed, and then let them be strayned. And so soon at they shall be
cold, add of Turpentine one ounce and half; of Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocol,
of each three drams; Saffron two drams; let th m be well stirred about with a
Spatula, or else with a Pestle in a Mortar: and if it seem good, to cause a
Consistence, Wax may also be added.

And whereas by reason of the Scarcity of natural heat in the Nerves, there can
hardly be made a good suppuration, but rather a Putridness and Corruption of
the humors; a Cataplasm that may inhibite and resist the said putridness is to
be imposed: which will likewise perform this good office, to wit, of defending
the Nerve (unto which cold is an Enemy) from the Injuries of the External Air.
This following is also very useful.

Bean Meal, Barley Meal, and the Meal of the Pulse E^vum, the powder of Camomil
flowers, and Red Roses, as much as you think sit; with Oxymel simple, and the
Oil of Roses and Earthworms Compounded together, make a Cataplasm.

And seeing that in the Nerves transversly wounded, and yet not altogether cut
assunder, the Brain by the fibers that are whole and entire may easily be drawn
into consent, so that a Convulsion may be excited; this Convulsion ought (as
much as is possible) to be prevented, by those Medicaments that have hither
unto been propounded; and if it shall happen, you must remove it by those
Remedies that we shall set down below in the Chap. 23. or if this may not
possibly be done and that the Medicaments are not sufficient to effect it, then
the whole Nerve is to be cut in sunder, that so the Convulsion may be removed.
For although that thereby the part be somewhat debilitated, and may come to
suffer a stupidity and insensibleness or else some hurt of the motion; yet
better it is to bear this inconvenience, then suffer death.

Of the Wounds of the Ligaments.
The Ligaments (in regard that they are void of sense) when they are Woeundd
produce neither pain, nor Convulsion; neither do they of themselves communicate
their Affects unto the Brain. And more especially, the wound of that Ligament
which rendeth from one bone to another, is most of all free from danger. But
that which is inserted into a Muscle, (in regard that it is able to draw the
Nerves and Tendons into a consent with it) if it be not rightly cured may bring
a great deal more danger along within. For because that even the very Ligaments
themselves have but a very weak heat, therefore they will not easily bear
Wounds; but they are very apt and ready to heap up many excrements, that may
contract a Putridness, and excite other Maladies and mischiefs; and therefore
of those Medicaments that are useful in the Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons,
those of them that are most drying are to be administered: and indeed we may
with safety enough make use of them, since that this part is destitute of
sense, and therefore may not easily be offended with the Acrimony of the said
drying Medicaments. But yet nevertheless, in regard that it seems to me, that
(as we told you before in the foregoing Chapter) such like Medicaments are wont
to be administered not only for drying, but to the end likewise that they may
cherish and strengthen the weak heat of the part, therefore we conclude that
such of these drying Medicaments are to be made use of that do no way
debilitate and dissipate the weak heat of these parts; but rather such as do
cherish and Corr^borate it.

Chap. 17. Of the Wounds of the the Joints.
THe Wounds of the Joints are very nearly related and of kin unto the Wounds of
the Nerves; to wit, those that happen in the Elbow of the Arm, the Knee, or the
Joints of the fingers: and these are either with a luxation or looseness of the
Joint, or else without it.

Prognostics.
Now al such Wounds are dangerous; since that the Joints are very apt and
readily prepared to receive the fluxions, as being such parts that are void of
flesh, hollow, and which are knit together by Membranes and Membranous Tendons,
and are easily assaulted with pains; whereupon arise Inflammations, Watchings,
Deliryes, and Convulsions: and such like Wounds as these do easily degenerate
into Ulcers of an ill and dangerous nature and quality; as Galen writes in his
fourth Book of the Method of Curing, and sixth Chapter.

2. And they are yet more dangerous in an internal part; because that in that
place the greater vessels and the Nerves are contained; where upon there are
also the more notable and considerable haemorrhages and Convulsions easily
excited.

3. Touching these same wounds Hippocrates likewise writes after this manner:
Those Wounds (says he) that are inflicted in the Joints, if the Nerves be
altogether cut assunder, (that contained them) without doubt they will render
them lame. But if there be any doubt, how and in what manner the Nerve may be
affected, if indeed the Wound be straight from a sharp Weapon, that which is
transverse is better then it. But if the Weapon that inflicted the Wound be
heavy and blunt, there is then no danger. But we must here consider both the
depth of the Wound, and other like signs of this nature. If any pus happen at
the Joint; there is then a necessity that the Joint should be rendered the
harder. And if likewise the tumors shall withal persevere, there is then a
necessity that the joint should be rendered the harder. And if likewise the
tumors shall withal Persevere, there is then a Necessity, that this place must
be hard for a long time, and that the Ulcer being whole, the tumor or swelling
still remain. But in those where nothing is to be expected but the cutting off
of the Ne ve, there we may with the more confidence sore^^ll a lameness to
follow, and this more specially, if any of the inferior Nerves shall be
loosened. But now whether or no the Nerve be to b^ ^ut off may be discovered by
these signs; if there flow sorth under it a white pus that is thick and of a
long continuance, and that there arise parts and inflammations at the Joint,
about the very beginning: which are likewise wont to happen when the bone is to
be cut out.

4. The same H ppocrates (in the place alleged) says thus: Those things that
are cut assunder in the Elbows, (especially with an inflammation) are at length
brought unto a suppuration, and cutting, and burning.

5. But these Wounds are made yet the more dangerous, if there happen withal
aloosening of the Joint: for then the Joint cannot be set and put back again
into its place without endangering the life of the Patient, by reason of those
pains that do perpetually accompany these kind of wounds. And therefore the
Physician may do well to save his credit by heeding the Prognostic, lest that
otherwise he be il spoken of by the common sort of people. For otherwise, if he
will adventure to put back the Joint into its former place, and that the Joint
when it is put back so continue, it brings death unto the sick person; and it
has been commonly seen, that upon a very small Wound death has followed. For
when with such a Wound a luxation or looseness of the Joint does happen, the
Nervous parts about the Joints do suffex a distraction; upon which there are
caused fierce and cruel pains, and fluxions: but if he Joint be brought back
unto its place, the same parts are again extended; and so of necessity there
must happen inflammations and convulsions, which unavoydably are communicated
unto the Brain: and withal from the afflux of the matter proceeding from so
many distractions and extensions the heat is suffocated, and so there follows
a Gangrene, and Sphacelus. Wherefore if any such Wound be brought unto the
Physician to Cure, let him acquaint the standers by with the danger of the
Patients life, and let him likewise give them notice of the fever that will
follow, and that a Convulsion will likewise happen in a very short time, if
this bringing back of the Joint be attempted, and accordingly effected.
Touching which Hippocrates (in his B. of the Joints, Text 74.) speaking of the
Ankle-bone, thus writes: But whosoever they be (says he) that upon any Wound
there inflicted have their Ankle-bones out of Joint, and altogether sticking
out from the Joints of the Foot, they ought not to be returned and put back
again into their places: but they are to be permitted so to continue: and if
any Physician will adventure to put them back, let him know for a certain, that
if they so continue when they are set, the Patients are not like to live, and
that their life is like to be but for a very few days; for there be but few of
them that live beyond the seventh day: for that which destroies them is the
Convulsion. Add this likewise, that it often happens, that both the Ankle and
the Foot are taken with the Gangrene. And we may be most certainly assured,
that these things will thus come to pass. And of the Elbow, (Text 16.) he says
thus: The very same happens in the bones of the Elbow: for if these bones
also (upon any Wound of the Hand-Wrist) be made to stick forth either toward
the interior or the exterior part of the Hand, we are to know for a truth, that
the persons who have these bones brought back and set in their former places,
(if they so abide) they shall within a few days die the same Death that we
told you of before: And touching the Thigh Bone, (Text 77.) And if (says he)
the Thigh Bone be fallen forth by reason of any Wound inflicted upon the Knee,
if it be again replaced, and so continue, it speedily brings a more violent
Death, then in the cases aforesaid. And afterward; And the very same is
likewise to be said as touching the Joints of the Hand-Wrist, and of the Arm.
For whatsoever they be of these that upon a Wound are dislocated and loosened,
and hereupon stick out, if they shall again be put back into their places, they
certainly cause Death.

6. And yet notwithstanding the lesser Joints if they be brought back, and
replaced, they do not necessarily bring Death; but many of them are preserved:
touching which Hippocrates (in his B. of the Joints, Text. 78.) writes thus:
But now (says he) if any upon a Wound have the Joints of their Fingers, or of
the Foot, or of the Hand, loosened and sticking out, there being indeed no bone
broken, but drawn away in the very Coherence, these if the Joints be again
replaced (and shall so continue) have indeed the danger of a Convulsion
threatening them, and nigh at hand, unless they be rightly Cured. And Galen (in
his 3. B. of Fractures, Text 16.) says: If the small Joints, to wit, such as
are found about the Fingers, chance to be wounded, and dislocated, neither then
also is the Cure altogether free from danger; for if these persons do
notwithstanding escape and recover, most of them obtain this their recovery
through the great diligence and pains taken in the Cure. And afterward he
adds: It is yet nevertheless ^o be expected, that the Joints about the
Fingers that are brought back to their former places will again fall forth; for
so for the most part it happens, if there follow but any the least
Inflammation thereupon. Wherefore if there were no fear that the Physician
would be accused and discredited by reason of the Ignorance and unskilfulness
of the vulgar, there were not any one of these to be brought back unto their
own former places. And which that the Physician may the better avoid, and may
not hasten the Death of the Patient, he ought not so much as to undertake the
replacing of the Joint. But then if the Physician shall not order the Joint to
be brought back and set in its former place, he shall by the vulgar be accused
of ignorance and unskilfulness, and as one that has made the Patient Lame or
maimed. Wherefore the Physician in this Case is to preserve his Credit and
Reputation by the aforesaid Prognostic, and foretelling unto the standers by
the danger of Death that may in thus doing accrue unto the sick party.

The Cure.
The Cure of these wounds, if they be without any Luxation or loosening, is
almost the same as was that before of the Nerves. To wit, the lips of the wound
are indeed again to be drawn together, but yet not wholly, if the Wound be
deeper then ordinary, that so there may be an open passage forth for the Humors
that are easily gathered together. And seeing that the Joints especially have
in them but little heat, they are therefore in the best manner that may be to
defend them from the injuries of the external Air. Wherefore not only those
Unguents and Emplasters that are used in other Wounds (especially those of the
Nerves) are to be imposed; but likewise those Cataplasms, of which mention was
made above in the eighth Chapter. As,

Take Powder of Marsh-mallow Root, half an ounce; Betony, flowers of Camomile,
and Melilote, of each one ounce; the meal of Linseed, and Fenugreek seed, of
each one ounce and half; of Beans, one ounce; and make a Ca^aplasm.

The afflux of the Humors is likewise to be prevented; and therefore the whole
body is to be evacuated with all diligence; and the Humors that flow are to be
intercepted, and turned quite out of the Body.

It matters very much likewise, that the member be rightly Situated and
placed, that the pain and the afflux of Humors may be prevented, and the action
of the member preserved.

If therefore the fore part of the Shoulder be wounded, then let a thick
bolster be put underneath the wing thereof, and likewise wrapped up in something
that may bear up the Arm, and drive up higher the top or head of the Shoulder.
For the top or head of the Shoulder being drawn downward by its own proper
weight causes that the Wound is cured much the more slowly. If the Wound be
inflicted upon the Joint of the Elbow, the Arm is then neither altogether to be
kept stretched forrh straight, neither is it too much to be bended inward, but
it is to be placed in a middle posture, resembling an obtuse Angle. Which
Situation of the part that it may be so preserved, and by the sick person
whilst he sleeps (or else through Incogitancy) not altered, it is to be kept
in that posture either by fit and convenient bindings up, or else by wooden
Instruments made fit for that purpose. The Hand-Wrist being wounded, or the
Joints of the Fingers, the Hand is to be kept half bended, and the Fingers not
stretched forth, lest that a Cicatrice being brought over them the Hand should
abide stiff, and be hurt by its contraction. If the joint of the Thigh be
wounded, let the sick person lie upon his back, and with fit little Pillows and
bindings let the Hucklebone in the head thereof be contained and kept in its
proper place; and until the Cicatrice be brought over it, the sick person must
be commanded that he sometimes move and stir his Thigh this way and that way;
lest that the Cicatrice being brought over it, there should happen a hurt of
the motion by means of the said Cicatrice. The Knee when it is wounded must be
stretched forth, and placed in a right and straight Figure, that so Lameness
may be prevented.

But now if the Wound be with a Luxation or loosening of the Joint, A Wound
with Luxation.
if the Joint that is loosened be great, the putting of it back again into its
place is to be omitted; and the sick person is to be told before hand of the
Lameness and danger that would follow thereupon: and the fluxion is by all
manner of means to be turned away, and the pain to be mitigated; and the Member
to be placed in such a posture as may seem most grateful and convenient unto
the Patient, and such as may bring the least pain unto him; provided still, that
the Member hang not down, lest that there should be an occasion for an afflux
of the Humors. But the wound is to be Cured like as other Wounds; but yet
nevertheless it is not to be bound up in the same manner as other wounds are.
And great care must likewise be taken that it be not offended by the external
cold of the Air. Cataplasms are likewise to be imposed, not upon the Wound it
self, But upon the parts that lie near unto it, lest that by any means the part
should by the weight thereof be grieved and burdened. And in regard that
fluxions are easily caused (in this case) unto these parts, and thereupon the
Cure the longer ere it be perfected; therefore the Body is by often purgations,
and likewise by swears, to be purged and cleansed from all its vicious and
superfluous Humors.

Chap. 18. Of a Wound with a Contusion.
AND seeing likewise that the quality and Condition of the instrument wherewith
the Wound is inflicted may cause a difference of the Wound we are therefore
here not to pass this over in silence, without speaking something unto it. For
some wounds are inflicted by sharp Instruments or weapons, and others by those
that are obtuse and blunt; which does not a little vary the Cure. And indeed
the Cure of Wounds made with sharp Instruments may sufficiently appear by what
has hitherunto been said: and as for what is peculiar unto Wounds that are
inflicted by blunt Weapons, we will here in this Chapter declare it. Now that
kind of Unity dissolved that obtuse and blunt Weapons cause in a soft part, is
called a Contusion. And indeed it is properly termed a Contusion, A Wound with
a Contusion.
when the superficies of the part (or the Skin) being whole and entire, those
soft parts that lie under it are bruised, and as it were battered together; of
which Contusion some mention has likewise been made above, in the first Part,
and sixteenth Chapter. And yet nevertheless, now and then, the part is not only
bruised within, but it is also externally wounded in the superficies, where the
Wound is joined with a Contusion; and touching this Contusion it is that we
intend here to treat; of which we shall notwithstanding so order our discourse,
that what is to be done in every Contusion may manifestly appear.

The Causes.
Now a Contusion is caused in Wounds, when the Weapon or Instrument wherewith
the Wound is inflicted has not only a power of cutting and making an incision,
but likewise of bruising and battering the part upon which it lights; and
this is done, when the Weapon or Instrument is blunt, or heavy; or when a man
is thrown against something that is hard: in which manner also the soft part may
be bruised without a Wound, or else with a Wound.

Signs Diagnostick.
Wounds with a Contusion are known by the instrument with the which the wound
was made, to wit, if it be blunt and heavy; and then in the next place from the
pain, and the black and blew color of the part.

Prognostics.
1. A Wound with a Contusion is more dangerous, and more difficult to Cure,
then that which is without a Contusion. For the bruised parts, and the blood
that is poured forth, if they be not discussed, they must of necessity be
turned into Pus, or otherwise before this is done the Wound cannot be Cured.

2. And if the bruised part, and the blood poured forth of the broken Vessels
begin to putrefie, it may excite and cause a Gangrene.

The Cure.
In regard that no wound that has any other affect that hinders the Curing
thereof Joined with it can be cured until the said Affect be removed, and that
the part it self be rightly disposed; it from hence easily appears, that our
first care must be directed unto the cure of the Contusion. And when the
Contusion or bruise is once taken away, the rest of the Cure is to be performed
in the manner and form aforesaid.

But then, seeing that what is bruised cannot be restored again, and made
entire as before, and that the Blood which is poured forth of the Vessels may
stick in another place, (where it ought not to be) and so may be easily
corrupted; therefore we ought first of all to endeavor, that both of then may
be taken away: and that they may either be discussed, or else converted into
Pus. And because that there is evermore caused an afflux of the Humors unto the
bruised part, by reason of the pain that attends the said Contusion;
therefore, first of all, Universal Revulsions (and chiefly Venefection or
opening of a Vein, if need so require) are to be administered. And then in the
next place, that there may flow no more of the Humor unto the part affected,
Defensives and Repellers are to be administered; touching which we have spoken
above, in the 1 Part, Chap. 16. which ought to be such that they will no way
admit of the afflux of the Humor; and withal that they may consume and dry up
some part thereof.

And when there shall be no further cause to fear an afflux of Humors; then we
are to do our endeavor that that which is bruised, and the Blood which being
forth of the Vessels sticks in the bruised part may speedily be turned into
Pus: as Hippocrates teaches us, in his B. of Ulcers: If (says he) any of the
flesh shall be battered and bruised by the Weapon, we are then to take care,
that it be (as soon as may be) converted into Pus, for as it is less dangerous
then an Inflammation; so there is also a necessity, that the flesh being
battered and bruised by the Weapon should being converted into Pus waste and
consume away, and then a new Flesh be bred instead thereof. Now what those
Medicaments are that move and forward the Pus, we have elsewhere told you. But
in the use of them, in regard that they are hot and moist, we ought to have a
special care that we apply not those things that are over moist; since that by
the use of such Medicaments, putridness and the corruption of the part may
easily be excited: and therefore certain Discussives are to be added. As,

Take of Marsh-Mallow Root, one ounce; wild Cucumber, half an ounce ^ Organy,
and tops of Dill, of each half a handful; Fat dry Figs, six in number; boil
them all to a softness, and then pass them through a hair sieve: then add the
powder of the flowers of Camomile, the meal of Lin-seed, and Fenugreek seed, of
each half an ounce; Dragons Blood, three drams; Styrax liquid, Galbanum, and
Mirrh, of each two drams; Saffron, one scruple; Oil of St. John's Wort, and
Hoggs Fat, of each a sufficient quantity; Mingle them, and make a Cataplasm.
But now these Cataplasms are not to be imposed upon the Wound it self, but they
are to be laid on round about, where the part is bruised. And this very thing
Hippocrates teaches us in his B. of Ulcers, where he thus writes; When it
seems requisite that the Wound should be fortified and fenced with a
Cataplasm, it ought to be brought back from the Wound, and laid upon the parts
next unto it, that so the Pus may pass forth, and those things that are hard
may be softened

But upon the very Wound it self there is to be anointed a Digestive made of
Rosin Turpentine, and the yelks of Eggs, or Triapharmacum, or the Unguent
Basilicon, or the like, out of those things that we mentioned before; and then
upon this Liniments dipped in the same Digestive are to be imposed.

The Pus b^ing bred, the Wound is then to be cleansed with convenient
Medicaments; and then to be filled up with flesh, and Consolidated.

But if that which is bruised be not changed into Pus, but that on the third,
fourth, or fifth day a Tumor arise with a pain, and so increase from day to
day, and that a beating pain be excited, so that the sick person cannot well
bear the touch of that place, and that at length the fresh and flourishing
color in the part be extinguished, and the part tend unto a yellowishness, and
that the pain and beating remit, and that there be present other signs and
tokens of a Gangrene near at hand; then the part is to be scarified, and the
Egpptiack Unguent laid thereon; and the Cure is so to be instituted and ordered
as we told you in the place alleged (to wit, Chapt. 16. of the first part)
and as is wont to be done in case of a near approaching Gangrene; touching
which we have already spoken in the 2. Part, Chap. 19.

But if not the flesh alone, but likewise the Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments be
bruised: the Nerves indeed and the Tendons if they be bruised without any
Contusion of the Skin, they are to be cherished with warm Oil that has in it a
Discussive virtue, as for instance, the Oil of Rue, Orrace, Dill, and sweet
Marjo^am But if withal the Skin be bruised, first of all, the white of an Egg
mingled with the Oil of Roses is to be laid on, to mitigate the pain. And then
the pain being somewhat moderated, the part is to be cherished and fo^^^^d with
Astringent Wine; and afterward (according as Galen writes that it was in
^^equent in use with Wrastlers, who have oftentimes such bruises befalling
them) a Cataplasm of Bean-meal and Oxymel is to be imposed. There is here
likewise much commended the Leaves of the Elm boiled in Oil, and applied; as
likewise the Ashes of the small shoots of the Vine mingled with the Fat of a
Hen, and Vinegar. And if some extraordinary Vehement pain be joined together
with the affect, then Liquid Pitch, with Oxymel and Bean meal may be mingled,
boiled, and laid on as hot as the Patient can well endure it. But if we see
that there is cause of more drying, then we may mingle with the former the meal
of the Pulse Ervum, or the Powder of the Orrace Root of Illyrium; and the place
ought to be anointed with the Oil of Camomile, of Dill, of Orrace; and of Rue,
with any one of them.

Or else let an Unguent be made of Galbanum and Myrrh. But all things
whatsoever that are moist, and that easily bring in a Putridness, they are all
of them to be avoided, and no use made of them. And there are also certain
internal Medicaments to be administered; as the Root of Birthwort, Gentian,
Ellecampane, Centaury the less, Ammoniacum with Honey.

But if after Contusion or Contorsion (by reason of the conflux of the thick
Humors) there remain a hardness in the Nerve or Tendon, and that thereupon a
Numness and stupidity be excited in the part, then Emollients and Digestives
are to be laid on; such as are, the Root of Marshmallows, of white Lillies,
Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, and the great Diachylon.

And Lastly, If the Ligaments be bruised, and writhed out of their places, then
there are to be laid on those Medicaments that have in them a virtue and
faculty of heating, discussing, and strengthing the heat of the part; and such
are the Oil of Mastick, Spikenard, Orrace, Spike, the Emplastrum Barbarum, and
the black Emplaster. Or,

Take Oil of Mastick, Spicknard, Spike, of each one ounce; Bdellium, two drams;
Saffron, one scruple; Wax as much as will suffice, and male an Unguent.

Chap. 19. Of Wounds caused by the biting of Living Creatures.
UNto Wounds with a Contusion there belong likewise even those that are caused
by the biting of Living Creatures, and Bullets shot from Guns; touching which
our purpose is therefore to treat in special, and particularly. And in the
first place, as concerning Wounds that are made by the biting of Living
Creatures, we intend to treat of them here in this Chapt. as they are void of
Poison: and of the biting of Poisonous Creatures our purpose is to speak
afterward, in the 21. Chapter. For it sometimes so happens that a man may be
bitten by a Dog, Ape, Horse, Ass, or other Creatures that are not poisonous or
mad; or else one man may be bitten by another. But Cornelius Celsus (in his 5.
B. and 27. Chap.) writes, that all bitings whatsoever of wild Beasts have in
them a certain kind of Poison: which indeed cannot well be denied of wild
Creatures. For since that the very spittle of living Creatures has in it a
great power and virtue, (in so much that if there be any thing vicious in the
Body it easily drinks it up) this spittle may together with the biting easily
be conveyed into the Wound. And this must likewise be remembered, that these
Animalls when they bite, they are for the most part enraged. And then it being
true, (as it is generally well known) that wrath and rage have in them a great
power both of causing a commotion in the humors, as also of corrupting them;
that vitiousness of the humors is very easily communicated unto the spittle,
and by it may as easily be imparted unto the Wound: and this happens much the
rather, if so be the Man be Frantic. And if there were altogether nothing of
virulency in the Wound that is inflicted by the biting of one of these living
creatures; yet notwithstanding the very contusion it self (which rendereth all
wounds whatsoever the more dangerous, and the more difficult to be cured makes
those wounds the more grievous. For since that the teeth of the said Animals
are not so sharp as a sword, or some other kind of Weapon; while they wound,
they do withal likewise bruise, and cause a Confusion in the part they fasten
upon.

Prognostics.
But now how dangerous these wounds also may be that are caused by one man's
biting of another, Guihelm. Fabricius teaches us by three Examples, and
instances, that he gives thus in his 2 Century, Observat. 84. and 85. The
first whereof is of a certain Merchant who a midst his Cups by another biting
was wounded in the very tip of the right forefinger; whose whole right hand
upon the same biting became inflamed, and a Gangrene soon after began to
follow, with Convulsions, an extreme burning fever, a Syncope, and continual
restlesness.

The second instance is of a Physician, who rashly and inconsideratly putting
his finger into the mouth of a Phrantick woman, to the end he might feel her
tongue, had it bitten by this mad woman; and upon this biting he became
extremly afflicted with a vehement pain, not only in the said finger, but in
the whole Arm also. The last example is of a man that being by another furious
and enraged person sorely bitten even unto the first Articulation of his Thumb,
he likewise was in stantly taken with a vehement pain all that Arm throughout,
and soon after there followed a fever, and a Syncope.

Matthias Glandorpius (in Specul. Observat. Chirurgic. Observe. 49.) relates
the like History of a certain person, who by another man's teeth (the man being
much enraged) was wounded in his thumb, about the first Joint; from whence
there arose a most extreme pain, an Inflammation of the whole hand, a Continual
fever, a restlesness of the body, frequent faintings and swoundings, and a very
intense pain of the head.

And evermore the wounds are dangerous, both in themselves, (by reason of the
contusion) as also because that the spittle of the furious and enraged Animals
has somewhat of malignity Joined with it; and they are so much the more
dangerous, if any of the Nervous parts (such as are the fingers) shall chance to
be bitten.

The Cure.
In regard that (as we have said) in every wound that is inflicted by the
biting of any living Creature there is present a Contusion, and this sometimes
greater, and sometimes less according as the teeth of those Creatures are more
sharp (such as are the teeth of a Dog, Ape, and Squirrel) or else less sharp,
(as those of a Man, Horse, Ass etc.) and that from this Contusion the pain is
caused; therefore there ought a regard to be had both unto the Contusion and
the pain.

And therefore in the first place, the blood is carefully to be pressed and
squeezed forth of the wound; and opening of a vein, or purgation (according as
need shall require) is to be instituted: and to prevent the greater afflux of
the humors, and the Malady from being communicated unto the superior parts
some Defensive of Oxycrate, or some o^ her the like, is to be imposed upon the
superior part; but unto the Wound it self (for the asswaging of its pain, the
promoting of the suppuration, and the keeping of the Wound open,) such a like
Medicament: as this that follows is to be applied.

Take One Egg, butter half an ounce, Saffron one scruple, Oil of Violets, and
Roses of each two drams; and mingle them. or,

Take Marshmallow Roots, one ounce and half; the leaves of Mallows, flowers of
Camomile, and Melilote, of each half a handful; Wormwood two pugils; boil them
to a softness and let them be well bruised and mashed together: when they are
well bruised add unto them the yelk of one Egg, oil of Roses, and Camomil, of
each as much will suffice, and make a Cataplasm.

If there be any fear that there is some kind of virulency in the Wound, then
we may ad Scordium, as also Treacle; and therefore such an unguent is to be
provided.

Take The Basilick Unguent, and fresh butter, of each half an ounce, Treacle
one dram; oil of Roses one ounce, the yelk of one Egg, and mingle them.

And moreover, that what is bruised may be wholly converted into Pus we are to
use Honey of Roses, Rosin Turpentine, with the yelk of an Egg, or the Basilik
Unguent, or if any Malignity be feared, this that follows.

Take Pounder of Myrrh, Root of Round Aristolochy, Orrace of Florence, and
Aloes, of each one dram; Angelica, half a dram; Treacle dissolved in the spirit
of Wine, two drams, with honey of Roses make a Liniment.

And at length, the Wound being well wiped and cleansed, it is to be filled up
with flesh, and so shut up with a cicatrice, as in other cases is wont to be
done.

If a Gangrene be feared, as nigh at hand, then the Cure is so to be ordered,
as we said before, touching the Gangrene.

Glandorpius his father (in the case before alleged) besides general and
internal remedies, was wont to administer these Topics.

First of all, with this Unguent he anointed the filaments; and then he imposed
them hot upon the Wound, with the Citrine Emplaster. As,

Take Venice Tu^pentine often washed one ounce, the powder of Earthworms two
scruples: Frankincense half a dram; the yelk of one Egg, and mingle them.

The hand even unto the wrist was anointed with the Oil of Roses.

The pain increasing, he applied warm this following Cataplasm.

Take Scordium or Water Germander, the herb Sauce alone or Jack by the hedge, of
each four pugills or small handfuls, Wormwood, the tops of St. John's wort, Sage,
Marjoram, of each two pugills, Red Roses three pugils, flowers of Camomil and
Melilote, of each one pugil; the pith of Rye bread three ounces: bran, one
ounce; the meal of Lupines one ounce and half with a sufficient quantity of
Wine make a Cataplasm; adding in the conclusion, oil of Rue six drams; oil of
Roses with Earthworms, an ounce and half; the yelk of one Egg, Saffron one
scruple; and mingle them.

The pain yet for all this little or nothing remitting, about the hand wrist,
and the Elbow, he applied this Defensive.

Take The Unguent of Roses Champhorated (or with Camphyre and the Santaline
Oil, or the oil of Saunders, of each half an ounce; oil of Roses with the Juice
of Nightshade, three drams; Bole Armenick two drams, powder of red Roses one
dram; Rose vinegar as much as will suffice, and mingle them.

The pain somewhat abating, there was then discovered a Nerve, or rather a black
Tendon; and upon this he strewed the following powder.

Take Roots of round Aristolochy, Sow fennel, Orrace of each one scruple; Hearts
horn burnt, prepared powder of Earth worms, and Frankincense, of each half a
scruple, mingle them and make a very fine powder.

Upon which he laid on the filaments after he had dipped them in the Diapompholyx
Emplaster; and covered them with the Emplasher Diapalm^^ and so the fear that
was conceived of the necessity of the cutting off of the Thumb, was taken away:
and a great part of the Tendon cut forth; and the first little bone, being
become altogether rotten was drawn forth with the Nayl. But because that the
fingers (by reason of their being continually bound up,) as also the thumb,
were benumbed and wanted their motion, by fomentations, Bathes, and Liniments,
the fingers recovered their motion again; and the thumb albeit that it remained
immovable, yet nevertheless it had a new Nayl instead of the former.

Chap. 20. Of the Wounds by Gunshot.
UNto Wounds with contusions we may likewise add those that are inflicted by
Gunshot. Where at the very first, and before we proceed any further, this
question comes to be discussed; to wit,

Whether wounds that are inflicted by Gunshot have any Malignity in them; and
whether they receive any burning heat, (causing an Inflammation, and
putrefaction of the humors) from the powder, or the Bullet?
Three opinions touching wounds by Gunshot.
And here in this Controversy, we find that Authors are altogether divided into
three Ranks, and opinions. The first determine, that the Wounds inflicted by
bullets from Guns are poisonous. Others deny indeed that they have any thing of
poison in them; yet they have nevertheless (as they say) an Empyreuma, and
burning. But thirdly, and lastly, others there are that will not admit of either
of these; but they assert, that all that wherein these Wounds differ from those
that are inflicted by a sharp weapon, is from the contusion and tearing of
those parts the bullet passes through. All which opinions we will now examine in
order.

The first opinion.
And first of al, the opinion of them that assert these wounds to be poisonous
is indeed very Ancient; and therefore soon after the invention of Guns,
according to this opinion, there was likewise a Method propounded and
practiced, for the curing of Wounds inflicted by Gunshot. For John de vigo (in
the second part of his Pract. Chirurg. Book 1. and the Chapter of a poisonous
wound) writes in this manner: If the Wound shall be caused by the Instrument
how much used, and called la Bombarda, or (as we term it) the Gun; then there
ought to be made a cauterization, with the oil of Elder, or the oil of Linseed
only. And Paraeus writes (in his tenth Book of Surgery, Apologism. 1.) that
it was a thing much in use even in his time, to burn into such wounds with the
oil of Elder applied very hot, and that had mingled with it a little Treacle;
and that he himself also at the first followed this way and method of curing;
until accidentally (by a certain chance) there was another way taught; touching
which, see the place alleged.

But those that follow this opinion prove this poysonousness (in the general)
from the diseases and symptoms that usually happen there upon; The reasons by
which the first opinion is proved.
such as are, the corruption of the parts, and the Gangrene, those ulcers
resembling the Nature of the Tumor Herpes, the trembling of the Heart,
Malignant fevers, the lips of the Wound leaden colored, or black; and then
next of al they prove it from the course that is taken in the Cure; because
that it is found by experience, that Alexipharmaca (or Counter poisons) have
brought much benefit and help unto the Patient; and because that these Wounds
are to be kept open a long time, after the manner of other poisoned Wounds. And
lastly, some there are that pretend this likewise, that it has been found,
that all those have perished that in some certain battles have been wounded by
such bullets; or if any have escaped, that it was very hardly; and that they
were preserved by some extraordinary pains and labor; although that the Wounds
did not seem so great and dangerous, whatever were the diligence and care of
the Surgeons, and though it were never so little.

But others of this opinion will have this poysonousness to proceed from the
Gunpouder, by the force and violence whereof the bullets are driven forth;
others from the matter and metal of which the bullets are made; others from the
poison wherewith these bullets are poisoned. For this powder consists of
Brimstone, Nitre, and Coals: of which (they say) the two former are hot in
themselves; and when they are fired, they then become extremely hot; and if
they take flame, then do they at length acquire a poisonous quality, as these
would persuade us. And this they think to be sufficiently manifest even by this
also, because that those who make this powder shut both their mouth and their
Nosethrills, that so they may not be hurt by the poisonous exhalations of this
powder. But they who derive this poysonousness from the Metal, these tell us
that al Metals in general are poisonous, and enemies unto our bodies: others
although they say not that these bullets are in themselves poisonous; yet
nevertheless they take upon them to prove that these bullets may be po^soned;
and that this was much used by diverse Nations, they abundantly prove out of
several Authors; As, The ophrastus, in his ninth Book of Plants; Chap. 15.
Dioscorides in his sixth Book, and Chapt. 20. Pliny, in his twelfth Book, and
Chapt. 53. Paulus Aegineta in his sixth Book and Chapt. 88. and other modern
Writers. And some there are who here (for to prove this their opinion) be take
themselves to the likeness and resemblance of the lightening and blow of the
Gun; and as it is most certain that oftentimes in Lightening there is a certain
poisonous quality and power (as is sufficiently testified by the stench, and
the wonderful power it has of blasting and destroying both man and beast, and
that in a moment; as also the other malignant Effects thereof sufficiently
witness the truth hereof) so they conceive that there is something like unto it
in the flash of the powder and the noise or report of the Gun.

Secondly, Many there have been, The Second opinion.
and still are, who affirm that an Empyreuma or Combustion of the parts is
joined with these Wounds. And hereupon it is, that Surgeons commonly carry
about with them so many Medicaments, which our Surgeons term Pulver le
shung, (that is, extinguishers of the Gunpouder, or the Empyrema when the parts
are inflamed and burnt in these wounds by Gunshot) because, to wit, that they
are persuaded, that in such wounds there is an Empyreuma, which is first of all
to be extinguished. And this they endeavor to prove by these Reasons. First of
al, The Reasons for proof of the second opinion.
because those bullets when they are cast forth may be inflamed by the
Gunpouder, and so may contract an Empyreuma. Secondly, from the motion it self
of the bullet, which in regard that it is most quick and swift, they conclude
that the bullet is thereby made hot; the same that even Aristotle also has
taught us; who (in his second Book de Caelo Chapt. 7. text 42. and in his first
Book of Meteors, text, 3.) writes, that by a vehement motion the Iron is made
hot, and the Arrow heads melted, and wood and stones set on fire: which we are
likewise taught by Experience it self, it being very well known, that by the
hard and vehement rubbing of wood one piece against another the Country people
do sometimes raise a fire; and that the Axletrees of Mil-wheels, unless they be
often moystened with fat, are very apt to be inflamed and set on fire. And
thirdly also, the very same is by experience confirmed in these bullets; since
that oftentimes it has been found, that (in villages) the straw or thatched
houses have by these bullets been set on fire; and that whole houses have been
burnt down thereby. Fourthly, they say also that other things that are wont to
happen in combustions or burnings, do appear likewise in those Wounds; to wit,
that the wound it self becomes black, that there flow forth from thence sharp,
stinking and black I chores (or thin Excrements) and that the inflammation (as
it is wont to be in all combustions or burnings) is augmented even until the
Ninth day, and then after this diminished.

The third Opinion.
Reasons for the defense thereof.
And thirdly, those that deny that there is present in these Wounds any poison
or burning they urge these Reasons for their opinion. 1. That there does not
proceed any poison from the Gun-pouder.
And indeed in the first place, they in this manner fight,and oppose themselves
against this poisoning of the Wounds. First of al (say they) if there be any
poison in such Wounds as are inflicted by gunshot, it is brought in and caused
either from the Gun-pouder, or else from the bullet. That it proceeds not
from the Gunpowder, appears from hence* that those things of which it is
compounded are not poisonous: for it is made of Brimstone, Nitre and Coals: of
all which not one of them is poisonous. For both the Sulphur, and the Nitre,
are made use of in the stead of internal Medicaments, both by the Ancient, and
by the Modern Physicians also; and this is a thing so generally well known, that
it needs not any proof at all. And much less have these Coals any thing of
poison in them. And although that this powder shall be kindled, yet
notwithstanding it cannot from thence acquire any poysonousness, since that
fire does rather consume then produce venenosity or poysonousness. And that
this powder is not poisonous, there are many Soldiers that have sufficiently
proved; who have made great use of it (together with vinegar) for the Curing of
the Plague: and they use to burn it in houses, in time of a great plague to
drive it away, and to preserve themselves from the contagion thereof. Yea, the
affect it self, and experience do sufficiently prove this, which testify, that
very many who have been wounded by these bullets have yet notwithstanding
suffered no symptom at all, that in the least might betoken any thing of poison.

Neither also can this poison come from the leaden bullet. 2. Not from the
Bullet.
For it is most manifest, that the bullet of lead (especially if it be whole)
cannot possibly bring any poison along with it; and it appears even from
this, that many carry about in their bodies such bullets that have been shot
into them, sometimes for the space of many years, and this without any hurt or
damage at al. Yea some have swallowed bullets of lead, and cast them forth
again by the belly, without any the least hurt. And it is a thing very well
known, that Lead, and such various Medicaments as have from it been made, have
been by the Ancients and our selves very succesfully administered unto the
External parts, for the curing of old Ulcers. But now that such bullets may
indeed be poisoned (as we shall afterward show you) this they deny not: but
this happens not unto al such wounds; as we shall anon further show you.

That there is present no burning, how proved.
And that there is also no burning present in the Wound they thus prove it. For
first of all if these Wounds should bring in any burning at all, then the
bullets themselves ought to be fired; and thereupon melted; whereas
notwithstanding, we see that the bullets are taken whole out of Wounds, and
appear to have suffered no such thing, Secondly, this burning should rather be
perceived in those things that are more combustible; and this burning should
first of all appear especially in the Clothes of those that are in this manner
wounded: whereas notwithstanding, there is not the least appearance or show of
any burning in these Garments, whether Linen or Woollen: yea and those who
endeavor to defend ships and houses from the violence and blows of these
bullets, what do they? Do they not hang before them Sacks filled full of Wool
or hurds? Which were yet never known to be set on fire by these bullets, no not
by the greatest of them. Neither may any one here object, and say that there is
great difference between the parts of man's body, and Garments, and such like
things. For such things as these (by reason of the widness of their passages,)
may be pierced through by this most thin Exhalation, without touching or hurting
the substance: which yet may hurt a man's Body, by reason of the closeness and
compactedness thereof: and that the same happens here which is wont in the
lightening that oftentimes melts the Sword, without hurting the Scabbard.

But there is here a very vast difference between the Lightening and a Bullet.
For the whole Action of the Lightening is by a most powerful Spirit; and by a
most subtle substance that pierces through all things whatsoever: but it is
not yet proved, that there is Joined with the Leaden Bullet any such spirit;
but here the whole Action is of the Bullet it self, which neither burns
things that are thin and permeable, nor yet Wood, (and other things of a thick
substance) upon which it not only glanceth but directly strikes against.
Thirdly, since that there is hardly any thing to be named that is more
inflamable then the Gun-pouder; if these bullets should burn the Body of Man,
it should much more kindle and set on Fire the Gun-pouder; which yet
nevertheless it does not do; experience it self testifying, and teaching us,
that although a Vessel that is full of such Gun-pouder shall be shot through by
such a bullet, yet that the said Gun-pouder is not hereby kindled and set on
Fire. But if at any time it so chance that by a Bullet sent out of a Gun the
Gun-pouder be fired, this happens because that either the flame it self
penetrateth unto the Powder; or else that the Bullet striking against Iron, or
some Stone, is kindled by the sparks of Fire, just as we see it to be in the
striking together of the Steel and the Flint-stone. Fourthly, if instead of the
Leaden bullet, either Papper pellets or pellets of Hurds be ram'd into the Gun,
and then shot forth, there will not appear any the least tokens of any burning
in them (caused either by the Gun-pouder, or else from the vehemence of
motion;) but only, that sometimes they are sullied by the Gun-pouder, and made a
little black; and they are oftentimes drawn forth of the very Wounds as whole
and entire as they went in. Fifthly, Those who are thus wounded do not feel any
heat or burning from these bullets, but only a pain from the bruising and
tearing of the flesh. Sixthly, That those bullets are not made hot either by
the flame of the Gun-pouder, or else by the swiftness of their motion, we are
sufficiently assured of it even by this, that a bullet made of Wax, and shot
forth of a Gun, does not at all melt, but that it even pierces through a two
inch board, or any piece of Wood two Fingers thick. And from this alone it may
appear very manifest-that those bullets, whatsoever it be that they do, it is
not by the power and virtue of any Fire that they have in them; but what they
effect, is merely by their force, and violence.

But now that I may a little open unto you my thoughts, The Decision of all the
opinions.
and give my Judgment touching this Controversy; I conceive the third Opinion
(well weighing the Reasons that are brought for it) to be the most agreeable to
truth. But those Arguments that are brought for the two former Opinions may
easily be answered. For the first of the three, who defend, that those Wounds
are poisonous, they do not prove it by this, that first of all grievous and
dangerous Symptoms do infest those that are wounded in this manner. For all
those Symptoms may possibly proceed from a Contusion if it be not rightly
Cured, or if it be overgreat, and that there be from hence a putridness
excited. For when that bullet does with the greatest violence that may be
penetrate through those parts against which it hitteth, it dashet together all
whatsoever lies in its way, briuseth, and teareth it; by which said violence
not only the Capillary Veins, and the Arteries and Nerves, (that be every where
up and down dispersed throughout the flesh) are rent and torn; but the greater
Vessels likewise are battered and broken; insomuch that the Natural flux of the
Blood and the Spirits is hereby hindered; whereupon the bruised parts being
deprived of their Natural and Vital heat are easily corrupted, and soon
putrify. Neither can it truly be said, that the trembling of the Heart, and
the like Symptoms do happen unto all that are thus wounded, But as for what
they say in the second place, that Alexipharmaca (or Counter-poysons) have been
sometimes found very good and commodious for the person thus wounded; we answer,
that this is not true of all Wounds made by Gunshot; but of those only, when
by the Contusion, and the great putridness following thereupon, and the near
approaching of a Gangrene, the Heart is hurt by the putrid Vapors, ascending
from the Wound through the Arteries; and thereupon it is by Alexipharmick and
Cordial Medicaments to be defended from them, and withal strengthened. But,
that those Wounds are a long time to be kept open, this is not therefore to be
done, that so the poison may be evacuated; but that the Pus that is continually
generated from the bruised parts may be emptied forth, which is done too
slowly, in regard that in such Wounds as these there is very much of that that
is bruised. And Lastly, for what they alleadg, that in many battles the most of
those that have been wounded, either they have Died, or else they have been
preserved with very great pains and much difficulty; this did not therefore
happen, because that the Wounds inflicted by Gunshot were poisonous; (since
that in very many other battles no such thing has been observed,) but it
happened from hence, to wit, either by reason of the bad and unhealthful
Constitution of the Air; or else from the vicious and unsound Constitution of
the Body, and the great store of depraved Humors in these wounded persons; such
as is most commonly wont to be in those that follow the Camp.

But now in special, and particularly, the poysonousness of those Wounds cannot
be proved to arise either from the Gun-pouder, or from the bullet. For (as we
also told you before) neither is the Sulphur, nor the Nitre, nor yet the Coals,
all or any one of them poisonous; and therefore surely of these there can
nothing be compounded that is poisonous. And that Sulphur and Nitre may be
safely administered, appears out of Dioscorides his 5. B. and 83. Chapter and out
of Hippocrates, in his B. of the Nature of Women; and others, both Ancient and
Modern. Now the kindling and inflaming of these, and the Fire following
thereupon, would rather dissipate this poison (if any such were present) then
any ways produce it. Neither do those that make this powder stop their Mouths
and Nosethrils, by reason of any poisonous quality that it has, but to keep
out the powder, that is otherwise very troublesome when it gets into the Mouth
of Nosethrils: neither yet do all that make powder stop the aforesaid places,
although some do for the reason I have given you.

And moreover, much less can this poysonousness be produced from the Lead. For
although it being long detained in the Body, and there resolved, like unto
other Metals, (if it contract any rustiness) it may possibly do hurt: but yet
nevertheless, that in this its moment any passage through the Body there should
be any poison imprinted by it upon the Body, this can no way be. And (as we
told you above) these bullets have sometimes been known to lie in the Body for
many years together, without any inconvenience or hurt: yea and moreover, from
lead there are many very useful Medicaments to be made, for External Ulcers.

But this we easily (and of our own accord) yield un^o, and readily grant them;
that those Bullets, as also all other Weapons, may be infected with poison. For
although the Lead be thick enough, yet nevertheless, since that Iron that is
yet far more solid may be infected with Poison, why may not Lead also be
poisoned? Now that Iron may be infected with poison, there is no doubt at all
to be made; the truth whereof is sufficiently testified by the Histories (both
Ancient and Modern) of those Nations that as yet use Arrows. And this we are
assured of by Dioscorides (in his sixth Book, and 21. Chapt.) and by Paulus
Aegineta, (in his sixth B. and 88. Chap.) and by Virgil, (in the tenth B. of
his Aeneids, and elsewhere) as also by Ovid in his 3. B. de Tristibus. And of
this there is no question at all to be made. But here lies the question,
whether or no every Wound inflicted by the bullet out of a Gun be poisoned; and
this I deny. And therefore, like as we cannot truly conclude, that because that
Wound which is inflicted by a poisoned Sword poisoned, therefore that all
Wounds inflicted by the Sword are mortal: so also we can no more rightly and
truly conclude thus, if there be some cerrain Wounds made by Gun shot, that are
poisoned, therefore they are all such. Neither is there any reason, why any one
(with Paraeus in his 10. B. Apologism 2.) should think, that there is m Fire
power enough (and more then enough) to dissipate all the strength of the
poison, if any should chance to be poured upon the bullet. For (as we shall
afterward prove) and as even Paraeus himself grants, those bullets out of
Guns can by no means get any such great heat, as that thereby (like as by Fire)
the poison (if any such there be present) may be dissipated and consumed.

But now, in what manner these bullets may be infected, whether only by being
anointed, (as Paraeus is of opinion) or else by an infusion of the very
poisoned substance it self (which he denies) of this I dispute not. And yet
nevertheless, I do not think it a thing altogether impossible, that some
poisoned substance (if not vegetable, yet Mineral) may be given, which by
infusion may be mingled together with the Lead, and there remain. But I shall
not contend at all in the maintaining of this my Opinion, neither shall I take
much pains to discover whether there be any such, yea, or no.

And whereas they would by the instance they give of the Lightening prove their
opinion; we answer that there is not so great a resemblance between the
Lightening and the Report or blow of a Gun, as they think. For indeed that
there is oftentimes in Lightening a certain kind of poysonousness, it cannot
be denied. But in the blow or Noise of a Gun there is no such thing, as we have
before already proved out of its Composition. Neither does any flame from the
kindled powder penetrate unto the Wound it self; but whatsoever the bullet does
it performs by its violence and motion, after the manner of other things that
are cast forth with violence, as Arrows, and Stones cast forth of slings. But
now, for what reason things thus cast forth by a violent and vehement motion
should work such effects, here is no fit place for me to dispute. And if there
be any resemblance at all between the Lightening and Guns, this likeness is
rather in the Fire from the Gun-pouder being kindled and cast forth, then in
the Leaden bullets.

And Lastly, Their telling of us that in some certain battles such as have been
wounded by these kind of Bullets they have most of them died of their Wounds,
neither does this prove the poysonousness of these Wounds. For neither does
this happen in all battles, (as we likewise told you before) but very many have
been Cured and recovered of the most dangerous and desperate Wounds. And this
if it shall sometimes happen, it is to be ascribed either unto the Malice of the
enemy, infecting these bullets with poison, or else to the ill disposition of
the wounded bodies, or lastly, even unto the vicious Air it self. For it is a
thing well known, that the Bodies of Soldiers (by reason of that ill course of
Diet they keep) are very much disposed unto the Plague, and other Diseases: in
whom Wounds, if any happen unto them, may easily prove Mortal; like as the
Wounds of Hydropick and other Cacochymical persons are wont to be very
dangerous. And there is likewise no doubt to be made, but that the Air becoming
impure and corrupt, both by the unsesonableness of the weather, the Crazy
Constitution of the year, and the impurities, and nastiness that always
follows the Camp, may cause the wounds to be the more dangerous. And evermore
in such like Wounds the ill disposition of the Bodies, and the Vicious
Constitution of the Air, bring more danger unto the party, then in other Wounds
inflicted and made without any bullet. For in these latter there is no such
great need of suppuration; but in those other Wounds that are not made without
much bruising, there is altogether great need of Suppuration, and Suppurating
Medicaments. Neither without these can such Wounds by bruising be any ways
Cured; which said wounds in Bodies that are ill disposed do very easily get a
putridness; which the fevers that follow, and the bad Symptoms are easily able
to excite. Neither indeed is this any new kind of wound. For although that the
invention of Guns, and this casting forth of the Leaden bullets be new; yet the
manner of the wound is not at all new, (as being well known both unto
Hippocrates and Galen) to with, Contusion, or bruising. And yet nevertheless our
expert Surgeons do not it rest themselves in the alone use of Suppuratives,
but if there be any fear of a putridness nigh at hand, which may very easily
produce a Gangrene, they then use the Aegyptiack Unguent, and other Medicaments
that may prevent and keep off the Gangrene; as we shall anon have occasion to
speak further hereof, when we come to show you the Cure; which yet
notwithstanding ought so to be ordered and contrived, that they may not
altogether hinder the suppuration; since that no wound made with Contusion or
bruising can possibly be healed, unless that which is bruised be converted into
Pus.

Now as for that other Opinion of those who assert that there is a burning or
Empyreuma conjoined with these wounds, neither have these any firm Reasons to
ground their opinion upon. For that our German Physicians and Surgeons call
these their Medicaments that are in these wounds at the very first administered,
Pulver le schung, that is, Extinguishers of the Empyreuma o^ burning that
happens from the Gun-pouder; this is grounded upon a false supposition; for
they who at first gave this appellation unto these Medicaments did falsely
believe, that there was an Empyreuma joined with these wounds, and that this
Empyreuma or burning was first of all to be extinguished. But now all those
Medicaments perform nothing else, but that they either turn into Pus all that
in the wound that is bruised, and so hinder and prevent putridness; or else
they keep off, and turn away the inflammation, if there be any nigh at hand.
Now that these suppurating Medicaments differ somewhat from those suppurations
that are wont to be administered in other Wounds and Ulcers, there is no wonder
in this: For above, (in the first Part, and 16. Chapt. and likewise a little
before, in the 18 Chap. of this fourth Part, touching a Wound with Contusion)
we told you that in Contusions those hot and moist suppuratives have no place
at all, but that from the use of them a putridness and oftentimes also a
Gangrene is thereupon excited; and that therefore those Medicaments that were
more drying, and such as resist putridness (provided, that in the mean time
they likewise strengthen Nature in her generating of Pus) are necessarily
required.

But now the Reasons they alleadg for this their Opinion have in them very
little of solidity. For first, whereas they assert that those bullets are as it
were fired by the Gun-pouder when it is kindled, this is false; and above by
those Arguments we brought for the third Opinion, it was sufficiently proved,
that those bullets are no ways heated and set on Fire by the said Gun-pouder.
And then furthermore, whereas they think that those bullets are made hot by
their violent and swift motion, (and to prove this, they Cite Aristotle, as a
witness on their side; for Aristotle indeed, in the place before alleged,
writes, that motion is wont to set on Fire both Wood and Stones, and even Iron
it self; and this he confirms by experience;) unto this we thus reply; that
this may be done, there is a necessity that there be two hard and solid bodies
long rubbed hard one against the other. But that Lead, or any other Metal,
should by their motion through the Air become very hot, and that it should
hereby be set on Fire, this was never yet taught us by experience. For if this
were done, then Arrows also (that oftentimes are pointed with Iron or Brass
points, we call them Arrow Heads) being shot through the Air ought to become
hot, and likewise to be fired. But now, as for what they say in the third
place, to wit, that by these bullets thatched Cottages and other Houses have
been set on Fire; this we grant to be true, if any flame (which together with
the bullet is sent forth of the Gun) touch the House; or if there be any kind
of Fuel, or Combustible matter fit to feed the Fire, tied and fastened unto
the bullet, as Incendiaries are wont to do. But if it be from that flame, or
from fiery matter: and if the bullet only touch the straw neither it, as
neither Wool, nor Hurds, nor Gun-pouder it self can be kindled; as before we
told you in the Arguments that were brought for the third Opinion.

Neither is there any place here for that distiction of Quercetan, (which he
has in his Sclopetarius or Gunner) where he writes that if that bullet be
sent forth of the Gun at a distance, and a great way off, or else that it hit
any part that is covered with Clothes, that then the Wound is without an
Empyreuma or burning: but if the Wound be inflicted by such a bullet out of a
Gun nigh at hand, or if it light upon a part of the Body that is naked and
bare, that then the Wound may have Joined with it a heat and burning. For
although that the flame from the kindled Gun-pouder, breaking forth of the Gun,
may near at hand hurt the beard, and the Hairs of the Head, or likewise the
Clothes; yet notwithstanding it is altogether a thing incredible, that the
flame by that small Wound of the Skin (through which the bullet penetrateth into
the Body) should together with the bullet break in, and pierce so far into the
Body. Neither does there appear any difference between Wounds made by bullets,
whether a far off, or night at hand, but only this, that the Contusion is
greater and more grievous that is caused by a bullet shot forth nigh at hand
(in regard that it strikes with a greater violence) then the Contusion or
bruise that comes from that bullet that is shot at a great distance, and
strikes more weakly. But Fourthly, As for what concerns the Symptoms that
appear in these Wounds; we answer, that all these do not proceed from any
Empyreuma or burning, but from the Contusion; and they appear also in those
other Wounds in which there is present no Empyreuma, nor burning, at all. And
that at length about the ninth day the wound appears to be in a better
condition, and what is corrupted begins to be separated; this happens not
only in Wounds with burnings, and where there is an Eschar; but also in
Contusions; since that a certain space of time there ought to be, wherein that
which is battered and bruised and corrupted be turned and converted into Pus.
Neither is that to be accounted for any true Eschar, that these men take for an
Eschar in these kinds of Wounds; being that it is no ways hard, as an Eschar
is; but flesh greatly bruised, which forthwith dies; whereupon it likewise
becomes black; and yet nevertheless, it is sometimes likewise discolored, and
made black by the heat of that Gun-pouder with which the bullet it foul'd and
sullied.

By all which it may sufficiently appear, The Nature of Wounds inflicted by
Gunshot.
what the Nature of these Wounds is; to wit, that it is only with some notable
Contusion and tearing of those parts through which the bullet passes. And
although the part may close at Hand, and at a near distance, be burnt by the
flame of the inflamed Gun-pouder, yet this appertains not unto the Wound it
self; neither is the part burnt within. And we likewise grant that these
bullets may possibly be infected by poison; but this is no way essential unto
these wounds but a thing merely accidental: like as, if any one shall be wounded
by a poisoned Sword, this poisoning is no way of the essence of the Wound.

But that which has deceived all those of this Opinion, is this, that other
Symptoms happen unto these wounds, and that these wounds require another kind
of Cure then those Wounds that are caused by Arrows. But these ought better to
have considered, that there is a very great difference between those wounds.
For Arrows are sharp, and they make a wound by Cutting; but those bullets are
round and blunt, and therefore they hurt by breaking and bruising; upon which
there easily follow a Corruption of the bruised part, and very ill Symptoms.

The Differences.
The Differences of these Wounds are taken. 1. From the greatness of the Wound;
to wit, that some are great, some but small, some superficial, others more deep.
2. From the part affected; that sometimes only the Flesh and the Skin are
wounded, but sometimes the Nerves and Tendons, Yea and the greater Vessels are
broken, Yea and the very bones likewise are broken and shattered. 3. Another
Difference is from the manner, that a Man is sometimes wounded only in one part;
and sometimes the whole Body, or some one part thereof is wholly shot through:
and sometimes also the bullet passes quite through the part, and then at other
times it sticks yet still in the part: and sometimes only the bullet
penetrateth into the Body; but sometimes again it carries along with it into
the Body some of the weapon, or some thing else through which it passes.

Signs Diagnostick.
There is no need that I declare unto you those signs by which these wounds in
general are known; seeing it will be sufficient to know that the party was
wounded with a bullet shot forth of a Gun. But now what parts they are that are
Wounded, this is to be discovered either by putting in the Probe; or else it
may be known from the very Situation of the parts, with the which Anatomy will
acquaint us. If the Nervous parts chance to be hurt, this the pain will
manifest. But whether or no the wound be poisoned, this is known by the
Symptoms following thereupon; to wit, if the color of the flesh be more Wan
and Leaden-coloured then it was wont to be; if there likewise happen an
extraordinary heaviness and sluggishness of the whole Body; if there be a
trembling and palpitation of the heart, Faintings and Swoundings, and other
such like Symptoms as these, and that there be no other Cause appearing from
which such Symptoms might proceed. Which notwithstanding even the very
consideration of the bullet (if it be there present) will sufficiently teach us.
For if the bullet differ from all the other things in color, or in any thing
else, there is then great cause to suspect its being infected with poison: and
this is confirmed, if the bullet being put into a hot fire, we take good notice
whether or no there exhale from it any thing that is black and stinking, or
else whether the bullet it self being again cooled, there stick any thing unto
the outside of it, and change its color

It is known that such a Wound as this will degenerate and turn into a
Gangrene, by the slow Maturation and generating of the Pus; by the
extinguishment of the fresh and flourishing color of the part, and its
inclining unto a yellow, and Leaden color; by the remitting of the pain
without any apparent cause, and by the ceasing of the beating, and by the
stupidity of the part, and by other like signs of the Gangrene, such as we have
above shown unto you, in the second Part, and 19. Chapter.

Prognostics.
But now, that we may not here again repeat those Prognostics which they have
in common with other Wounds, and which we have declared unto you above, in the
third Chapter.

1. All those Wounds, since that they have Joined with them an extraordinary
and notable Contusion, they are therefore far more dangerous then those Wounds
that are inflicted with a Sword or Dart. And therefore (as we may observe) of
these Wounds made with the Sword, (as to instance, the Wounds inflicted on the
Belly, Guts, and Bladder) many have been recovered; but it is a very rare thing
for any to be cured of those Wounds that are inflicted by Gunshot.

2. But although that those Wounds be far more dangerous then the wounds that
are inflicted by the Sword; yet notwithstanding we must not rashly forsake the
Patient, and give the Cure over; seeing that even here Nature is likewise wont
oftentimes to work miracles as in were; and it has been observed that very
many of those that seemd to have been near unto the Grave, have yet
nevertheless recovered, and done well: and Histories to this purpose we very
frequently meet withal, and they are well known: and Guilhelmus Fabricius
gives us likewise a very notable Observation, and a singular way of Curing
these kind of Wounds; as we may find it in the third B. of his Observations.

3. If there be many (and those the more noble parts) that are wounded,
bruised, and torn; and especially if withal the Bones be any of them broken and
impaired, the Wound is then so much the more dangerous, and the more difficult
to Cure.

4. And hitherto are to be referred those parts that can easily draw the
principal parts into a consent with them; such as are the Joints, as also the
great Vessels wounded; from which there arise not only Vapors, but likewise
vicious and corrupt Humors; which being received and communicated unto the
Heart do easily excite both Fevers, and faintings; and the Syncope, yea and
also the Fluxes Diarrhaea. And this Ambrose Parry observed in Count M^nsfield,
who (as this Author relates in his tenth B. and 12. Chap. and in his 16. B.
and 49. Chap.) having received a Wound in his left Arm, out of it Nature sent
forth by the Belly a Purulent and stinking Sanies or thin Excrement. Yea and in
other Wounds also it sometimes happens, that both Blood and Sanies is emptied
forth by siege, (that is, by the Belly,) and likewise by the Bladder; like as
Ambrose Parry has an instance and example of this thing, in the alleged 16.
B. and 49. Chapter. As I have also given you the like example in the second B.
of our Practice, Part 2. Chap. 16. Quest. 5. where I likewise treated of the
way by which this may be done.

5. If such Wounds befall a Cacochymical Body, they are much more dangerous then
if they happen unto a sound Body: from whence it is, that in Armies (in which
Epidemical Diseases are wont to reign and rage) most of those that are thus
wounded die of their Wounds. Yea and otherwise also in Camps those Wounds are
dangerous, and become more difficult to Cure; in regard that the Air is for the
most part infected with the Nastiness and Defilements of the Camp; and that
Soldiers (for want of better food, and fit wholesome drink) for the most part
use a very bad and corrupt Course of Diet; eating any meats whatsoever that
come next to hand, and drinking filthy and corrupt waters.

6. Those wounds wherein the bones are broken are far more dangerous, and
difficult to Cure, then those without this Fracture of the bones.

7. These kind of wounds if they be inflicted by a poisoned bullet, they are
indeed then greatly dangerous, and for the most part Mortal, and more
especially if they penetrate unto the interior parts. And yet oftentimes
notwithstanding those wounds that are but small to see to do yet kill and
destroy the Patient.

The Cure.
These kind of Wounds have especially three indications. The First is this, the
drawing forth of the bullet, if it as yet stick in the part; The Second is, the
converting of the battered and bruised flesh into Pus; and the Third is that in
common with all other Wounds, to wit, that the Wound be filled up with flesh,
and then at length shut up with a Cicatrice.

Of the drawing forth of the Bullets.
And First of all therefore the Bullets are to be drawn forth of the Wound; and
this is to be done either at the very first dressing; or if it be not then fit
to be done, or that it cannot then be done; we are then to do it at some other
time during the Cure. Now the bullets are wont to be drawn forth the same way
they went in, and likewise that way whither they tend: for if the bullet shall
penetrate very deep, so that it be found to be nearer unto the opposite part,
and that through the Skin and the Flesh lying underneath it may be felt; then
the part being opened by an incision, the bullet is by it to be drawn forth.
But if the bullet shall not pierce so deep that it may conveniently be drawn
forth on the opposite part; then the searching Instrument being put into the
Wound that way the bullet went in, the bullet is to be sought for, and it being
found, we must then attempt to draw it forth by a fit Instrument; which are
various, and very different in their length and breadth.

Now there are these three things required in this extraction or drawing forth
of the bullet. The First is, that the way be sufficiently opened by the
Instrument. And then Secondly, that the bullet be laid hold on. Now the
Instrument takes hold of the bullet, either as a pair of Cizers, or else as it
fasteneth it self (in its extreme part, or point) into the bullet; either when
it comprehends it within its Cavity; or else when it lays hold thereon by
its extreme part, made like unto a Saw. And from hence there springs a great
variety of Instruments; of the which some lay hold on the bullet, and draw it
forth as they are fastened into the bullet: and others of them Comprehend the
bullets, as they are broader and hollow at the end; and others, as they are in
their extreme parts notcht and made like unto Saws; of which some are straight,
and others somewhat Crooked, according as the Wound is in its progress either
straight or oblique. And Thirdly, the Bullet being laid hold on by the
Instrument it is by the Surgeons hand together with the Instrument to be
drawn forth. The Instruments that are fit for this purpose we may find extant
in Paraeus his tenth B. and 14. Chapt. in John Andraeas a Cruce, and Guilhelm.
Fabricius, in his. 1. Cent. Observat. 88. where he shows us a very easy way
of drawing out these bullets with Instruments there described and delineated;
and by a new invention of his own he makes that known common Instrument in the
form of a Wimblet, more apt and fit (then it was before) for the drawing forth
of these Leaden bullets. For whereas if the Common Wimble be fastened in the
Bullet, the said bullet may easily be stirred and turned about together with
the Wimble: which to prevent, he first of all puts down (very gently) a pipe of
Silver, or Iron, or Brass, polished and made as smooth as possibly may be, and
then anointed with the Oil of Roses; and this he thrusts down even as far as
the bullet. And then after this he conveyeth in another pipe or little Cane, at
the one end toothed, or like unto a Saw; and so indeed, that the teeth thereof
pass from the left unto the right, and that they may hindea the bullets being
turned about when the Wimble is fastened in it. And then at length by this
Second pipe the Wimble is let down; and when it shall be found to be
sufficiently fixed in the bullet, then the Wimble with the Bullet (and both the
pipes) is to be drawn forth. But if the bullet cannot be found out by the probe
or searching instrument (as it happens now and then in wounds when they are
very deep) then the Wound is a long time to be kept open, and suppurating
Medicaments to be made use of; and the Member is so to be placed, that the
bullet may fall forth of it by its own weight. And so sometimes we have known
it, that Weapons or bullets that have layn hid for a while in the body, they
have at length (in the progress of time) either been drawn forth by the help of
Art, or else they have been expelled by Nature. Unto Nature therefore (if the
bullet cannot be found out) the whole business is to be committed; and the same
is likewise to be done, if there be any danger at all in the drawing of it
forth, and the rather, in regard that leaden bullets may lie long, and be
carried about in the body, without any hurt or detriment at all unto the
Wounded party; which cannot be said touching Iron or Brass bullets, which
because that they contract a Rustiness, they will not suffer the Wound to be
healed.

But yet nevertheless, if the bullet stick fast in any Noble parts or that part
that may easily draw the Noble part into a Consent with it, and that by reason
of the Wound in it self the Patients life seem to be much endangered; the
Surgeon ought not in this Case so much as to attempt the drawing forth of
the bullet, since that by this means he cannot bring any help at al unto the
wounded person, but may very easily hasten on that death, which the wound of it
self would have brought upon the Party.

But then it is not the Bullets alone that are to be taken forth; but because
that by means of these oftentimes the spills or splinters of Wood, Paper,
fragments, and pieces of Arms, and Garments, and other things of this nature,
are violently carried into the wound; al these therefore are in the first place
to be drawn forth, and indeed this extraction is most fitly put in practice in
the very beginning, and so soon as ever the Wound is made, in regard that the
pain is as yet but little, and so likewise the inflammation is not so great as
afterward. But yet nevertheless, if such things as these cannot be drawn forth
at the first dressing of the Wound; this is then to be done in the following
dressings.

Of those Medicaments that are necessary for the Wounds inflicted by Gunshot.
And indeed, it may likewise verry well be, that in these wounds there may be
need both of venesection and purgation. But since that neither of these is
proper unto the Wounds we are now treating of, but common unto them with other
wounds, those things that we spoke before on this subject touching wounds in
general, may likewise here take place.

And therefore our first and main care must be, that what is bruised may be
turned into Pus, and that it may be separated from the sound flesh and the
sound parts. But in regard that the bruised parts may easily receive and gain a
putridness, and that there may be great danger of a Gangrene nigh at hand,
those ordinary and common digestive and suppurating Medicaments that are made
use of in other tumors and wounds, here simply have no place; especially if any
of the Nervous parts chance to be bruised; which cannot well bear nor admit of
such kind of moist and simply Oily and fat Medicaments, and require those that
are dryer; but such are to be made use of that do in very deed make for the
turning of the bruised flesh into Pus, and yet not produce any putridness.
Which Medicaments have withal a virtue likewise to mitigate and moderate the
pain. Quercetan (in his Sclopetarius) that he might the better prevent al those
inconveniences that are wont to proceed from the use of common suppuratives,
unto every ounce of these Suppuratives or Digestives he adds one dram of
precipitate Mercury. But I conceive that great caution is to be had in thus
doing; and that nothing is to be done rashly. For though where there is present
a putridness, and fear of a Gangrene nigh at hand, I do not at al dissuade the
admixture of the said precipitate Mercury; yet nevertheless I say, that in all
wounds whatsoever inflicted by Gunshot this is not either Necessary, or always
safe, since that experience testifies, that many such wounds have been cured
without the admixture of Mercury; and there are many other Medicaments more
safe, that may prevent and keep off this putridness. And if the Nervous places
chance to be wounded, this Precipitate Mercury may very easily occasion an
extraordinary great pain.

Ambrose Parry received (as a great secret) this following Liniment, or Balsam,
from a certain Surgeon, Famous by reason of that happy and succesful way he
had of Curing these Wounds by Gunshot.

Take Oil of white Lillies, or violets, four ounces; in these Oils let two
young Whelps (as young as you can get them) be boiled, until their very bones
be dissolved: after this add of earthworms washed in Wine, one pound; Boil them
together, and let them be strained without any strong expression; and unto the
straining add of Venice Turpentine three ounces; Spirit of Wine, one ounce;
mingle them and make a Liniment; which has in it a wonderful virtue in
mitigating of the pain, and ripening the Pus.

This is likewise singularly useful,

Take Oil of Lin-seed, and Oil of white Lillies, of each three ounces; Unguent
Basilick, one ounce, and mingle them.

And very useful likewise is the Oil that is pressed forth of Hemp Seed. Or,

Take Oil of Hemp, and of Lin-seed, of each four parts; Honey, one part; Alum
half a part; mingle them over the Fire. Or,

Take Oil of Hemp, one pound; of Lin-seed, three ounces; Juice of Plantane and
Nightshade, of each a sufficient quantity; and boil them, until the Juyces be
confumed. Or,

Take Oil of Hemp, and Flax, of each three ounces; Oil of Roses, one ounce; Oil
of Mastick six drams; Oil of Camphire half a dram; boil them together, and let
them be well mingled, and used warm. Or,

Take Oil of Flax, and of Hemp, of each four ounces; of white Lillies,
Camomile, and Roses, of each three ounces; Oil of Turpentine, one ounce; mingle
them, and let them melt together. Or,

Take Turpentine four ounces, Frankincense and Mastick, of each three drams;
Myrrh, one dram; Oil of St. John's Wort two ounces, the Yelks of two Eggs,
Saffron a little, and mingle them. Or,

Take Honey and Turpentine, of each four ounces; Alum and Crocus Martis, of
each two drams; Roots of round Aristolochy, poudered, and Aloes, of each half
an ounce; and mingle them. Or,

Take Turpentine and Honey, of each three ounces; the Yelks of six Eggs; and
boil them to the Consistence of a Liniment.

If there be any fear of putridness, (as nigh at hand) then these things
following are to be made use of.

Take Oil of Hemp, Liquid pitch, and Turpentine, of each two ounces; Oil of
Roses, Mastick, Frankincense, of each one ounce; Alum half a dram; Galbanum,
Nitre, Salt Armoniack, of each one ounce; Verdigrease, Oil of Earthworms,
Powder of Earthworms, Oil of Turpentine, white Vitriol, and Camphire, of each
one dram; Oil of Lin-seed, two ounces; mingle them, and let them melt over the
Fire. Or,

Take Oil of Hemp, and of Flax, of each one pound; Salt Armoniack, and white
Vitriol, of each half an ounce; Vernish, three ounces; mingle them over the
Fire. Or,

Take Oil of Flax, and Oil of Hemp, of each six drams; Salt Armoniack, and
white Vitriol of each half an ounce; Treacle and Mithridate, of each two drams;
let them melt together over the Fire. If there be yet a greater fear of
putridness, and a Grangrene, then there may be some Mercury Precipitate added
unto the former Ingredients. As,

Take the greater Basilick Unguent of Mesues, two ounces; fresh Butter one
ounce; Mercury Precipitate two drams; and mingle them.

But then that the afflux of the Humors may the better be prevented, Defensives
are to be applied unto the more remote parts, from which this afflux may
happen. As,

Take Bole-Armenick, and Dragons blood, of each one ounce; Frankincense and
Rose flowers, of each half an ounce; the whites of three Eggs; mingle them with
as much Oxyrrhodium as will suffice; and let them be put upon the part in a
remote place.

Or else let those parts be anointed with the following Unguent.

Take Oil of Roses, Oil of the rind of Elder; and of Mastick, of each two
ounces; Bole-Armenick half an ounce; the Santaline Unguent one ounce; Vinegar
of Roses as much as will suffice, and mingle them.

Neither will it be amiss, to lay on some Cataplasm upon the wounded part it
self, that may cherish the hear of the part, help forward the suppuration, and
prevent putridness. As,

Take Marsh-Mallow Roots one ounce; the greater Consound six drams; flowers of
Camomile, Melilote, and St. John's Wort, of each half a handful; Wormwood three
pugils; boil them to a softness, and then mash them together; after this, add
of Barley Meal, and Bean Meal, of each one ounce and half; Wine as much at will
suffice; boil them again, and make a Cataplasm.

Whether the Seto may in this case be administered.
But now touching the Application of these Medicaments we are likewise to give
you notice of this that it has been in use with some, that if the bullet have
wholly penetrated through any member of the Body, in so much that the wound
appeared on both sides, they then administer their Medicaments by the Seto or
Setaceum, made of Hemp, Flax, or Silk, which the Germans call Durchzug; and as
often as they open and uncover the Wound, drawing about the Seto this way and
that way, they remove it, and anoint it with a new and fresh Medicament. But in
regard that in this manner and by this means the passage forth of the Pus is
stopped up, and a pain excited, it is apparent, that the use of these Seto's is
not safe enough; since that the same may likewise be performed by Tents put in
on both sides; and that Wounds which appear on one side only may be cured
without any use of these. But yet nevertheless, the Penecilli or Tents
themselves ought not to be over thick, lest that they hinder the issuing forth
of the Pus, and cause a pain.

How often these Wounds are to be opened.
And indeed, it will be sufficient at the beginning that the Wound be dressed,
and bound up nce a day only, in regard that then at the First there is scarcely
any thing in the Wound that will require Evacuation. But so soon as ever the
Pus begins to flow, it is then to be opened and dressed twice a day; and
when it flows in that abundance, that unless it be often evacuated it may
cause great grief and pain to the wounded person, then it will be requisite
likewise to open and cleanse the Wound from the Pus or corrupt purulent matter,
three times a day. But when the Pus begins again to be diminished in its
abundance, it will suffice then twice a day to open and cleanse the Wound. And
at length, when there flows forth very little of the said Pus, and that the
Wound begins to be filled up with flesh, it will then be sufficient to open,
cleanse, and bind up the Wound once a day, as at the first. But First of all,
we must endeavor that (here) there may be a passage opened for the Sanies, or
thin Excrement, to flow forth, which in these Wounds is in great abundance
heaped up, and gathered together, by reason of the Contusion of the parts, as
also because of the fragments of the bones that Nature endeavors to expel:
and this may be performed by Tents, that (if need require) may be hollow. And
if Splenia (as they term them) or Linen thicker then ordinary, three or four
times doubled, be imposed upon the bottom of the sinus; and that afterward the
Pus and Sanies be pressed forth by a harder and closer binding, this will very
much advance and help forward the flowing forth of the said Pus and Sanies.

But there is sometimes so great an abundance of the Sanies gotten together in
the Wound, and the Sinu's are so deep and winding, that the Sanies cannot all
of it either flow forth, or be pressed forth of the wound: and therefore then
the Sinus is to be cut, that so the Sanies may flow forth, and the Sinus may be
cleansed.

Neither are the vulnerary potions here in this case altogether useless and to
no purpose; for in regard that they cleanse the Ulcers, and free them from the
filth of the Excrementions Humors, and cause that all things in the Wounds that
are from without (and Heterogeneous) may by Nature the more easily and sooner
be thrust forth of the said wounds; if there be need of these potions in any
other kind of Wounds, then certainly they are here most of all necessary. But
touching these vulnerary potions we have spoken before, in the eleventh Chapter.

After that Concoction begins now to appear in the wound, (which seldom
happens before the third or fourth day (in regard that by reason of the
vehement Contusion of the part its heat was greatly weakened, and the spirits
exhausted) and when there is now appearing neither any notable pain and
Inflammation; and that which is bruised is for the greatest part turned into
Pus, then the Wound is to be cleansed, filled with flesh, and at length shut up
with a Cicatrice. And the truth is, when the wound is once become pure and
clean, then it is very necessary that flesh be generated, because that the
bruised flesh is all of it converted into Pus, and so the wound must
necessarily become hollow.

And indeed as touching Cleansers these ought to be either weaker or stronger,
Cleansers.
according as there flows forth a greater or less abundance of the Pus, and
according as the Wound is either more pure and clear, or else more foul and
polluted. As,

Take the Decoction of Barley, the Juice of Plantane, Smallage, Agrimony, and
the lesser Centaury, of each one ounce; boil them, and in the end add, of
Turpentine, three ounces; Honey of Roses, two ounces; Frankincense and Mastick,
of each one dram; Saffron, one scruple; and mingle them. Or,

Take Meal of the bitter Vetch Orebus, one ounce and half; Frankincense, and
Orrace Root, of each six drams; Juice of Smallag^; four ounces; Honey as much
as will suffic^; Mingle them over the fire, or,

Take The Meal of Barley, and of Lupines, of each one ounce: Frankincense,
Myrrh, Aloes, of each half an ounce; the powder of Orrace Root two drams; Juice
of Smallage and Wormwood, of each three ounces; Turpentine two ounces; Honey one
ounce: let then be boiled unto the consumption of the Juices. If the Wound be
fouler then ordinary, you may then add some of the Aegyptiack Unguent. As,

Take The Meal of the Vetch Orobus one ounce; Myrrh, and Frankincense, of each
half an ounce; Turpentine and the Juice of Smallage, of each two ounces;
Unguent Aegyptiack half an ounce; Mingle them.

If the Sinus be very deep, it will be good then to wash it with the Decoction
of the lesser Centaury, Horse-tayle, the greater Consound, Birthwort, Orrace,
Frankincense; this Decoction must be made with Wine, adding thereto a
sufficient quantity of Honey.

But then for the breeding of flesh, Medicaments that breed flesh.
let the Medicaments that were before propounded be made use of. And this
following is likewise very useful in these Wounds.

Take Oil of Mastick one ounce and half; Rosin of the fir tree, one ounce;
Manna Thuris (or the fine flouer of Frankincense) half an ounce; the herb
Horstayl, Tormentil, the greater Consound, St. John's wort, Plantane, and
Betony, of each half a handful; Earthworms washed in Wine two ounces; Wine as
much as will suffice. Boil then until the Wine be consumed: and afterward
strain them, with a strong expression and squeezing of them; and then add of
Wax and of Goats sewet, of each four ounces; Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick, and
Aloes, of each half an Ounce; Mingle and make an unguent, which may be laid
upon the Wound; and this Unguent may be covered with the Emplaster Diapalma. If
the Wound be infected with poison, then the Wound caused thereby is to be
referred unto the poisoned wounds; touching which we shall speak further in the
following Chapter.

But if the wounded part begin once to be taken with a Gangrene, then the cure
is so to be ordered as we told you before, in the last Chapter of the second
part, touching a Gangrene.

But now this is one thing that especially renders wounds inflicted by Guns
difficult to be cured, Wounds with a fracture of the Bones.
when in the Arms, the thighs, and the Ankles, bones are broken; yea and many
times shattered into diverse fragments; in which, since that for the most part
the Nervous parts are hurt, when these come to be purged from these fragments
of the bones, there will from thence arise most sharp and acute pains,
convulsions, yea and the Gangrene it self, after all. Which if it happen, the
Common Surgeons frequently hasten all they can to the amputation and cutting
off of the whole Member. But although notwithstanding, that this may sometimes
be done; yet nevertheless this is not to be put in practice so long as there is
any the least hope left of a Cure; seeing that Nature is wont even in these
wounds also to work miracles as it were.

The way of Curing is the same as of fractures with a wound; of which we shall
treat further in the next part, to wit, the fifth, and the Second Chapter. The
first and main care therefore must be, that the great fragments of the bones be
restored again unto their places, and that they may be there Joined together:
But yet nevertheless in administering of the splinters (which are otherwise wont
to be applied in the fractures of the bones) there ought great caution to be
had; since that by the use of them there may easily be excited a pain,
Convulsion, Inflammation, and at length the Gangrene it self; unto which
Maladies these Wounds are otherwise obnoxious; like as also those Glutinating
Cataplasms, (which stick so close and fast unto the part, and bind it so
straightly together) have here no place; neither are they rashly and
inconsiderately to be made use of, because that they bind together and
streighten the part, and thereby cause pain. It is therefore most convenient,
that after the bones are again composed and conjoined, the Member be placed and
fastened in a thin plate of Lead, or in a skin moystened, or with those slivers
or chips that wheel-wrights (while they hollow the holes of their Carts and
Wains) cut forth with the hollow Auger or Wimble, after they have been first
moystened with water. For all these things as they hold the broken part
together, so they do it in such a manner, that they may notwithstanding be bent
as much as you please, that so they may not cause any pain.

But now in the stead of those Cataplasms there may be laid on some Emplaster
or Cerote. As,

Take Rosin and Wax, of each half a pound; the powder of the barque of the teyl
tree, one ounce and half; Turpentine two ounces; Bole armenick one ounce; the
Juice of the herb Storks bill, or Cranes bill two ounces; boil them to the
Consistence of a Cerote. or,

Take Mucilage of the Root of the greater consound, the Gum or Juice that
sweats out of the Apple tree, of each three ounces; the Juice of the greater
Comfrey, and Bole Armenick, of each an ounce and half; the Juice of Cranes
bill, six ounces; the powder of the rind of the Linden or Teyl tree two ounces;
the yelks of twenty Eggs, Turpentine half a pound; the oil of Earthworms three
ounces, mingle them.

You shall have more of these prescribed, blow; in the fifth part, touching
Fractures.

The Diet.
Let the Air be dry; and in other Respects temperate; and rather inclining to
heat, then cold. Let the Patients food be sparing; and yet nevertheless, there
is here also a regard to be had unto the Patients strength, and his accustomed
Diet: and as in all other, so especially in this kind of Wounds, his Meats must
be of a good Juice: but he ought carefully to abstain from all those meats that
yield a naughty and corrupt Juice. Let the Patient altogether forbear the
drinking of wine, unless he has been much accustomed thereto: for whosoever he
be that has wholly accustomed himself to the drinking of wine he will hardly
away with the drinking of Water, in case Beer should be hard to come by. Let
the Wounded person likewise carefully shun all occasions of Anger, abstain from
all over swift and violent motion of the body; in regard that rest ( as
Hippocrates in his Book of Ulcers teaches us) is the most fit and requisite
for all that are wounded, and on the contrary, all labor hurtful. He must
likewise avoid Venery, by keeping himself from women's company. And in a word,
if ever there be need of an exact and accurate Diet in other wounds; then
certainly the most exact Diet that may be is much more especially required in
this kind of Wounds.

Chap. 21. Of Poisoned Wounds.
TOuching those poisoned Wounds, you are to understand that these poisoned
Wounds require a peculiar kind of Cure by themselves; whether it be by poison
put upon the bullets, Arrows, Darts, or whatsoever other kind of poisoned
Weapons; or else by the biting of any living Creature, as a Dog, or a fierce
and raging Wolf, or some other poisonous Creature; or else by the blow of a
Scorpion, Aspe, or any other venomous Creature whatsoever. And the very truth
is that those wounds that are thus inflicted by the biting or strokes of
poisonous Creatures (whether wild beasts or any other) they do more hurt by
their venomous quality then by the Wound it self; which for the most part is
but slight, and of no great moment; whereas those Wounds that are inflicted by
poisoned weapons do not only hurt by their poisonous quality, and by virtue of
the poison wherewith they are infectted, but they are likewise oftentimes very
dangerous simply as they are Wounds.

We must not here pass over in silence that Disease which is contracted from
Scarifications; The Moravian Disease.
some have called it the new disease of Moravia, and the sickness of Brunna;
because that it first of all began to show it self at Brunna a town in Moravia,
in the year 1577. touching which Thomas Jordan has published a special
Treatise, which Johan. Schenckius has inserted in the sixth Book of his
observations. And touching this same disease or plague, Johan. Sporischius has
written a Tract, and inscribed it, of the Symptoms of Scarification. And Job.
Crato likewise makes mention of this same Disease, in his Epist. collected by
Scholtzius, Epist. 139. The Sum of the whole business is this in brief. Al
whosoever they were that in the year 1577. on St. Lucies day (from what
follows notwithstanding I Collect this, that not only those that were thus
scarifyed on the first day of Winter were taken with this Malady; but that all
likewise that made use of these Scarifications from that first day of Winter,
even unto the vernal or spring Solstice) went into their public Bath at
Brunna, and had these scarifications administered to them, they instantly seemed
to be taken and surprised with this Malady. Neither did they yet presently
perceive the hurt and mischief thereof, although that forthwith there appeared
some certain signs of the disease, now gotten into them. There were some that
had the disease lying hid, and not discovering it self for the space of Eight
days; in others the Malady lay concealed a fortnight, and in others during the
whole time of their courses; to wit, according to the strength both of the
Malady, as also of the party now affected therewith: But at length it
manifested it self publicly. In the mean time those that were taken with the
disease were observed to be affected with an universal kind of sloth and dull
sluggishness; and being thus taken with sloathfulness they became lazy, and
altogether unfit and indisposed for the discharge of their Callings and wonted
business; and they were likewise Melancholy, and of a sad countenance. The
Native fresh color of their face was suddenly turned into a paleness, the
Vigor and quickness of their eyes into wild and fierce looks, there appearing
in them a deformity with a dun and duskie Circle as it uses to be in women
that have their Courses upon them. And then it soon discovered it self by
manifest and apparent signs. After the application of Cupping glasses, they
were immediately invaded by an extreme great and incurable heat; and after this
there followed filthy imposthumations, and putrid rotten Ulcers, flowing with
Sanies and foul black gore-Blood: and round about there appeared also certain
pushes at broad as the Palm of the Hand, together with other running sores; out
of which when they gaped, and were opened either with the Needle, or
Medicaments, there issued forth a thin pituitous or Phlegmatic matter, wheyish,
and rotten, as also a snotty Sanies; and in others this thin pituitous matter
was likewise sharp and corroding: then the Flesh al of it that was comprehended
within the Circumference of the Cupping-Glass being corroded and putrefying
sent forth a stinking savor, such as is wont to arise from the Telephian
Phagedaenical Ulcers. Where it was worth observation, and to be wondered at in
the very beginning, that of so many Cupping-Glasses as were affixed (some
having had ten or there about, and others also not above three of these
Cupping-Glasses fastened and affixed unto their Flesh,) only one of them, or
two at the most, of all these, brought forth any of the said filth and
Corruption; the Mother in Law of one Laurentius a Tailor only excepted, who of
fifteen that were applied, had three that produced of the aforesaid
impostumated matter. You might have seen some of them with their whole bodies
all overspread with Pustules or Pushes (as we call them) their Face deformed,
their Countenance sad and dejected, their looks terrible and frightful, their
Back, Breast, Belly, Feet, even all places from the Head to the Foot of them,
polluted and defiled with a scurfie scabbiness, and with Crusty Ulcers lifted
up a little above the Skin, as broad at the Nail of ones Thumb, with a red
Circle, and a white superficies and outside. And out of these Ulcers also did
continually run a kind of Fat liquor, and other Excrementitious filth and
corruption, that did more resemble the thin and clear Sanies, then the thicker
Excrement that we call Pus. Yea and moreover, the scabbiness being removed and
cured, there still remained certain black spots, somewhat differing from those
that appear in the Impetigo and the Vitiligo, which are of a dark, Leaden, and
Duskie color. In the progress of the Disease there grew together in the Head
certain Callous or hard Crusts, which being with the greatest pain broken or
diffected did sweat forth a kind of matter not unlike unto Honey, and very
tenacious (such a kind of Juice as we may see to destil from those Trees that
bear a fruit like unto the Pine Apple) a certain substance (I say) thick and
clammy, and therefore an Argument of the ripening and withering away of the
phlegm. These sordid and filthy impostumes (they being indeed of the worst sort
of all others) were no sooner thoroughly cleansed and purged with a great deal
of trouble, and much difficulty; and no sooner were those parts grown together
with a little flesh brought over them, but out there breads a new Symptom. The
Limbs of the whole Body, the Arms, Shoulders, Shoulder-Blades, Elbows, Calves
of the Legs, Ankles, and bottom of the Feet, they were all extremely twinged
and pulled with a certain kind of pricking, like unto stings; and as if they
had been sawn assunder with some Iron Instrument. The members were all of them
so heavy by reason of their weight, that they needed something to underprop
them, and bear them up: yea and many of them also that had a palsy threatened
unto them were fain of necessity to be born up, and carried upon men's
Shoulders: And yet for all this they had no rest day nor night, being wracked
with continual and incessant pains. And these tormenting pains were not for a
day or two, but they lasted commonly for the space of a whole month. And the
Head likewise that was not free. For besides the Achores above mentioned,
together with the Gummy and Callous risings therein, (not unlike unto great
warts) it was grievously infested with vehement pains (and especially about the
hinder Region thereof) which by reason of the weakness and decay of the Parties
strength, as also through the want of due rest and sleep, caused many of them
to be Mad; which said Madness of theirs left them not until for a long while
together very much of the aforesaid purulent snot and filth (of a most
offensive and stinking Savor) had run forth from the Head by the Nosethrils.
And all the whole time that the Disease had its course they took no pleasure at
all in the gifts and comforts of Ceres or Bacchus, that is say, they were not
at all delighted with their Food, whether Meat or Drink, They abhorred likewise
and shunned all manner of converse with others, either out of shame, or else for
Anger and Indignation, when they beheld themselves (without any desert on their
part, as they thought) quite over spread with a horrible and Contagious
Disease, and of which they had small hope to be recovered. This Disease
continued the whole Winter long, even until the spring Equinoctial, that is,
the Suns Entrance into the sign of Aries; about which time it manifestly
declined, and was Judged to be quite ceased about Easter; because that after
that time there was none found to be wholly overspread with this strange and
(until then) unheard of Disease.

As touching the rise and original of this Disease, there were two Opinions
especially. For some there were that thought it to be a new kind of the French
Disease, by Contagion* or infection propagated in the hot House or Stove of the
Bath: but others conceived that this poison was communicated by the
Scarification, The Chief Magistrate of the Town made a very diligent and strict
enquiry as touching the Cause of this Disease; but he could find very little
or nothing of a certainty. Johan. Sporischius (in his Tract before alleged)
admits of neither of these Causes before mentioned: but he conceives that this
Malady had its original from a Pituitous and Phlegmatic Cacochymy, heaped up in
the Body by the unhealthy Constitution of that year; and withal that overmuch
and Unseasonable Scarification drew these vicious Humors unto the Scarified
places. And that he may the better prove this, he writes many things touching
the Situation of this Town, and concerning the Diet, and the Diseases of the
inhabitants: and from all these put together he proves that there was
collected great store of this Phlegmatic Humor.

And the truth is, that it is not altogether so plain and evident, from whence
that Disease was at first contracted. For if it had its original from
Scarification; then the Cause is not evident, wherefore this infection
continued only from the Winter until the vernal or Spring Aequinoctial, and no
longer (unless happily any one will render this for a cause, that after this time
none durst by reason of the fear they apprehended of a danger, make use of
these Baths, or else because that this Bath was almost destroyed, and then
again renewed) and why all the parts unto which the Scarified Cupping-Glasses
were affixed were not exulcerated. For (in the Histories of the infected)
Thomas Jordanus takes notice, that a certain person who had five of these
Cupping-Glasses affixed unto several places of his Body, yet that only two of
all those places, (to wit, the hinder part of the Neck, and the Region of the
left Loyn) were exulcerated; and he tells us likewise of a certain
Maidservant that had seven of these Cupping-Glasses applied unto several
parts; of all which, the Skin was exulcerated only under one of them, to wit,
that which was affixed unto the right Shoulder Blade: and there he assures us
that the very same happened also unto many others. But now, this seems to
make very much against those who will have this Malady to proceed from the
vicious conflux and storing up of the Humors, to wit, that there being at that
same time three public Baths at Brunna, they only were infected who made use
of Scarification in that Adams Bath, which ought likewise to have happened
altogether alike in them all, if the Disease had its original from the vicious
Humors gotten together in the Body. But the opinion of Sporischius (as he
determines that this affect proceeded from the pituitous or Phlegmatic Humor)
does no way deserve that any assent should be given unto it. For it easily
appears unto any one that well weighs the History, and considers the
Symptoms of this Disease, that the Cause of this Disease was from somewhat that
was poisonous.

And yet nevertheless the Second opinion seems to me the more probable. For
(like as Crato takes notice, and gives us to understand) since that there was
not any one infected besides those that used Scarification, (and that also in
this Bath only, and not in any other) it is therefore very likely and most
agreeable to the truth, that by cuts and wounds inflicted by Scarification
there was some kind of poison derived unto the Body; whether this poison were
imparted to the Body by the edg of the Penknife infected, or else by the
Cupping-Glass, or by some poisonous Vapor of the Bath, or from the Water, or
by whatsoever other means it were. For it is a thing generally well known that
Arrows are by many Nations infected with Poison; which might likewise as well
be done in the Penknife wherewith the Scarification was made, whether this came
to pass by the Malice and wickedness of the keeper of the Bath, or else by his
carelessness and want of Circumspection; whiles that with the very same Knife
with which he Scarified some impure person, he likewise Scarified others, who
were thereby infected; seeing that it is a truth very well known, that the
opening of a Vein has oftentimes fallen out very much amiss, that has been
performed by the same Penknife wherewith another man's Ulcer has been opened.
This poison might likewise be communicated unto the Scarifying Knife from the
Hone or Whetstone, (upon which these Instruments are wont to be rubbed hard,
thereby to have an edg set upon them) if from the Vapor of the Bath any filth
and Malignity should chance to stick unto them. There might likewise some
contagion cleave fast unto the Cupping-Glasses, that are not always wiped and
made clean with that care and diligence as they ought to be. And Lastly, it is
not altogether impossible that the Vapor of the Bath might insinuate it self
into the Skin newly Scarified; or else into the water with the which the
Scarified places are washed: which said Vapor is not evermore pure, but is
sometimes defiled and infected by the sweatings, and filth, that come from
diverse persons. And that which also makes much hereunto, may be this, that
from those very Stones upon which the water is poured forth for the heating of
the Stove or hot House there is lifted up great store of Vapors, which are not
always p^re, but oftentimes very ill disposed, by reason of the filth and
pollutions of the Bath, and the perpetual moystness of the place.

Another History of the like affect.
And in this opinion I am confirmed by a History of the like Scarification, that
not many years since happened in Franconia; the History we have extant in the
2. B. of the Medicinal Epist. Sect. 6. of that Eminent and Famous Physician,
Dr. Gregorius Horstius; by which it appears that persons infected were al
overspread with pustules or pushes, and as it were Cancerous Ulcers, not only
in the Scarified places, but almost all the Body over; they suffered also very
extreme pains of the Limbs, (pains as if they would have even broken the
bones,) whereby the Diseased persons were so greatly weakened that they were
not able to raise them out of their Bed without the help of others, and by
leaning upon them. But to conclude: this Malady altogether proceeded from the
Malice and evil practice of the wicked Bath-keeper, who (as there we may find
it extant in his own confession) three or four times a week was wont to rub the
Herb Aconitum upon the whetting block of Wood (being covered over with Leather
or a Skin,) with which he was accustomed to sharpen the edges of his Penknifes;
as also the powder of the Metalick Cadmia, such as is dug out of the Earth;
or the powder of the stone Cobaltum, and Rats-bane; he confessed likewise that
he rubbed upon his scarifying Knives the powder of Locusts; and that he also
dried Toads, and afterward macerated the powder of them in Water; which said
water, together with the powder, he poured out upon those Stones upon which (in
the time of bathing,) the Water was wont to be poured forth; for the heating of
the Stove or hot House, into which they entered when they went out of the Bath.

Signs Diagnostick.
Poisoned Wounds if they be inflicted by poisonous Creatures, this will appear
by the relation of the sick person; and even by this it will be known, that
those Wounds proceeded from such kind of Creatures, because that they are
envenomed. But if the Patient be wounded with a Dart, or any other kind of
Weapon, or a Leaden bullet, this is known by the extreme great sense of pain
and pricking that is felt in the wounded place; and by this also, that the
Natural color of the wounded part is quite altered and changed, degenerating
into a Wanness and Leaden color, or blackness; and that instantly upon it
grievous Symptoms (for which no Reason can possibly be given) do follow upon
the Wound; and that in the whole Body there is perceived and felt, sometimes an
extraordinary heat and burning, and sometimes a kind of stupidity and great
streightning of the Heart, and sometimes the trembling of the Heart, together
with dangerous fainting and swooning Fits.

For so soon as ever the poison is received in by the Veins and Arteries, it
immediately diffuseth it self throughout the whole Body, and oppugneth the most
principal members, and especially the Heart, (as it is the Nature of all
poisons so to do) from whence diverse Symptoms are excited. And these indeed are
the more general Signs of a Poisoned Wound; unto which afterward (according to
the Nature of each Poison) very many other Symptoms do adjoyn themselves.

Prognostics.
1. Every Wound that is inflicted by any poisoned kind of Weapon, or by the
biting, sting, or stroke of any venomous wild Beast, is far more grievous and
dangerous then that Wound which is free from Poison. And a small Wound likewise
when it is thus Poisoned may (and often does) bring Death: whereas otherwise
great Wounds may be healed.

2. And indeed by how much the more for number, and greater for danger, and
contumacious the Symptoms are, and unyielding unto the remedies administered
(though never so fit and proper) by so much the more dangerous they are, and
for the most part deadly. But if the Symptoms be but few, and those not very
grievous, and such as are mitigated by the Remedies administered, there is then
so much the greater hope of Recovery and safety.

3. By how much the Poisoned Wound is nigher unto the Heart, by so much the
more dangerous is it; and so likewise for that wound that is near unto the
Brain.

The Cure.
It sufficiently appears what Indications a wound, considered as a wound,
points out unto us, and supplyeth thus withal; and it is likewise
sufficiently manifest (by what has hitherunto been said) how it is to be
cured. But now if we look upon it as poisoned, then we are to endeavor in the
first place, that this poison may not penetrate unto the more interior parts,
especially the Heart; and then in the next place, that its power and strength
may be broken and weakened by Alexipharmick Medicaments, which we commonly term
Counter-Poysons. And therefore first of all, we ought carefully to heed whether
any part of the poisoned Weapon yet stick fast within the Wound. For indeed all
our attempts of curing the Wound will be frustrated, unless the weapon be drawn
forth; and therefore we must labor that with all possible speed it may be taken
forth by the operation of the hand: but if it cannot thus be taken forth, then
together with the emplasters which have a power in them of calling forth the
poison, we are to mingle with them those things that are able to draw forth the
Weapons and all other extraneous bodies out of the Wounds; touching which we
have spoken above in the eighth Chapter. And then moreover, that so the poison
may not penetrate unto the more inward parts, especially the heart, first of
all (as Celsus in his fifth Book, Chapt. 27. teaches us) that member is to be
bound up upon the wound, but yet notwithstanding this binding must not be
overhard and straight, lest that the member should hereby be benumbed, and lose
all its sense and feeling; or that (which sometimes through the unskilfulness of
the Surgeons comes to pass) it should be taken with a Gangrene. Then the
poison it self is to be drawn forth, and called out unto the more external
parts. The Ancients to extract and call forth the poison, were wont to appoint
the sucking of the wound; and they who performed this office they termed
Psylly; and they thought that these had a kind of propriety of attracting and
drawing forth the poison by sucking, and also of resisting the said poison;
whereas the truth is that it was only to show their boldness and
adventurousness in thus doing; touching which Celsus in his fifth Book, Chapt
27. thus writes: but if this indeed (says he) be not done (that is, if there
be want of a Cupping-glass, or the like) then a Man is to be provided, who may
suck the poison out of the wound. Neither indeed have these men (whom they call
Psylly) any more special and peculiar knowledge then others; but only a boldness
and confidence confirmed by much use and practice. For the Poison of a serpent
(as likewise some certain poisons that Huntsmen use) hurt not by their taste,
but only they impoyson a Wound. And presently he adds; and therefore (says he)
whosoever he be that following the example of those Psylly, shall suck the
Wound, (and yet would both himself be safe, and so also preserve him for whom
he does this office) let him carefully attend this advice (that so he perish
not) that he admit not of any part of the Ulcer into his Gums, or his Palate,
or any other part of hit mouth. Now the truth is that the poison is most safely
drawn forth by Cuppingglasses especially in the bittings and strokes of
venomous Creatures; which said Cuppingglasses will draw forth the poison the
more powerfully, if unto them there be added and administered Scarifications;
and especially if they be made deeper then otherwise upon slight occasions.
After the removal of the Cuppingglasses, then the Gutts of Hens or other birds,
or (if you please) the bodies of them being cut in the midst, the parts whiles
they are yet hot may be laid upon the Wound. And if the place be not nervous,
(in the bitings of these poisonous Creatures) the flesh round about it is to be
pared away, yea and quite cut off: And Galen relates of a certain
vine-dresser, that being bitten by a viper he presently with the pruning hook
cut off the singer that was bitten; and so by thus doing escaped and avoided
all the danger. It will likewise ^prove to very good purpose, if the wound be
washed with Vinegar or Wine in which Treacle has been dissolved; or with the
Decoction of Camomil-flowers or the root of the sour or sharp dock Yea and in
the bitings of poisonous Creatures (if the place that is wounded be not
Nervous) a most effectual remedy is the Actual cautery, that by the force and
power of the sire does both consume the poison, as also prevent and hinder the
penetrating unto the more internal parts. But if the sick person will not admit
of an Actual Cautery, then the potentiall Cautery, or caustic Medicaments are
to be administered. And care is likewise to be taken that the Eschar may fall
off as soon as may be; and if it fall not off soon enough of it self, the wound
is to be freed therefrom with the penknife; neither is the ulcer immediately to
be glutinated; and therefore an Onyon with Salt, or Wild Garlic, or Rue, are to
be imposed upon the wound.

And these very things not withstanding (although that Caustic Medicaments
have not been premised) are to be imposed upon the Wounded or bitten place, for
the drawing forth of the poison; As for instance, the Onyon, Wild Garlic,
Rue, Doves dunge, Wallnuts, with Garlic, Salt and Honey, (as the Author of the
Book of Remedies against poison, tells us in his fourth Chapter) which
whether they be taken inwardly, or only outwardly imposed, are able to free
from poisons (whether inwardly drunk, or else caused and brought upon the body
by the bitings and strokes of venomous Creatures) St. John's wort, Swallow-wort,
Elecampane, Raddish, Dittany, long and round Aristolochy. Very useful also are
Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Rue, Gentian, Vipers grass and indeed all kind
of simples whatsoever that attract and draw poison, either by a manifest
quality, as heat; or else by an occult quality, and peculiar likeness. Touching
the former this is to be noted, that in those parts that are Nervous we are not
to wake use of Medicaments that are over sharp, lest so while we seek to avoid
one danger we fall into another as great, in exciting both a pain and a
Convulsion. And therefore in such parts the safest way will be to apply those
Medicaments only that draw forth the poison by the property of their substance.
Neither likewise ought the use of sharp Medicaments alone to be long continued;
but after they have been continued for a day or two, then after others more
mild are to be imposed.

The Compositions are very many and various. Treacle is of singular life, if
mingled with other Medicaments: which that some should therefore have in
suspicion in regard that by reason of the coldness of the Opium it may possibly
drive the poison inwardly, this is indeed a most ridiculous conceit, in a time
of so much light from the truth. Or else drop in Matthiolus his oil (which he
describes in his Comment upon the preface of the sixth Book of Dioscorides) or
that of the great Duke of Hetruria; or the Juice of Vipers Grass.

Guido in poisoned Wounds commends this Emplaster.

Take Galbanum, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Asafaetida, Myrrh, Pepper, Sulphur, of
each one ounce and half; Doves dung, and Ducks dung, of each two ounces;
Calamint and wild Mint of each one ounce; Let the Gums be dissolved in Wine;
and mingling them all with honey and old oil, make an Emplaster. or,

Take Turpentine, the Water or Juice of Swallow-wort washed, two ounces; the
propolis of Beehives two ounces, Matthiolus his Oil half an ounce; Oil of
Turpentine two drams, Precipitate a dram and half; Water Germander, and the
Root of Vipers grass, of each four scruples; mingle them and make an unguent.
or,

Take Ammoniacum, Galbam^m, Bdellium of each half an ounce, Styrax Liquid three
drams; Myrrh and Sulphur that has not felt the fire, of each two drams;
Euphorbium and Precipitate, of each one ounce; Matthiolus his oil, and oil of
Turpentine, of each two drams; let the Gums be dissolved in scillitick vinegar,
and then mingled with the rest; and then with as much Propolis and Ship pitch
as will suffice; make a Cerote. or,

Take Root of Dragon wort, and Round Aristolochy, of each one ounce; Tabaco,
and Water Germander, of each one handful; Frankincense, Myrrh, Brimstone that
has not been near the fire, of each half an ounce; Dittany of Crete, Angelica
Root, and white Dittany, of each three ounces; Oil of Turpentine two ounces;
Wax and Ship pitch, of each as much as will serve the turn; Mingle them, and
make an Emplaster. or,

Take Tops of St. John's wort two handfuls; Carduus Benedictus, Water Germander,
Tobaco, Swallow wort, of each one handful; Rue one pugil, Root of Dragon wort
two ounces; Sour or Sharp dock, an ounce and half; let them be well bruised
together, and then applied in the form of an Emplaster. or,

Take Oil of Olives, and Honey, of each two ounces; Quick lime two drams, Roots
of round Aristolochy one dram: make a Cataplasm, or,

Take Onyons, Garlic, Leeks, of each three ounces; boil and bruise them, and
then add the root of Dragon wort, and Asphodill, of each two drams; Treacle
half an ounce; Oil of Scorpions one ounce, and mingle them. Or,

Take Ashes of the herb Trinity or Hearts ease, and Quick lime, of each two
ounces; Wormwood, Round Aristolochy, Rue, Garlic and Oynons, of each one
ounce; Figgs twenty Number; Goats dung, Oil of Euphorbium, and Oil of
Scorpions, of each three ounces; Honey one pound and half; Wine Vinegar one
pint; Mingle them, and make an Eplaster.

More of these you shall have in the following sixth Book, touching the bitings
of venomous Creatures.

And withal, (even instantly upon the receiving of the wound) there ought to
be administered Alexipharmaca (or counterpoysons as we properly call them) that
may Guard and fortify the heart, from the poison, and may expel it unto the
outward parts. And indeed if the kind of poison be known, we are then to
opposse and counter work it by its own proper and peculiar Alexipharmaea;
touching which more in the following Book. But if the species or kind of the
poison be hid and unknown to us, then these universal or general Alexipharmaca
(to wit) the Bezodi stone, Treacle, Mithridate, Treacle Waters, and others of
this kind, (every where commonly known) are to be administered.

And with the very same the Heart is likewise outwardly to be fenced and
guarded; and therefore not Treacle and Mithridate alone, but chiefly the Oil of
Matthiolus, is to be anointed upon the Region of the Heart, and the Arteries;
as also the Oil of the Great Duke of Hetruria.

The poison being drawn forth, we are then to hasten unto the Curing of the
wound; for which purpose this Unguent is very useful.

Take Wax. black pitch, Rosin, the soft fat of a Ram, and old oil, of each
three ounces; Galbanum, six ounces; Make an Unguent.

And afterward, the Cure is to be performed as in all other Wounds.

But if we come to understand from the dangerous symptoms, (as cold sweats,
faintings, swoundings, and the Syncope) that the poison has now already
penetrated unto the more inward parts of the body, and especially the Heart,
then the wounded part is not much to be troubled and tampered withal, but in
this case we ought rather to take care for the preservation of the whole body,
but more especially the Heart.

Chap. 22. Of Particular Wounds.
ANd hitherto we have been treating touching Wounds in General, as also
touching the general Cure of them. But now in regard that the Cure of wounds is
very different and various, according to the variety of the parts that are
wounded; we should now therefore come to speak of them more particularly, (and
in special;) to wit, of the wounds of each single part; But since that we have
already handled them in our former Books, therefore here again to treat of them
will be a thing altogether needless and superfluous. For in Book 1. Part. 1.
Chapt. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25. We treated of the Wounds of the Head and Brain.
Ibid. P. 3. Sect. 2. Chapt. 9. Of the Wounds of the Eyelids: Chap. 10. Of the
Wounds of the Eyes. Ibid. Sect. 3. Chapt. 5. Of the Wounds of the Nosethrills.
Ibid. Sect. 5. Chapt. 3. Of the Wounds of the Tongue.

Lib. 2. Part. 1. Chapt. 4. Of the Wounds of the Lips. Ibid. Part. 2. Chap. 4.
Of the opening of the vessels of the Lungs. Ibid. Chap. 11. Of the Wounds of
the Lungs. Ibid Chap. 15. Of the Wounds of the Diaphragm. Ibid. Chapt. 17. Of
the Wounds of the Chest. Ibid. Chap. 22. Of the Wounds of the spinal Marrow.
Ibid. P. 4. Chap. 3. Of the Wounds of the Heart.

Book. 3. P. 1. Sect. 1. Of the Wounds of the Oesophagus. Ibid. Chapt. 16. Of
the wounds of the Stomach. Ibid, P. 2. Sect. 1. Chapt. 8. Of the Wounds of the
Intestines. Ibid. P. 4. Chapt. 7. Of the Wounds of the Spleen, Ibid. P. 6.
Sect. 1. Chapt. 7. Of the Wounds of the Liver. Ibid. P. 7. Sect. 1. Chapt. 11.
Of the Wounds of the Reins. Ibid. P. 8. Sect. 1. Chapt. 5. Of the Wounds of the
Bladder. Ibid. P. 9. Sect. 1. Chapt. 5. Of the Wounds of the Testicles. Ibid.
Chap. 11. Of the Wounds of the Yard. Ibid. P. 10. Chap. 15. Of the Wounds of
the Abdomen.

Book. 4. P. 1. Sect. 2. Chapt. 1. We treated of the Wounds of the Womb.

Chap. 23. Of the Diseases, and Symptoms that happen unto Wounds.
And now, since that it often happens that other Diseases, as likewise diverse
symptoms do happen unto Wounds, and follow upon them; (al which yield forth
peculiar Indications, and so draw the cure to themselves; deject and weaken the
strength of the Patient, and render the Wounds very difficult to be cured, and
dangerous) we ought therefore to treat of those also; and to show you how and
by what means they are to be removed and taken way; until which be done, no
Cure of the wound is to be expected.

Of Fevers.
And indeed in the first place, it happens very often that Fevers follow upon
Wounds And therefore although I have already treated of Fevers in a peculiar
Tract by its self; yet nevertheless, in regard that it much concerns us to
know, and rightly to understand the differences of Fevers that follow upon
Wounds, (that so we may the better remove them) we will therefore herein this
place speak something of them inspeciall, and particularly.

And therefore, first of al, we are diligently to inquire what the nature of
this Fever is that follows upon the Wound, and what the Cause of it. For
these kind of Fevers are very various; some of them being every day Fevers,
having their Original from the great disturbance of the spirits, and the
boiling heat of the blood; by reason of anger, Fear, and upon all occasions of
the humors being disturbed by the motion of the body, or the commotion of the
Mind. And moreover also, Secondly, these fevers happen while the Pus (and
especially if there be great store of it) is in breeding, according to that of
the 47. Aphor. of the second Sect. Thirdly, from an Inflammation; Fourthly, and
sometimes these putrid Fevers are likewise generated from the putridness that
is in the wounded part. And fifthly, from the store of the vicious humors.

The first kind of Fevers invadeth the Patient at the first in the very
beginning; The first kind of seaver from the disturbance of the humors,
and (as I told you before) it proceeds from the passion of the mind, and the
motion of the body, and the disturbance of the blood and spirits following
thereupon. And hitherto also belongs most vehement pain, which by dsturbing
the humors, and causing restlesness, may both set on fire those humors, and the
spirits, and likewise excite a Fever.

Their Signs.
Now these Fevers are known by this, that they invade the wounded person
instantly upon the inflicting of the Wound, and together with it. But yet
notwithstanding because that the putrid Fevers may likewise sometimes invade
the person immediately, and even from the very first beginning, therefore by
what Signs these Ephemerae or every day Fevers may be discerned from the
putrid, we have told you before; and the difference will sufficiently appear
from what we have written hereof, in our first Book of Fevers, and sixth
Chapter.

Prognostics.
And the truth is, these Fevers of themselves bring with them no danger at all
unto the sick person; and yet Nevertheless, neither can they at all promise any
safety unto him, seeing that then the time of the fluxion and Inflammation,
that are wont to follow upon the Wound, is not as yet overpassed and gone.

The Cure.
But now this Fever requires not any peculiar Cure; but (if the Patient will
but only submit himself unto the strict Rules of Diet) soon vanishes of its
own accord. But yet nevertheless all the Causes thereof (if they be yet
present, or that there be any fear of their returning) are to be removed: for
otherwise they may easily draw upon the person some kind of danger. And in
regard that otherwise (about the fourth day) Inflammations and fluxions are
wont to happen; these Fevers, if they continue so long, (as until the said
fourth day) may possibly attract and augment those Evils.

And then again, while the Pus is in breeding, A Fever from the generating of
Pus:
(and especially, if there be a great abundance thereof generated) Fevers are
caused; as Hippocrates tells us, in the 2 Aphorism. Sect. 27. For then,
whatsoever over abounds in the wounded part, and cannot be changed into the
substance of the part, begins to putrefie, and there is caused (as it were)
a certain kind of boiling forth of putrefied mattier. And yet notwithstanding
Nature does what lies in her power, and what she is not able to turn into the
substance of the part, she does what she can so to work and frame it, that it
may not be altogether corrupted, but most of it turned into Pus. And therefore
from this Ebullition or boiling there is indeed a heat of the blood in the
Veins and Arteries communicated unto the Heart, which when it is thither come
it kindles a Fever, that is like unto an Ephemera (of many days) rather then
to putrid Fevers properly so called.

Signs.
And therefore the Signs of Putridness are absent, and appear not, (and so
likewise for the Signs of an Inflammation) and these Fevers invade the wounded
person at that time wherein the Pus is wont to be generated; and especially
about the fourth day. The heat is much, but withal sweet; the pulse great,
swift, and frequent. The Urine differs and recedeth but little from its
Natural state; and there is no ill and dangerous Symptom Joined together with
it, to accompany it.

Prognostic.
This Fever of it self has no danger at all in it, but soon after cease.

Cure.
And this that it may so much the sooner be done, there is a passage forth to
be made for the Pus; and this so much the more speedily, if the Pus be
contained in a more noble part, or in a part that has consent with some one of
the more principal and noble parts: and withal we are to endeavor that all the
afflux of the Humors may be hindered and prevented.

And Thirdly, Fevers from an Inflammation.
Fevers are sometimes kindled from the Inflammation that follows and
happens unto the wounded part; sometimes Quotidians or every day Fevers; and
sometimes putrid Fevers; even according as the Spirits Wax hot, and this heat
is communicated unto the Heart; and also according as the putrid Vapors
transfused into the Veins and Arteries do penetate unto the Heart, and heat it.

Signs.
Now these like Fevers are known from the Signs of an Inflammation; touching
which we have spoken in the first Part, and 5. Chapter. But whether the Fever
be a Quotidian, or a right putrid Fever, this may be known by the Signs of
them both; of which we have likewise already spoken in our first B. of Fevers;
and especially, that in the Quotidian the Signs of putridness disappear in the
Urine, whereas in putrid Fevers they appear therein. And so the heat in putrid
Fevers is far greater and sharper, then in Quotidians; and so are also the
Symptoms more grievous; and withal there is a greater dejection of the strength
and powers of the Body.

Prognostic.
Now these Fevers in regard that they wholly depend upon the Inflammation,
they are therefore greater or less, according to the greatness of the
inflammation; and so likewise more or less dangerous.

Cure.
These Fevers are taken away and Cured, upon the removal of the Inflammation,
like as al other Symptomatick Fevers; touching which we have already spoken in
their proper place. And therefore we ought in the first place to do our
endeavor, that by coolers and other convenient altering Medicaments this
Fever may be Cured; lest that otherwise a putridness be excited in the Humors;
or if there be now already present any putridness, that it may be restrained
and kept under.

And Fourthly, There happen likewise fevers unto Wounds, Fevers from the
putridness of the Humors:
kindled even by the putridness of the Humors that are in the Wound it self; as
being nearly related and allied unto those things that are raised and have
their rise from the Pus or thick purulent matter.

Signs.
Such Fevers as these are known from the Quantity and quality of the
Excrements of the wound. For there flows forth great store of Sanies, and
this resembles something that is putrid, rather than good and laudable Pus; and
it is of a various and evil color, and of a very unsavory and offensive smell.
And although there should not flow forth any great store of Pus or Sanies; yet
nevertheless if the matter that flows forth be naught and corrupt, if the
color of the part be changed, and if there be present any pain and heaviness
in the part, it is then indeed a sign and token that there is present a vicious
matter, and that it has not been sufficiently purged forth. But in the mean
time there will be present, and appear, the signs of a Fever, which will show
unto us in the Urine the Notes and Marks of putridness; or it may be they show
us none; according as the matter is more or less communicated unto the Veins,
and Arteries.

Prognostic.
And as for these kind of Fevers, they are more or less dangerous, according
as the putridness is greater or less; and likewise as it is in a part more or
less noble, and accompanied with more mild and gentle or else more sad and
grievous Symptoms; and according, as there may be made a passage for the more
easy or more difficult flowing forth of the vicious matter.

Cure.
The Cure consists in this especially, that the putridness in the part
affected be with all speed, and as much as may be, restrained and kept under,
and that by all means possible there be a way and passage made for the vicious
matter to flow forth. For the putridness being taken away and removed, the
Fever soon after easily vanishes of its own accord.

And Lastly, There is also a kind of Fever, A Fever from the vicious
preparation of the Humors.
which arises (in wounded persons) from the storing up and the great provision
that has been made of vicious and naughty Humors, and the ill preparation of
them. For if the wounded Body be impure, it may then easily be, that a Fever
may be kindled in it upon the occasion of the Wound. Now this is done in a
twofold manner, and upon a double account. First of all, from the commotion and
disturbance of the Spirits and Humors, after the receiving of the Wound. For as
in Bodies otherwise impure there are Fevers oftentimes kindled from the
passions of the mind, and Commotion of the Body, (even as we see it to befall
Women that have hard labor in Childbed) so the very same may likewise happen
in those that are wounded. And furthermore a Fever is also kindled from a
putridness in the wounded part. For as in Childbearing Women there are Fevers
oftentimes kindled from the retention of the Secundine, and the blood that
usually flows from them after the Child is born; (and this so much the more
easily, if their Bodies be impure) even so if any putridness be kindled in the
wounded part, and that the depraved Vapors communicated unto the Veins do find
any vicious Humors in these Veins, then a Fever arises thereupon. Now these
Fevers are various, (according to the different preparation of the vicious
Humors;) sometimes intermitting, and sometimes continual; according as this
treasury of the vicious Humors is laid up either without the Vena Cava (viz.
the great hollow Vein) or else sticks fast in the same; and indeed for the
most part they are Tertians either continued or intermitting, (single, or
double) and very rarely Quotidians; and most seldom, Quartans.

Signs.
These Fevers are known, in that both the heat, and the Urine, and the pulse,
do all of them discover sure signs and tokens of a putridness. But now whether
these Fevers are kindled only by the commotion and disturbance of the Humors,
or else from the putridness in the wounded part, it is known by this, to wit,
that if the Fever proceed merely and only from the Commotion of the Humors,
then such a Fever invadeth the person immediately and in the very beginning;
and there is no vitiousness or fault at all to be found in the Wound. But if it
proceed from any putridness in the Wound, then the Fever appears not
instantly, and at the very first, but after a short time; and then there are
Signs and tokens of Putridness in the Wound it self. But then for the Nature
and Quality of the Fever, it is to be known from the proper Signs of Fevers.

Prognostic,
Of these Fevers, some of them are more dangerous then other some, as we have
already told you before, in its proper place, touching Fevers: and
intermitting Fevers they are of themselves altogether void of danger; but the
Continual are somewhat more dangerous; and that likewise more or less, according
to the quality and condition of the putridness. But yet because that these
Fevers happen and follow upon Wounds, they al of them therefore bring some
danger along with them, more or less. For whereas the wounded part was weak
before, now the Fever happening thereupon increases the debility, and so
augmenteth the danger thereupon depending; and thus it may very easily come to
pass, that at the part affected there may be a fluxion excited; or else by
reason of the heat weakened upon the aforesaid Cause very many Excrements may be
generated in the part, and from hence other evils may be excited.

Their Cure.
Now as for the Cure of these Fevers; albeit that they are occasioned by the
Wound; yet nevertheless because that the vicious provision of Humors is the
principal cause of them, therefore these Fevers are to be cured in that manner
we told you of in its own proper place.

Touching the Inflammation.
Now very often there happens unto Wounds an Inflammation; and sometimes
likewise an Erysipelas. And indeed an Inflammation does most commonly (if not
evermore) follow upon the inflicting of a Wound; and more especially in the
Nervous parts; in regard that the afflux of Blood unto the part affected
stirs up and causes a pain therein; and moreover, because that the Blood
when it cannot sufficiently flow forth from thence it putrifieth, and very
easily exciteth an Inflammation, which is prevented by a due and sufficient
efflux of the Blood; touching which Hippocrates thus writes, in his B. of
Ulcers.

If there flow forth of the Wound Blood more or less, according to the strength
of the wounded person, then both the Wound it self, and those parts that are
near about it are the less troubled and affected with any Inflammation that
shall follow upon the Wound.

And therefore if there be any cause to fear an Inflammation; and if the blood
has not sufficiently flown forth, then forthwith a Vein is to be opened in the
opposite place; and the Blood is to be evacuated according to the strength of
the sick person, and as he is well able to bear it. Yea and moreover, if there
be already present an Inflammation, and that the Patients strength will bear it
(and necessity so require) Venesection and Purgation are both of them to be
administered, according as there shall be need.

If the Inflammation be excited from pain, then we are to endeavor that the
said pain be taken away, and withal that the afflux of Humors be repressed.
Avicen for this use highly commends the Cataplasm that is made of the
Pomegranate boiled in astringent Wine, then bruised in a Mortar, and so made up
into the form of a Cataplasm. There may likewise a Cataplasm be made of the
meal of Barley, of Sea-lentiles, Mouse Ear, and Oil of Roses. But if the
Inflammation be not removed by these, the rest of the Cure is then to be
performed, as we showed you before in the first Part, Chap. 5. Touching an
Inflammation.

Of the Erysipelas.
If an Erysipelas follow upon the Wound, this will soon appear from those Signs
that we gave you in the first Part, and 7. Chapter, touching an Erysipelas. And
in what manner it is to be cured, is manifestly declared by those things that
are there spoken of. And the truth is, Hippocrates (in his B. of Ulcers)
teaches us, that whenever an Erysipelas shall follow upon an Ulcer, that
then the Body is to be purged. And indeed, if it be so that Choler abound,
(lest that there should be an afflux thereof unto the Wound) it will be very
expedient wholly to evacuate the same. And yet notwithstanding, because that
the Erysipelas (which we call Rosa) has its original rather from the thinnest
of the Blood, and that part of it that is peculiarly corrupted; Sudorificks are
therefore most especially useful, as there we told you. Hippocrates was wont to
impose upon the part affected the Leaves of Woad, or the Juice thereof with
Clay. We may likewise apply unto the place affected Cataplasms of Barley meal,
and Eldern Water, and other the like, such as we have there mentioned, to wit,
in the place before alleged.

Of the Super-excrescent Flesh.
And sometimes likewise it so happens, that the Flesh becomes Luxuriant and
proud (as we term it) and grows forth beyond all reason and measure; which
hidereth the production of the Cicatrice, and its covering over of the Wound;
or at least it causes the same to be unfightly and deformed. But this
happens through the unskilfulness or want of care in the Physician, who
administered Medicaments that were not sufficiently drying. And therefore what
Flesh we find to be superfluous we must take it away, that so the Wound may be
shut up with a Cicatrice.

But now this is the work of the Physician, who is to consume the superfluous
Flesh with Medicaments that are sufficiently strong in their drying, cleansing,
and (if need so require) somewhat Corroding likewise.

But now what those Medicaments are with which this may be done, we have told
you before, in the 2. Part, and 7. Chapt. whither we refer you. Of all which
Medicaments there mentioned the most useful and principal is the Green Water
there spoken of; which both consumes the superfluous flesh, and likewise
brings the Cicatrice over the Wound when it is cured.

Of the Haemorrhage.
There happen also many Symptoms unto Wounds; which partly deject the strength
of the Patient, and partly render the Curing of the Wound more difficult then
otherwise it would have been. And first of all, there oftentimes happens
indeed an extraordinary great Haemorrhage and profusion of the Blood; which
does not only deject the strength and Spirits, (depriving the Patient
oftentimes of his Life) but it likewise very much hinders the Cure. For so
long as the Flux of Blood lasts, there can nothing at all be done in the
Cure. Now that said Haemorrhage happens upon the wounding of the greater
Veins, as also the Arteries, not only the greater of them, but the mean and
middle sort of these Arteries. But touching this Symptom we have already spoken
above in the 14. Chapter. where you may see further.

Of pain with the VVound.
And oftentimes likewise there is an extraordinary vehement pain following and
accompanying the Wound. For although there be indeed hardly any Wound without
pain; yet nevertheless very usually this pain is tolerable, and such as the
Patient can well bear. But sometimes it is vehement and altogether intolerable:
which happens more especially, when the Nerves and the Nervous parts are hurt
and Wounded: and an extreme vehement pain arising immediately upon the
inflicting of the Wound is a sure and certain Sign and token that either a
Nerve or a Nervous part is wounded.

The Cause.
Now this pain is excited in Wounds, sometimes by reason of Errors committed by
the Patient in the Course of his Diet whiles he eats all manner of bad and
corrupt food; as Cabbage and Cole-worts, salt Fish, Swines flesh, or the like;
whiles he exposes the wounded part unto the cold Air, and moves it overmuch
by exercise. And sometimes also this pain happens by the Carelessness of the
Surgeon, who administreth Medicaments that are overhot, and too sharp;
hindeth the part too hard and straight, places ^ not aright, thrusts into
the Wound Tents over long, or thick; leaves the Pus over long in the Wound,
and suffers some piece of bone to prick and molest the part that lies next
unto it. And sometimes also, without any of these Causes, a pain may be excited
by an internal afflux of the Humors; and this pain oftentimes invadeth the
wounded person suddenly, and with a certain unwonted coldness and Chilness; and
this is oftentimes a very shrewd sign of some great Inflammation instantly to
follow, or even of a Gangrene very nigh at hand; and this especially, if
together with the pricking pain there be perceived a certain heat in the Wound.

Prognostics.
Now these extraordinary and over vehement pains in Wounds are wont to be the
Causes of grievous Evils. For besides that they cause a restlesness and want of
sleep, and deject the stength of the sick person, they are likewise the Causes
of the afflux of Humors unto the wounded part; whereupon Inflammations, a
Fever, sometimes also the Gangrene, are excited and brought upon the party.
Touching which Galen also very frequently gives us notice. There is nothing
(says he) that more increases the Phlegmone then pain; as he writes in his
5. B of the Meth. of Curing, and 4. Chapt. and in the 3. B. of his Method,
Chapt. 2. and 6. By reason of pains (says he) the parts a^e troubled with and
lie under fluxious. And in the 13. of his Method, Chapt. 5. Pain, and the heat
of the member in which the Erysipelas resideth (although the whole Body be pure
and free from Excrements) become the Causes of a Fluxion.

That therefore the pain may be taken away, we are to make diligent enquiry,
and find out, whether this pain proceed from any Error and fault in the sick
person, or else from the Carelessness of the Surgeon: and if any such Cause
shall be discovered, it is to be removed before any thing else be done. But if
no such Cause shall appear, but only that something extraneous sticks in the
Wound, this is without any delay to be drawn forth. If the pain proceed from
the abundant store of the Pus retained and kept in; then a free and open
passage is to be made for it that so it may freely flow forth But if it proceed
from the overgreat Afflux of the humors (like as it is wont to be in an
Inflammation) then we are to make use of those Medicaments that restrain the
immoderat^ and excessive afflux of the humors; as also we are to administer
Medicaments both rarifying and Anodyne. And very useful here is the Oil of
Roses with the white of an Egg, and the yelk of an Egg (according as the Case
shall require) and in which Earth worms have been boiled: as likewise the Oil of
Camomile, of Linseed, of sweet Almonds, of Earth worms, and of Elder. A
Cataplasm of the Leaves of Mallows, the Roots of Marshmallows, Barley meal, Bean
Meal, and bran. But if the pain be greater then ordinary, we may then make use
of the Oil of Poppy, and of Water-Lilye; as likewise of the Cataplasm that is
made of the Leaves or Root of Nightshade, and Hoggs grease. As for Example;

Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Roses, and of Camomil, of each one ounce;
the yelk of one Egg, and Saffron half a scruple, Mingle them etc. or,

Take Root of Marshmallows half an ounce; Mallow Leaves one handful; Elder
flowers two pugills; boil them all unto a softness, and then pass them through a
hair s^eve, adding unto them the powder of Camomile flowers half an ounce;
Barley Meal one ounce; Bean Meal and the Meal of Linseed, of each half an
ounce; Make a Cataplasm hereof. Unto which (if you please) there may be added
the Oil of Roses, of Camomile, of white Lilyes, of Mastick, and the Unguent
Dialthaea.

If the pain be not assuaged by all these Medicaments, it is a sign that some
Nerve is greatly hurt. And so then the cure ought in all respects to be carried
on, as that we mentioned above in the 15. Chapter touching the wounds of the
Nerves.

Of Convulsions, and Convulsion Fits
There happens likewise now and then a very grievous and dangerous symptom
unto Wounds; to wit, a Convulsion, or Convulsion Fits, (the Latins term them
Convulsive motions) touching which symptom many are wont to treat at large,
touching Wounds. But in regard time we have already (in the first Book of our
Practice, Part. 2. Chapt. 20.) spoken enough of a Convulsion in general; we
shall here only set before you those things that are proper unto that
Convulsion which is wont to follow up on Wounds.

Causes.
As for the Cause^ of the Convulsion, Convulsions are caused in Wounds, either
from a pricking of the Nerves, and then extreme vehement pain, or else from
some sharp and Malignant, either humor or or vapor, pulling and swinging some
Nervous part, or the Membranes of the Brain: for the expulsion of which when
Nature begins to best ^ her self, the then ex^^^th this Contraction, and
Convulsive Motions. Touching which Hippocrates (in his (...) Aphorism of the
fifth Sect.) thus writes: Those (says he) that together with their Wounds
have conspicuous Tumors, their are not greatly troubled with Convulsion fits,
but they are taken with a kind of Madness. But these tumors suddenly vanishing
(if this indeed happen on the hinder part) then Convulsions and Cramps follow
thereupon. And Galen (in Art. M^dica, Chap. ^^.) says, that the pricking of a
Nerve and Tendon, (by reason of the vehemence of the sense, and because this
part is knit together with the principium, (that is, the Brain) it is therefore
very apt to excite and cause a Convulsion of the nerves, and then especially
when nothing breaths forth outwardly, the wound of the skin being closed and
shut up.

And indeed the matter exciting a Convulsion does it sometimes only by its
Atrimony, and sometimes also by its malignity; like as we see the very same to
happen in Wounds and strokes, and bitings of venomous Creatures.

Prognostic.
Now these Convulsions or Convulsive Motions are very dangerous in wounds:
touching which Hippocrates (Sect. 5. Aphor. 2.) says thus; The Convulsion that
follows upon a Wound is Mortal* and in the 5. Sect. Aphor. 3. The Convulsion
that follows upon an extraordinary Flux of the blood, (or a sighing and
sobbing upon the same occasion) is very evil and dangerous.

Cure.
But now, as for the manner and method of Curing these Convulsions, we have
showed it unto you, in our 1 B. Part. 2. Chapt. 28 and there you may see enough
hereof. And therefore here in this place we shall only give you notice of these
things following. First of al, that in Convulsions and Convulsive Motions that
happen unto Wounds (whether it be of themselves, or by Consent with some other
part, how and in what manner soever it be) we ought to have a special regard
unto the Brain, spinal Marrow, and the Nerves that proceed from these; and
thereupon we are to anoint the Neck (both before and behind) and the whole
spinal Marrow with Convenient Medicaments; such as we have already mentioned in
the place alleged. Caesar Magatus (in his first B. Chap. 77.) Commends this
following.

Take Oil of Bays, of Juniper Wood, of Juniper Berryes, Man's Fat, and Oil of
Earth Worms, of each four ounces; Oil of Rosemary flowers, Lavender flowers,
and Sage flowers, of each two ounces; Oil of Peter, and of Turpentine, of each
half a pound; Oil of Tile, and the oil of Been, of each three ounces and an
half; Myrrh, Frankincense, Ladanum, Benzoin, and Gum Juniper, of each three
ounces; Oil of Cinamom, of Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, of each one ounce and half;
Bdellium two ounces: Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Galbanum; of each one ounce; Indian
Tacamahaca, and Caranna, of each four ounces; Castoreum, and Saffron, of each
six drams; the Root of the herb Masterwort. Angelica, Valerian, Acorus, Costus,
of each half an ounce; Fat styrax Calam^te one ounce and half; the fat of a
Lion, and Bulls fat, of each two ounces; the best burning Water one quart; and
mingle them well together.

And Lastly, if the Convulsion happen from the Retention of the Pus or other
excrements; then we are to endeavor that by all ways and means a passage forth
may be made for both the thin and thick excrements and that there may be some
liquor dropped into the Wound that has in it a power and virtue to cleanse and
consume. And outwardly also there ought somewhat to be imposed that has a
power of drawing from the depth and bottom of the Wound; which kind of
Medicaments may sufficiently be known from what we have written before, and
more especially, touching the Wound of the Nerves.

Chap. 24. Whether it be lawful for a Christian by Amulets, (the Greeks call
them Periapta, we Preservatives) or else by hanging of Seals about their
bodies, or by the like means, to defend and preserve themselves from all danger
by Weapons.
SInce that there is nothing now adays more frequently practiced by Soldiers,
then by certain Amulets (or Periapta) as also by Seals and Characters, to fence
and Guard themselves against all thrusts and Strokes of Weapons, and Gunshot,
(and so to render themselves altogether inviolable;) before we end this
discourse touching Wounds, we think it not amiss (for a Conclusion) to add and
discuss this question; whether it be lawful for a Christian, and whether he
may with a safe Conscience, (and without breach of Piety) in any such manner as
aforesaid make his body weapon-proof, and impenetrable by Gunshot.

For although I neither desire to make any inquiry into the secret and private
practices of these kind of Persons, nor think it worth the while so to do; yet
notwithstanding this is a thing very well and commonly known, that these men
cannot Guard and fortify themselves from all kind of violence whatsoever; but
only against the thrusts and strokes of Swords, and other the like Weapons, as
also from Musket and Pistol bullets, so that such like Weapons, and smaller
Gunshot shall not by any means be able to penetrate their skin. But yet these
persons may by Clubs be dry-beaten, and by bullets shot forth of the greater
Guns (as Ordnance, and the like) be hurt and violated; yea they may hereby
likewise be destroyed, although it be true, that their skin cannot easily be
wounded. Yea moreover (even as themselves confess) there are some certain parts
that cannot thus be safe-guarded and preserved impenetrable and inviolable; and
more especially their Eyes. And moreover this is likewise commonly reported,
that some of them can make not only themselves, but that they can render even
the bodies of others so impenetrable and inviolable, that they shall not be
hurt by any kind of Weapons; yea that some of them are able to cause, that
butter shall not be cut, either by knife, Sword, or by hatchet. And thirdly
they report this also that such as are altogether ignorant and unwitting unto
any such practice, may likewise by others be made inviolable, and proof against
all kind of Weapons and Darts.

The various ways and manner by which some make themselves impenetrable by
Weapons.
But now they have diverse ways and means of making themselves thus impenetrable
and weapon proof, which I neither know nor desire to know. In the general, I
shall only acquaint you with one or two of those things that are commonly
carried about by them; that so by them you may likewise know how the better to
Judge of all the rest. And first of all, it is scarcely unknown to any, that
there are certain Seals or Pentacula (as they call them) that are graven with
figures and Characters, and ignorantly lettered (as Apuleius speaks) and
these are carried up and down, and by the Soldiers hung about their Necks; and
they are wont also to be bound unto their Body; that so by them they may render
themselves inviolable, and not to be hurt by any Weapons. And some there be,
that only inscribe these kind of Characters upon a piece of paper, and so hang
them unto their Bodies. And I my self knew a man, who reported that he hung one
of these sheets of Paper about the Neck of a Dog; and then he shot him close at
hand with a bullet out of a hand-Gun, and yet the Dog was not at all any whit
hurt thereby. And there are some likewise, who swallow down these sheets or
pieces of paper thus Figured and Charactered. And there is extant in a certain
public writing an instance of the like Artifice (if we may so call these
delusions and impostures of the Devil) by which a certain Gentleman fenced and
guarded his Body against all kind of Weapons. Which practice of that renowned
Commander (that so valiantly and succesfully fought many battles against the
Turks, in the behalf of the Christians in Hungary) whether it make more for his
praise or dishonor, I leave it free unto any one to Judge thereof. I shall only
say this, that oftentimes even great persons (Princes and worthies) have been
deceived in this kind, and have too incautelously given Credit unto these
Cheaters and deceivers (who go up and down selling these things, and oftentimes
putting them off at very dear rates) and have not sufficiently weighed and
considered the dangerous consequence of what they go about. And therefore, as
for the Course that these men take (seeing that it is altogether superstitious
and impious) I do not think it any ways fit for me by my writings to propagate
it unto Posterity: and yet notwithstanding, that the superstition and
wickedness of this practice may appear, I will in the general speak somewhat
thereof, a^^ delineate it in some particulars. At the sacred time of our
Saviors Nativity (or as we call it, Christmas) about midnight in a sheet of
Vellom or Parchment there are these letters inscribed. I. N. R. I. and this
same sheet of Parchment is closed up in certain bals or Lumps of Wheaten dough,
which are privily put upon the high Altar, that so at certain and diverse times
three Masses may be celebrated over them. And then one of these little balls
(with certain superstitious prayers they have for that purpose) must be eaten
in the morning; and this will for that day preserve the man safe and sound from
all kind of Wounds whatsoever.

In the same little Book, (the writing before mentioned) we are taught, in what
manner on the day any wound is inflicted, before Sunrising, the Moss is to be
taken and shaved from the Skul of one that was hanged or broken upon the wheel,
(and this with certain prayers) which if sewed into the Garment under the left
Arm-pit, and worn, will in like manner preserve the man inviolable, and not to
be hurt by any Wound.

And there are some also who Wound their Skin; and then they put upon the Wound
these kind of Parchments, or some other things Charactered (as before) and so
they Conglutinate the said wound, and close it up. And there are likewise
(without doubt) many other such like ways and means well known to Soldiers;
in the discovery of which I intend not at all to be Curious, or in the least to
trouble my self.

If enquiry be made after the Authors of these Diabolical Practices, The
Authors of this practice.
the prime and chief of them are for the most part unknown; and these things
are by the incautious Soldiers derived from one to another, and from hand to
hand. And if we should trace the Authors out even unto the very first of them,
we shall find the first Author hereof was (doubtless) some Devil and wicked
Spirit, as we shall anon show you. They do acknowledge that oftentimes hang-men
or the common Executioners are the Authors of this wicked Artifice, as being a
generation of Men for the most part much addicted unto Magic. And so the
Passavian Art (as they call it because that it first came to be known in that
Army which being raised about Passavium afterward in the year 1611. brake into
Bohemia, and took Prague, and was every where divulged up and down the Country,
and throughout Germany) at the first was communicated and made known unto the
Soldiers by the common Executioner of that place.

If you enquire into the reason hereof; they first of all pretend experience,
and they alleadg likewise great persons Princes and worthyes, who have by their
Experiments found the truth hereof, and so have left it unto us as a Probatum,
that any one may in this manner and by this means render himself inviolable and
so as not to be hurt by any kind of Weapons. And moreover, some there are that
derive the virtue and Cause of this effect from the Constellations; and
therefore it is that they teach us to make those Seals (which they call Periapta
and Pentacula) under certain Constellations.

But in very truth, we deny not this indeed, that such things as this may thus
be done, and that they have been made use of by great persons, (Princes and
others:) but the Question is now touching this, whether such like practices as
these may be wrought by any Natural means; and whether a Christian Man or Woman
may lawfully and without Impiety in this manner render himself inviolable and
impenetrable; or else whether or no whatsoever shall be done in this kind be
not done by Magic and the Diabolical Art, and by a compact with the Devil; and
so therefore that it is altogether unlawful, impious, and wicked, for any one in
this manner to make his Body impenetrable.

Thus to do simply unlawful:
In which Question we indeed defend the latter opinion;and we positively
assert, that all the power, virtue and efficacy of the Means aforesaid proceed
from a compact and agreement with the Devil, and so consequently from the Devil
himself; and thereupon that he (whosoever he be) that shall by this kind of
Means endeavor to fence and guard his Body against the violence of Weapons,
shall by thus doing attempt a thing altogether impious and unbesitting a
Christian. Reason proving the unlawfulness of thus Practice:
For First of al, most certain it is, that there is no such virtue either in
Metals, or in sheets of Paper or Parchment, of themselves and in their own
Nature; but that they perform whatsoever is done, as they are marked with the
aforesaid Characters. But now there can be no such virtue or efficacy in
Figures and Characters; and therefore it will necessarily follow, that it
proceeds from some higher power; and this must be either from God, and the
good Angels; or else from the Devil, that wicked Spirit. But it is no where
extant in Holy Writ, that ever God did (either by himself, or the Ministry of
the good Angels) work any such thing; or that he ever promised so to do. And
who is there that can believe, that such an abuse of sacred Words, and other
such like superstitious practices as have been before related, should be
approved of by those good Angels: and therefore we must believe that they
proceed from the Devil. And thus the Devil that he may seduce and withdraw men
from the Worship and Service of Almighty God, and devote them unto himself, he
makes an Agreement and compact with any one that will hearken unto him, that
if he will forsake God, and become his, he will then make him free and
inviolable from the violence of all Weapons whatsoever, so long as he shall
carry about him such like Seals (or Periapta as they are commonly called) or
shall devour the aforesaid Characters inscribed upon Paper. Unto which Compact
they render themselves Obnoxious, and give their Consents, who ever they be
that make use of the above mentioned Characters. For those Characters are the
Devils Alphabet (if I may so term it) and as it were the Military pawn and
Engagement by which he knows and acknowledges them, when they implore his help
and assistance. For albeit there are some who here conceive themselves to be
altogether free from all Idolatry, superstition, and impiety, and that they
have herein no compact nor commerce with the Devil; yet nevertheless they are
herein greatly deceived, so long as they make use of Means that were never
ordained by God, but such as are of the Devils Institution.

For there is a twofold compact with the Devil, to wit, Mediate, A Compact with
the Devil twofold:
and immediate; or explicit, and implicit. The immediate and explicit is,
when any one shall make use of means immediately delivered into his Hands by
the Devil himself. But the Mediate or Implicit Compact is then, when any
person shall make use of such means as were at first prescribed by the Devil,
but yet such as he has not received immediately from the Devil himself, but
has had them by others and from Hand to Hand delivered unto him. Both which we
find forbidden, and contrary to the Law of God, which forbids us to have
any other Gods. Neither is it any whit to the purpose, that which many object,
when they say, that it is no way probable, that compacts which others have
entered into with the Devil, the guilt thereof should become theirs, and bring
them under the like impiety; seeing (says they) that it is the consent of the
Covenanters that makes the compact: for in that Compact implicit or Mediate
(as I have said) the consent is not altogether wanting. For whereas every one
that has but so much soundness of mind yet lest him (that he knows how to
shun Rocks and avoid the pit that stands wide open, and ready to devour him)
will easily acknowledge, that those Characters or Words have no such virtue in
themselves; and therefo^^e before ever he make use of them he ought to inquire,
by what power and virtue it is that they perform what they do. Which if he
neglect to do, he then implicitly enters into a compact with the Devil, who
has made that promise that he will perform this for such as shall make use of
those Characters and form of Words according to his prescription; and so
consequently such a one cannot at al be free from impiety. And that this is a
truth those two Histories following will sufficiently make good. Martinus del
Rio in the 2. B. of his Magic. Disquisition. Quaest. 27. Sect. 1.) relates of
Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, who having at Lovain a youth boarding in his House
that was over curious and prying, it so came to pass, that during this youths
abode with him, Agrippa having at length occasion to ride a Journey far from
his home, he delivered the keys of his Study unto his Wife (whom he afterward
put away by divorce) with this prohibition and charge that she should not
suffer any to enter thereinto in his absence. But this youth having by his
importunity and earnest entreaty gotten leave to go into the study, and
lighting upon a little Conjuring book, while he was reading therein, lo a
knocking at the Study door; but the persisting still in his reading there is
another knocking heard at the Study door, which the youth still reading on and
not answering, the Devil enters in, and asks wherefore he was called; at
which the youth being astonished and so far affrighted that he could not make
any ready answer, the Devil immediately choked and strangled him For as he
that reads any thing in an unknown Language, he himself happily may not
understand what he reads which yet one that stands by may understand; so it
was here; although this youth knew not that he called for the Devil; yet
notwithstanding the Devil well knowing his own watchword, and the engagement or
Compact he had entered into, soon came upon calling.

The other History we have related by Henricus Brucaeus (in the Miscellanies of
Smetius, B. 5. Epist. 17.) which he tells us that he received from Doct.
Naevius; and that the truth of this History was there confirmed by many of the
Citizens. At Leipswich little Girl not understanding what she did by reason of
her Childishness and want of Age, whilst she was imitating all the Actions
carriage and behavior of her Nurse (which she had seen her oftentimes use in
the raising of storms and tempests) causes thunder and Lightening, by which a
village not far distant from this City was set on fire. The little young Girl
being brought before the Senate, it was there with much deliberation debated
whether they might legally proceed against her. But it was decided by the
opinions of all the Counselors there present, that they could no way proceed
against her, neither punish her, by reason of her nonage, and ignorance of what
she did. Which History does sufficiently teach us that any one may even
unwittingly, incautelously, and almost without his consent, cast himself into
such a like compact with the Devil. For when as the aforesaid Girl (although by
reason of her tender Age she understood not what she did) made use of those
Ceremonies that were delivered and prescribed by the Devil unto the Witch her
Nurse; the Devil was presently ready at hand, according to the Compact betwixt
them) and ray sed the aforesaid Tempest. Which if any one of a riper age (which
might easily understand, that in these kind of Ceremonies themselves there can
be no such power and virtue) had done, such a one (without doubt) had not been
acquitted by the Counselors, nor gone unpunished by the Senate. And therefore
we conclude that there is none (unless he be out of his wits) that will make use
of the means aforesaid; seeing that he may easily understand that such like
Ceremonies, Words, and Characters, do not perform those things they are said to
do, either by any Natural power and virtue of their own, or else by any power
given them from God, or the good Angels, but that they have this their power
from that wicked spirit. And he whosoever he be that shall make use of them
cannot be acquitted and freed from gross impiety, Magic, and Idolatry.

But whereas there are some that endeavor to derive these virtues from the
Constellations; Whether there be any virtue in the seals.
(and therefore teach how to make diverse of these Seals under some certain
position of Stars; we are therefore in the next place to examine that opinion
also.

And the very truth is that among all the Seals of Arnoldus de villa Nova, and
of Paracelsus (in his B. Archidox Magic.) there is none at all to be found that
will render a man inviolable, and so as not to be hurt by any kind of Weapons;
and therefore this invention of the Devil seems to be newer and since their
times. But now in regard that there is one and the same reason for all those
aforesaid effects (that are promised from these kind of Seals) we conceive it
therefore very fit to speak something, in the General, touching the
aforementioned Seals For if we shall (in the general) demonstrate unto you,
that these Seals have in themselves no such natural virtue or efficacy, we
shall thereby withal show unto you, that these seals likewise (that are made
use of against Wounds) have not their virtue and power from the Constellations.

That under the name of Astrology such like Magical Trumpery should be exposed
to sale, Magic.
is no new thing; for it was of old thus wont to be done in the Eastern
Countries. Touching which Pliny (in the 30. B. of his Natural History, and
Chapt. 1.) says thus. Maggick that most fraudulent of all the Arts has very
much prevayled all the world over, and that now of a long time, and for these
many Ages. But indeed there is no cause why any should admire at this the so
great authority of Magic: in regard that she alone of all the Arts, adding
unto her self and comprehending within her self three other of the most famous
and sovereign of them (and such as have the greatest command upon the mind of
Man) has reduced them into one only, to wit, her self alone. For first of all
there is none that doubts and that will not readily grant, that she has her
birth and original from Physic, and that she so crept in under a fair and
specious pretense of safety and health, as a higher and more sacred Art then
Physic it self. And so has she likewise by her blandishments and large
admirable promises added unto her self the strength and power of religion; with
which now a days mankind is so strangely blinded. And that she might the more
easily suggest these her promises, she intermingleth the Mathematical Arts;
there being none that is not very greedily desirous to know things future as
concerning himself; verily believing that these things are fetched and brought
unto him from heaven it self. And thus the senses of Men being possessed, and
lying under a threefold Obligation has increased and grown up unto so great a
height, that even at this day it is very prevalent in most Nations; and in the
East especially it has a commanding power over such Kings as have Kings for
their subjects.

And I could heartily wish that the said superstition had there only had its
residence and abode in the Easterly Countries; and that Monarchy there
perishing, she had likewise perished together with it. But afterward this
superstition became propagated likewise into other Regions. For even Galen also
(in his 9. B. of the facult. of simple Medicam. in his Chapt. of Stones, the
Jasp. tells us that it was a very usual custom even in his days to ingrave a
Dragon upon the Jasper stone, and to set and wear it in rings for the
comforting of the Stomach. And Alexander Trallianus (in his tenth B. about the
end) writes, that they were wont to carve upon the Jasper stone the effigies
of Hercules standing upright, and killing the Lion; and this they set in a Gold
ring, and wore it for the Curing of the Colic. And in the same place, he
commends as a thing sacred and not to be communicated but unto sacred
Persons, this Ring, against the Colic. On the seventeenth or the one and
twentieth day of the Moon, he appoints us to take a Ring of Iron, and to make
the Circle thereof eight-angled; and upon the Eight Angles to inscribe these
words, fuge, fuge, heu bilis: a'auda quaerebat. And this Sign or Mark
following, diagram to be inscribed in a ring to ward off colic he commands us
to write upon the head of the Ring. And in his tenth Book, and Chapt. 1.
against the Gout in the feet and toes, he commends a thin plate of Gold, in
which (the Moon then being in Libra or Leo) is to be inscribed that verse of
Homer: (...) And many more besides of this nature we likewise meet with very
frequently in Trallianus. And Paracelsus has also propounded very many of
these like Characters, (in his Book Archidox. Magic.) And yet nevertheless he
himself (in his B. of occult Philosoph. in the Chapt. of Characters) before all
other Characters, Signs, Pentacula, and Seals, he prefers two of them: one,
that wherein (in a certain figure there is inscribed the name Adonai The other
is that in which likewise (in a peculiar figure) there is inscribed the
Tetragrammick name of God, consisting of five syllables. And he writes that
these seals are very useful and avaylable against al Devils and also against
all Charms and enchantments, and that they perform things wonderful and
admirable. And therefore again I wish hearetily, and I would to God that the
said superstition which has had a commanding power over great kings in the
East who have had even Kings for their Subjects, had not likewise born too
great a sway over Christian Princes, Nobles, and great persons; or that there
were not found to be such as sold unto these Princes and Nobles those Magical
Charms and spells under the name and pretense of Astrologicall Rarities: and
likewise that these great persons would more diligently inquire into those
preservatives when they are proffered unto them: for they might easily find and
discover that those things had not so much as any probability of Reason to
ground upon. For although some have endeavored to derive the cause of these
effects from the Heavens; yet notwithstanding as for the manner how this is
done, therein they agree not; neither do they bring any thing of probability to
prove the same.

The Reconciler ( Difference 101) from that of Ptolomy, (in his Centiloquy,
that the faces of sublunaries are subject unto the Celestial Aspects, that is
to say, the species of the Living Creatures of this inferior world are subject
to the Caelestial images,) concludes and positively determines, that the
Caelestial sign Scorpio has the predominance over al inferior Scorpions, and
the Serpent over all Serpents here upon Earth.

But grant indeed that it be so, (which yet Nevertheless they have no way
proved) that these inferior Earthly Scorpions are subject unto the sign of the
Scorpion in the Heavens; yet what is all this to the Scorpion carved and
engraven upon the precious Stone? Certainly a Dog, or Scorpion, engraven or
pictured, is not of the same kind, nor under the same Genus, with the living
Creature, Dog, or Scorpion. There are others that say that this virtue is
instilled into these Seals from Heaven and the Stars; and that the Astral
Spirit that has its influence and is sent upon them, does not only accommodate
it self unto those Metals, precious Stones, and those plants; but that it does
likewise secretly intermingle it self even with their very substance; and that
in the very first Creation it obtained a Mutual and Sympathetical consent with
them, then a Familiarity, and Lastly, soon after a Continuation also with them.

But let it indeed be granted, that the Heavens and the Stars do not only (as
Erastus will have it in this Quest. Part 1. Disputat. against Paracelsus, Page
151.) warm these inferior Bodies, and enlighten them, and that in this manner
they do (as a Common and general cause) at all times produce one and the same
effect in all things here below: but let it likewise be determined, that there
are some certain peculiar Stars that work upon these inferior Bodies by their
secrets and occult influences, and that they do peculiarly affect those things
with which they have the aforesaid familiarity; and that one Star has a
familiarity with the Adamant, another with the Rose, and a third with some
other Plant: But I pray, what makes all this for the engraving and inscribing
of Figures and Characters, seeing that the Stars communicate their virtues unto
things here below in a mere Natural way, without any prescript or Artifice of
ours? And wherefore do not the Stars and Constellations infuse those their
virtues equally and indifferently into Metals or precious Stones, whilst they
are whole and entire, and before they are engraven and inscribed with any
Characters, as they do afterward (if these men speak truth) into those that
have such like Characters Carved and Engraven upon them? And certain it is,
that Paeony gathered at such a fit season of the year, as also other Plants,
and all things else whatsoever that are made use of instead of Natural Amulets,
do put forth their virtues; (and so likewise the Lodestone draws the Iron,
and is moved unto the Pole) without any kind of Figure, or Character engraven
thereon. And hereupon Galen rightly determines, that the Jasper stone has the
very same virtues, whether the sign of the Scorpion be carved upon it, yea or
no.

And Henricus Cornelius Agrippa seems to differ but very little from this
opinion, who in his 1 B. of occult Philosoph. and 33. Chap. thus writes
touching the thing in Controversy: All the Stars (says he) have their own
proper Natures, Proprieties, and Conditions; the Signs and Characters whereof
they do by their Rays and Beams produce likewise even in these inferior
Bodies, to wit, in the Elements, in precious Stones, in Plants, in Animals, and
their Members. Whereupon it is, that every thing whatsoever from its Harmonical
disposition, and from its own Star Iradiating and Darting its Beams upon it,
obtains some special Sign and Character imprinted upon it, that is
significative of that Star or Harmony; and containing some special virtue in it
self, differing from others, either in general, or in special, or in the number
of the matter praeexistent. Every thing therefore has its own Character
imprinted upon it (for the working of some peculiar effect by its own Star, and
especially by that which above all other things has the sovereign power and
predominance over it: and these Characters contein within themselves, and so
also they likewise retein these proper Natures of their own Stars, as also
their virtues and Roots, and they produce the like operations with them on
other things upon which they are reflected: and they also draw forth and help
forward the influences of their own Stars (whether Planets, or even fixed Stars
also, and Celestial signs, and Images) to wit, as often as they are wrought and
fashioned in a due and fit matter, in their own due and proper time, and with
due and fitting Solemnities. And there he also delineateth very strange and
admirable letters and Characters, proper and peculiar unto each of the Planets.
And therefore if any one desire and seek after the virtues of any Star, the
thing that is subject unto that Star is to be engraven upon somewhat that he
wears about him. As for instance, if any one desire to have the virtue and
influence of the Sun, let him then take Gold and engrave upon it the Character
of that Planet, at that very time when the virtues of the said Planet are most
strong and vigorous. But these are all merely grounded upon a false
supposition; whereas they take that for granted which indeed was never yet by
us, neither will it ever be granted unto them. For first of al, Agrippa and
others do attribute unto these Seals many such like virtues (as we may see
frequently in diverse places of their Descriptions) which in very truth cannot
be the Natural virtues of any Star. And Paracelsus (in the fourth B. of his
Archidox. Magic.) teaches us how we may make a Bodkin, and paint and inscribe
upon it certain Characters; and then he affirms that if any one shall with
Chalk make a circle against a wall, and in the very Center thereof fix the said
Bodkin, all the flies near that place will come and sit upon the said Circle,
and these remain until such time as the Bodkin shall be again pulled out of the
Wall. But let Apella the Jew believe this, for indeed I shall not.

And yet notwithstanding there are at this day those that do not only believe
this, but endeavor likewise by their public writings to persuade others
hereunto; and these conceive that this virtue is by those Characters derived
from the Constellations. But let them show us what Star it is that has this
commanding power over these Flies. Beelzebub is indeed called the god of Flies.
And without all doubt these poor Flies are more likely to obey his Commands
then the Stars. There is Another who tells us how we may make a Seal with the
Figure of old Father Saturn digging up the Earth with a Spade (which, say they,
ought to represent unto us the Planet Saturn;) and this Seal if any one shall
carry about him in his left Boot, (and why not. I pray, as well in his right
Boot, or on his Arm?) he writes that it will then so preserve a man, that he
shall suffer no hurt at all from his Horse; and moreover that it will speed and
hasten the hard labor in Childbearing Women.

And moreover how and from whence will they be able to prove that those strange
and uncouth Characters (that are to be seen in Corn. Agrippa, Paracelsus, and
others) are the Characters of certain Stars? And not Characters only, but even
other Figures also. They paint Saturn in the likeness of an old man, with a
Pruning Hook, Sithe, Spade, or Plow-share. They paint or Picture Jupiter like a
King with a Scepter in his Hand. Now what agreement is there between these
Figures and those Planets which they Represent? And what, I pray, may the
Reason be, that the Planets communicate their virtues and influences unto
Metals, only if they be engraven and inscribed with these Figures, and not with
others? And who was the first that taught us, that this Star takes a delight
in this kind of Character, and that Star in another kind of Character different
from the former? And the Reason is the same for all other Figures; touching all
which they ought to prove unto us, that these are the Figures of certain Stars.
And moreover, besides these Characters, what mean they by so many Words, which
they not only pronounce in the framing and fashioning of these Seals, but they
are likewise engraven and imprinted upon these Seals; as we may see in
Paracels. his B. Archidox. Magic. and in the Seals of Arnold. de villa Nova.

But others there are that endeavor to free themselves, and clear the
controversy, by saying, that individuals when they begin to be under some
determinate Constellation, they then receive a certain admirable faculty (of
operating, or of suffering) over and beside that they have in special, or from
the species. But let this be granted; yet notwithstanding it cannot be said,
that the precious stone, or Metal, do then begin to have their being when they
have these Characters engraven upon them; for they were, and had their being
before; and indeed their substance was likewise individual; and according also
to their own opinion, the Astral Spirit and virtue insinuates it self into
that substance wherewith it has a Sympathy. For there is, to wit, between
natural substances themselves a certain occult and secret familiarity and
Sympathy; but yet no such thing between Natural Substances and Artificial
Figures.

But others are of this opinion, that the Figure is not indeed the principle of
operation, but yet notwithstanding that it conduces very much unto the said
operation. For the conception of a deformed Figure in the mind of Man or
Woman, we see what sadness it produces unto them; and on the contrary what Joy
and cheerfulness the conception of a fair and delightful Figure and
representation causes in their Minds and Countenances. And by the Instruments
of Artificers, according to the variety of the Figures, so are the operations
various; some of them by the Saw, and some others of them by the Hatchet or Axe.

But neither is there any thing of weight or moment in this that they alleadg.
For I demand, what Beauty or Deformity there is in these Images and Characters?
And whereas fair things delight the mind while they are seen and looked upon;
how (I pray) can these things delight the mind of a Man when they are carried
and worn about him covered and seldom looked upon? And what do those various
Names, (and indeed oftentimes such as are altogether unknown to us) confer and
add unto the fair and pleasant conception before mentioned? And as for the
Instruments of Artificers, the Figure indeed makes much unto the operations
which are by a local motion; but nothing at all unto those operations that are
wrought by alterations: for in these the Figure does nothing at all, neither
can it: and precious Stones if they have any natural virtues at al in them,
they put forth these their virtues under any Figure whatsoever it be. And Galen
writes as touching the Jasper stone, in the place above alleged, that he
himself had found by experience, that the virtue thereof was still one and the
same, with, or without the Figure of the Celestial Dragon, or the sign Scorpio.

Neither yet are there any other that hitherto have been able to bring any the
least show of probability for the virtues of these Characters and Seals. And
how indeed could they possibly render any Reasons, and give us the causes of
such their absurd Tenets; whenas they write, that these Seals do not only expel
and drive away Diseases; but that some of them will likewise make a Man gracious
unto al Men whatsoever; and that others of them will procure for a man
knowledge, Wit, and Memory; others the favor of Princes; others victory in War,
and Civil Causes; others good fortune (as they call it) in Hawking, Hunting,
Fishing, and Merchandising; and that others will make friends to stand faithful
unto them; others advance a Man unto the highest Honors and preferments; and
that there are some of these Seals that will make a Man Master of his with
whatsoever it be; and I know not what other things that these Seals are able to
accomplish for him that wears them? Rodolphus Goclenius (the younger) takes
here a great deal of pains, and troubles himself exceedingly (in his Magnetic
Synarthrosis) and at length he distinguishes between these Seals; and those
whose Authors are said to be Ragael, Chael, Terel, Hermes, Solomon, these he
rejects: but there are others of them that he commends, to wit, those Seals
that are framed and fashioned under some certain position and concourse of the
Stars, and receive naturally all their virtues from the influence of these
Stars, and from the Connection and Continuation of the Natural Causes; without
any impiety, or Superstition at al. But now what this Connection of the Natural
Causes is, and in what manner these Seals and Images receive their virtues from
Heaven; these things he no where tells us; neither does he sufficiently
explain himself; only he says indeed that these things are very clear, and
sufficiently manifested by Experiments. But the very same may be said by Chael,
Ragael, and the rest of the Magitians, in the behalf and for the Justifying of
their Seals also. And who is there that now adays knows not, that even by
such like Seals very many have been made inviolable, and not to be hurt by any
Weapons? And therefore the Question is not here, what may be done; but the
Question is only from what agent these things are performed; and whether by a
Natural Cause, or by the assistance of the Evil Spirit.

But now unto any one that shall accurately and exactly and without any
prejudice weigh and consider the whole business, it will very easily appear,
that these virtues and effects cannot proceed from any Natural Cause. For two
things there are in those Seals, the matter it self, and the Characters
engraven upon it; unto neither of which this virtue can be ascribed: for the
matter is from Nature, and has in it no such virtues: and this they themselves
see a necessity of confessing.

And here therefore for the proving of the efficacy of these Seals, they betake
themselves to Amulets, and pretend the virtue of them. But be it so indeed,
that all things whatsoever are written touching these Amulets are true, (as
most certain it is that very many of them are;) yet what is all this unto these
Seals; in which if we consider the Metals, Characters, and the like, it is
without all doubt, that those things have in them no such virtues. And Paeony,
the Hoof of the Beast Alx, and the like, do show and put forth those virtues
that they have, albeit there be no Characters at all engraven upon them: and
the like also Galen (in the place before alleged) tells us that he himself had
by experience found to be true of the Jasper-stone.

And then as these Seals have not their virtue from the matter; so neither from
the Characters, that are from the Artificer; and cannot have any such virtues,
either from the Artificer, or from themselves. For why, these Characters are
from an Idea in the mind of the Artificer, which does not work any effect upon
things external, And of themselves they are nothing else but Figures. But now
there is no power nor efficacy at all in Figures for the working any effect, in
regard that they are nothing else but only qualities of a quantity. For all
virtue and power of acting is principally from substance; which by its
qualities is efficacious and operative. Action is between Contraries of the
same kind, and such are not Natural and Artificial; among which are these
Characters. Neither do things Artificial work upon things Natutal, nor alter or
affect them as they are such: but they Act and work upon them as they have a
Natural matter. And so on the contrary, things Natural do not Act upon
Artificial things (by altering or affecting them) as such, but as they consist
of a Natural matter. And therefore Images or Names engraven upon matter can of
themselves perform nothing; and the matter if it be at all affected by the
Heavens, is equally and as much affected if it has not any Image or Figure at
all engraven upon it: and as for Characters, Figures, and Words, engraven upon
the matter, they have in them no peculiar virtue of receiving the Influences of
the Caelestial Bodies; neither can they give any such virtue unto the Matter.

The truth is that Rodolphus Goclenius the younger does indeed endeavor to
give an Answer unto this objection; whilst (in his Magnetic Synarthrosis,
page 101.) he thus writes: It is not the Statue (says he) as a Statue,
neither yet the Seal, nor the Image and figure, as such, that can affect any
other Statue or quality. For the very truth is, that these Artificial Seals do
acquire no virtue at al from Art; but the virtue is instilled and infused into
them from Heaven, and the Stars. I say again that this same Celestial Ray, and
Astral spirit that is sent down hither, and here has its influence, (in this
sublunary world) does not only Accomodate it self unto the Metalls, Stones, and
those plants aforesaid; but does likewise secretly and imperciptibly insinuate
it self into their very substance; with the which (even from the very first
Creation) it has obtained a Mutual and sympathetick familiarity, connection,
and continuation. But now this spirit has its influence without any
adjuration, Consecration, and invocation of Devils; but altogether in a
Natural way. But all that he answers is nothing worth. For this is that very
thing (according as it is in the Question) which he ought to prove, to wit,
that upon Metals, and papers, ignorantly engraven and Lettered, there can any
such like virtue (as is attributed unto these Seals) be derived from heaven,
and the Stars. For although we do not deny, that the Stars have their secret
influences upon these inferior bodies (and therefore he has taken much pains
to very little purpose in proving of it,) to wit, that the Stars do act upon
these inferior bodies not only by their motion and light, but also by their
occult influence: yet nevertheless, two things there are especially of which
there is great question to be made. The first is this, whether the Stars have
in them any such virtue of producing fortuitous Events, and mere casualties,
and such effects as are not Natural but wholly depend upon the will and good
pleasure of Men. And the other is this, to wit, why they do not communicate
those their influential virtues unto Metalls as they are of themselves, but
only unto such of them as are engraven with Characters. For what have those
Characters to do with the Stars? And what has Mars in the Heavens to do with
the image of an Armed man? Or what has Saturn to do with an old man holding
the plough? And so of all other the Planets.

And the very same is likewise to be said (the case standing al one) touching
the signs of the Zodiac, and the rest of the Asterisms unto which Names, have
been given by Men according to their wills and pleasure; (for the teaching and
instructing of others in the grounds of Astronomy) who could (if they had so
pleased) have given some other names unto those Asterisms, which we now from
them call, Pisces, or Sagitarius. Like as the Hollanders, even in our Age, have
most freely (and according as they thought good) imposed names upon all those
Meridional signs that they observed in their Navigations to the Southerly
parts. And so the signs and figures likewise (denoting those Asterisms,) have
been imposed according to the wills and fancies of Men: and therefore we
conclude, that there is no Necessity at all why the virtue of any Star should
insinuate it self into any such Character as is imposed merely by the will and
fancy of Men, although it be engraven and inscribed at such a certain time,
the Star being then in such or such a position.

And therefore the whole controversy at length returns to this, that from a
Natural Cause there can no such virtue be ascribed unto Seals and such like
Characters: and if there be any, (for of this very thing there is great doubt
to be made; and many things without question are much talked of and boasted,
which indeed were never yet experimentally found to be true) as Paracelsus,
Arnoldus de villa Nova, Thurneiserus, (and other of our more Modern Authors)
produce many things to this purpose; I say if any such efficacy be found in
them, it is to be ascribed either to the imagination, (for there is none that
knows not, that the power and strength of the Imagination is very great and
almost incredible) or else if it be not so; then of necessity it must depend
upon some supernatural cause; that is to say indeed upon wicked spirits, who by
such like Characters, as by certain signs, are tacitly invited and called
unto, by virtue of a former Compact they had long before entered into with his
Servants that engaged themselves in a League with him. For these things have
their original from the Gentiles that were extremely addicted to superstition
and Idolatry: and those wicked spirits made and framed unto themselves such
like Seals, and Characters, to serve instead of Military pawns and pledges. And
therefore they avayl from that Compact (whether explicit or implicit) to wit,
that which the Devil entered into with that person who first received and sucked
in this Discipline from him. Now the Devil does this, to confirm and establish
the compact, and the superstitions constituted by himself; and that he may
ingraft them into the minds of Men; or else being ingrafted that he might
confirm and propagate the same; and so by this, as by all other means, withdraw
man and hurry him away (unto himself) from God his creator, and from those
Means by him created, and ordained for the safety and welfare of Mankind. And
therefore these things (and al other of this nature) are nothing else but
certain owls or the Devils Night-birds, with which he uses to hawk for the
souls of Mankind. And therefore it is by no means to be endured, what Phedro
writes (in his Chirurgia minore) that in such Characteristick Cures there lie
concealed greater and more miraculous Secrets of the First Fathers and the
Ancient Prophets, then is fit for us to express and discover unto others. The
rash bold Man ought first of all to have demonstrated that this so great a
virtue is either by God and Nature, or else by Art, put upon these Characters
and constellated words (as he calls them;) then so to have raged and railed
against other Physicians, terming them (as he does) blasphemous, and men of an
ill conscience, so to detract the honor from God in these his highest and
miraculous operations of the Characteristick Cure. He honoreth God who
contemplateth, admireth, and Celebrateth the works of God, such as are by him
created, and as they come forth of his hands. And he may truly be said to be
injurious against God, and impious, who attributes unto any of his Creatures
those virtues which they have neither received from God, nor yet from Art.

And as for those first Fathers, and the Ancient Prophets he speaks of, who (as
he writes) used this Characteristick Cure, they are not those of whom we find
mention made in holy writ; for it cannot be proved by any Argument that these
ever admitted of any such superstitious practices: but they are those that we
find mention made of in Ascelpius Hermes Tresmegistus, in these words Because
(says he) that our Forefathers erred much against, and walked contrary unto
the command of the Gods, (incredulous as they were) and not heeding Divine
worship, but sleighting true Piety and Religion, they invented an Art by which
they might have Gods unto themselves; unto which when they had invented it they
adjoined that fit and convenient virtue that proceeds from the very soul of
the World, and this they mingled with the said Art. And because they were not
able to make Souls, calling forth the Souls of Devils, or Angels, they
conferred these upon their Images, and their Divine Mysteryes; by which these
their Idols alone might have power and might of doing good or doing Evil unto
others, as they thought good. And al others who have approved of those
Characters, and defended them have been very much addicted unto the damnable
art Magic, and unto all kind of superstitious practices; to wit, the
Platonists, (the most Studious and devout Worshippers of Devils) Cornelius
Agrippa, Paracelsus, and others the like, very much suspected as touching this
infamous Magic. Neither does this any thing avail them, to say, that such
things as these may be done, without any invocation upon the Devil, and
adjuration of the Wicked spirits, and by other unlawful Means; and that they
may be wrought by a Natural power. For first of all they were to prove that
these have within them those peculiar virtues that Metalls and precious stones
of themselves have not; which unless they can prove we may truly conclude that
they make use of unlawful means, and such as were never ordained by God, nor
propounded by Nature for our practice. And moreover, though there appear no
immediate compact with the Devil, nor any explicit Conjuration, at the
present; yet Nevertheless there may be for all this (and questionless there is)
an implicit compact with the Devil; who very well knows and is ready to
acknowledge those his pawns and engagements (as it were) once given and
appointed unto his followers and Worshippers. And who is there of all these who
would defend these Seals from the suspicion of all superstition and Idolatry,
that can explain unto us what these strange and wonderful Characters (and as
Apul^ius terms them) so lettered that they cannot be understood, and those
unknown Words, which appear in the Seals that are propounded by Paracelsus, (in
his Archidox. Magic. and elsewhere) signify; or that dares pass his word, and
engage his faith upon it, that these figures and unkown words are not the
Devils pawns and assurances by which he obliges unto himself his worshippers
and votaries? A German understands not what is written in the Turkish
Language, but a Turk does; as likewise neither does a Turk understand that
which is written in the German tongue, which yet a German does. And so although
it be not every man that understands these strange uncouth Characters, or
knows what to make of those never heard of words (not to be understood) yet
notwithstanding, the Devil (as the Author of that Alphabet and writing,)
understands them very well; and accordingly being by these invocated, and
called upon for his assistance, he readily affords the same unto the utmost
of his power. And therefore, let any who so pleases esteem of these ways and
practices, and account of them as highly as he lists; but as for my own part,
I shall endeavor to keep in mind that first and Chief command of God; to wit,
Thou shall have no other Gods.

And therefore seeing that from what has been said is clearly appears that
there are no Natural virtues in these Seals and Periapta; it is even from hence
manifest, that these things cannot possibly render a man inviolable, and so as
not to be hurt by any Weapons of War: and for this cause we have been the more
large in the handling of this Controversy; and at length conclude with this,
that whatsoever is attributed unto them they have it not either from Heaven, or
from any other Natural Cause, but that all this is nothing else but the mere
invention of the Devil; and that therefore it cannot be made use of without
Idolatry. For God so formed and framed the Body of Man, that it should be soft,
and sensible of pain, and the solution of Unity; and therefore whosoever he be
that would dispose and make it otherwise, he opposes himself unto Gods order
and intention, and uses the Devils help and assistance therein. For the Cause
of this effect is altogether to be referred, either unto Nature, or unto God,
or unto Men, or unto those means that are administered; or else Lastly, it is to
be ascribed unto the Devil. Unto Nature it cannot be referred; for she has
formed unto Man such a Body, that it may be violated by any kind of Weapons.
Neither can this effect be attributed unto God, who without a Miracle does not
change the order and course of Nature. Neither does it appear from Scripture,
or any sacred History, that ever any such thing was done by God: although that
(by his own command) his people have oftentimes waged most dangerous and
difficult Wars against diverse of their and his enemies. Neither can any such
effect proceed from Men, who (as it is very well known) have no power as of
themselves to perform any such thing. Neither likewise, if we consider those
means, have they any power in them any way whatsoever to produce such an
effect, and to invert the order of Nature. For they are either Characters, or
words, or some such like thing, unto which no such virtues were every yet given
and granted either by God, or else by Nature. And therefore it comes al (at
length) to this, that such things as these are performed by the help and
assistance of the Devil. For albeit there are many who think that there passes
no commerce at al betwixt them and the Devil, although they shall make use of
such means: yet notwithstanding these ought to know, that such means as they
(first of all) have no warrant from God, so neither were they invented by Men,
but suggested unto those persons (even by the Devil himself) who at first
entered into a league and Covenant with him; and therefore they are to know,
that all those that make use of them do make themselves partakers of this
compact, as we have often said before.

And that the evil and wicked Spirit does merely Cheat and delude men by these
Periapta appears even by this, that when men have thought themselves by this
means, and in this manner, sufficiently fenced and guarded against the violence
of all kind of Weapons; there were others found that were able to Null,
Dissolve, and quite take away that inviolability, as they term it, and proof
against the force of Weapons; and so when they least of all look for or suspect
any such thing, they perish in this their superstition.

And the truth is, the ways they have to uncharm the Body, and to render it
penetrable by Weapons or Gunshot, are for the most part (as they say) of very
little weight or moment; but they are (I confess) unto me altogether unknown:
and yet notwithstanding from the Relation of others (of the vulgar people) it
plainly appears that those Periapta have no power of fencing and preserving
the Body against bullets of Silver; as also that a man's Body cannot be made
inviolable, if the Leaden bullet be but never so little chawed in the mouth: if
the Swords point be heated in the Fire, and then anointed with Sewet; if the
Sword be run into the ground, or thrust into broad; and if many other such like
things be done; in which to be curious is neither my business, nor intention.
But this will most certainly from hence appear, that the Devil is a Liar, and
that he keeps not the Covenant and Compact he enters into with his
Servants; but that he oftentimes Cheateth and Deceives them; and that when he
communicates that Art unto Men, he does not this that he may benefit them; but
only lays Snares for their Souls, whilst he most of al pretends and
promises the making of their Bodies safe from all manner of injuries. Of which
there are extant many instances and examples; and among the rest, remarkable is
that example which happened at Misnia in the Month of February, this very year
1634. For there (at Misnia) when as a certain Soldier (in his Cups) was
boasting and making his brags (with that solem^, but yet now adays too common
an adjuration among the Soldiers, Let the Devil fetch me, or, the Devil take
me) that he was inviolable, and impenetrable by any Weapons whatsoever; and
that he might give them an experiment to confirm the truch of what he had said
drew forth a short Sword, and therewith he violently smote twice upon his naked
Breast, (insomuch that the Sword was even bowed and made crooked thereby) and
yet had no hurt at all by thus doing; but when he attempted to do the same the
third time, then the Sword suddenly penetrated into his Breast, and pierced
even unto his very heart; and so this miserable wretch perished in this
miserable manner.

And therefore let every Christian and pious Soldier be hereof warned that he
make not use of any such wicked and unlawful means (as being and proceeding
merely from the Devil) but that he content himself in the safe guarding of his
Body by lawful Arts and ways; and as for all other things, let him commit them
unto almighty God, who has our lives in his Hands; and without whose will
there is not one hair can fall from our Heads.

THE FIFTH BOOK, THE FIFTH PART. Of Fractures.
Chap. 1. Of Fractures, and the Cure of them in General.
THat which in a soft part is called a Wound, the same is in a hard part, and
bone, called a Fracture, (by the Greeks properly termed Agma, and Catagma)
which is a division or rupture of the bone, from some external Cause violently
rushing and breaking in upon it. Now as for those that have written at large
and very accurately touching Fractures, they are (in the first place, and
especially) Hippocrates in his Book of Fractures; and Galen in his Comment upon
the said Book; and in his sixth Book of the Meth. of Curing, Chap. 5. and 6.
And among the more modern Authors, and those of our own time, Hieronymus
Fabricius ab Aquapendente, in his B. of Surgery, Tit. of the Fractures of
the Bones; and these Authors you may have recourse unto, for your more full
satisfaction in so weighty a point: in the mean time I shall endeavor briefly
and plainly to Contract the whole substance of the subject in Hand, and so to
set it before you.

The Differences.
Galen (in his sixth B. of the Meth. of Curing, and 5. Chapt.) tells us what
these Differences are. For sometimes (says he) the bones are broken
transversly; and then it is chiefly and properly to be termed a Fracture; but
then indeed if the bones be so broken, that by no Art or means that can be used
the ends and extreme parts of them may be brought and made to stick fast
together as before, and that they lie not directly one against the other, this
kind of Fracture is (in special) called Cauludon from the resemblance and
likeness that it has with a broken stalk. And Paulus Aegineta writes that
this Cauludon Catagma is likewise called Raphanedon, and Sicnedon, from the
similitude of a broken Raddish and Cucumber. But if the bone be not only broken
into two parts, but that it be likewise shivered into many, that Fracture is
termed Suntrimma, or Comminution; and by Galen it is also called Caruedon,
because that it is made after the manner of broken Nut-shels. But if the bones
be cleft according to their length like as Wood is cleft, it is then called
Parameces, that is to say, (properly) a right or straight Fissure or Cleft; and
by Galen it is termed Schidacedon. In the Head, this species of the solution of
Unity has names peculiar and proper unto it; touching which see Hippocrates,
in his B. of the Wounds of the Head, and in his first B. of Practice, Part 1.
Chap 23.

And of these Fractures there are likewise several other differences; for some
of them are great, and some again but small Fractures, some of them simple or
single Fractures, and all but one alone; but then another Fracture there is
that is manifold; as consisting of many; some equal, others unequal; and the
bones are also broken sometimes in one manner, and sometimes in another manner,
and that very different. And the truth is, the Ancients gave them their names
from the Figure and the likeness of other parts; and (as we told you before)
they called them Cauledon, Raphanedon, Sicnedon Catagma; and sometimes likewise
Alphitedon, when the bone is broken and shattered into many small and thin
parrs, not unlike unto Meal; they call another sort of Fracture also Calamedon,
that is to say, the breaking of a Reed, eis Onucha, after the form of a Nayl.
All which Appellations notwithstanding are for the most part slighted and
neglected by Hippocrates, who instead of them has made use of Names more
ordinary and usual, as one rather desirous to interpret, and choosing rather by
speaking of them in more words, so to describe them. And sometimes all the parts
of the broken bone do again Join and grow together; but sometimes some one or
other parts of the broken bone impostumateth and droppeth out.

There are likewise diverse other differences, that are taken from the part
affected. For one is said to be a Fracture of the Shoulder; another of the Arm,
another of the Thigh; and so of the other parts. And then indeed in the Arm,
either but one of the two bones, or else both of them (to wit, the Vlna, and
the Radius, bones) are broken. And in like manner it is also in the Thigh, the
case being one and the same. The bones of the Nose are likewise broken; and so
are also the Channel bones, the Ribbs, and the whirl-bone.

And there are moreover (besides these) other differences that are merely
accidental; when as a bone broken either abides still in its own place, or else
is carried forth thereof, and lifted above some other bone; and that sometimes
the Fracture is but newly made, and sometimes it is old, and of a long
continuance. And there are also other differences, that are improperly so
called; as that a Fracture is conjoined sometimes with a Wound, sometimes with a
Luxation or disjoynting, and sometimes with other affects. For sometimes there is
a Fracture made, the Skin and Flesh lying above it still remaining sound and
whole; and sometimes these happen likewise to be hurt and wounded. And sometimes
also together with the Fracture there happens a loosening of the Joint near
unto it. And sometimes unto a Fracture there happen an extraordinary pain, a
swelling, and an Inflammation: but sometimes again, there are none of al these
joined with, or following upon the Fracture.

The Causes.
Now all things may be said to break the bones, that so endeavor to bow and
bend them, that they (being not flexible) must necessarily be broken. Galen (in
his second B. of Fractures, and Text 9.) reduces them all unto four Causes,
whiles he writes after this manner: It is either something (says he) that can
bruise and batter, if it be laid on with great force and violence (and this
without doubt ought to be some Body that is hard of substance, and heavy in its
weight:) or else it is somewhat that does not only divide the Skin, or that
divides likewise something that lies under the Skin, even unto the very bones,
but which divides also the very bones themselves: which Malady Hippocrates
himself indeed calls Edra, ( that is to say, a Decession) in his B. of the
Wounds of the Head. And moreover also some by leaping from an high place have
broken either the Ankle or the Thigh bone; which in these persons were drier,
and not so thick perhaps as in others. For I my self also have seen in the
common wrestling, when in the turning of a man round a Fracture has happened
unto him, who having hereby had his Ankle together with the Calf of his Leg
broken by the greatness of the Wound the bones have been made naked and bare.
For this Fracture happened upon his Ankles being gotten under the Leg of his
Adversary that wrastled with him, in a transverse or overthwart manner; so that
both the Heads thereof, as well that toward the Foot, as that above toward the
Knee, were pressed downward with great violence: like as we also see it in
Wood, which we our selves endeavor by bowing and bending it round to break.
For if a piece of Wood be put upon ones Thigh, and then from both ends or Heads
pressed down vehemently with the Hands, we shall then soon perceive it to be
broken in the middle part.

But yet notwithstanding even the very Constitution of the bones does sometimes
cause the Fracture of the bones; the Constitution of them being sometimes so
brittle, that it cannot brook the least violence; and sometimes again more hard;
so that it cannot be broken but with a far greater violence and force. And
rottenness likewise rendereth the bones very frail and weak, and especially
that which follows the French Pox, and in those that often make use of
Mercurial Inunctions. Of this strange and wonderful frailty and weakness in the
bones there is extant a Memorable History in Marcellus Donatus, in his Hist.
Medic. Mirabil. B 4. Chap. 5. And the story is briefly this: Vincentius
Morellus, Coachman unto that Famous Poet, and Noble Patrician, D. Dionysius de
Pietis, sporting, and playing the wag with others of his fellow Servants,
snatched up half an Orange from off the Table, and threw it as hard as he could
at the Head of his fellow Servant running before him; but as it fell out, he did
himself more mischief then the other. For in that Arm wherewith he threw (by
reason of the strong and forcible motion) the bone of the right Shoulder was so
broken, that the Heads of the broken bone being disjoined one from the other,
were easily and manifestly found to be so even by the touch. But strange it is
to hear what followed. This bone was no sooner splinted and bolstered up with
Iron plates (in regard that he could not now do his business as formerly) but
at midnight lying in his bed, and awakening, he puts down the other Arm to
reach himself the Chamber pot: in which Motion the bone of the left Arm was
broken about the middle of it; and this was likewise set and bound up by the
help of the Physician. This Man for many years before had been sore troubled
with the French Pox in a most grievous manner; in so much that his Head, Legs,
and Arms were full of hard knotty swellings, which at length by his often
anointing them with Unguents of Hydrarge, seemed to sink down and disappear.
Wherefore we can think no other, but that the rottenness eating through the
bones of the Arm, and thereby vitiating and corrupting them, made way and gave
occasion for this so easy and much to be admired Fracture. Two Histories
Parallel to this we meet with in Schenckius (in his 5. B. and 8. Observat.) from
the observation of D. Camerarius. For Capivaccius had sometime related unto him,
that a certain person in throwing an Almond shel against the pavement, instead
of breaking that, brake his Arm. As likewise he related of another, that but
knocking something with a Mallet, (and that not very hard neither) brake his Arm
likewise. Two other such Histories we meet with in Guilhelm. Fabricius, in the
2 Century of his Observations. The first is of Philibert Sarrazenus (a
Physician of Leyden) who writes unto Fabricius (Observat. 66.) in this manner:
A certain man (says he) a Citizen of Leyden (threescore years of Age) was
tortured with an obtuse and dull pain (for the space of almost two months)
proceeding from a Phlegmatic Gout in the Joints of his Shoulder and right Arm.
Remedies he used none all this while: only he procured what rest he could for
that part, by having the Arm affected wrapped up in a Swathe, and continually
resting upon his Breast. He being otherwise very sound and healthy, about eight
of the Clock in the morning goes forth abroad unto the shops; and while he was
fitting on a Glove upon the hand of the right Arm, (and that as gently as he
could) he brake the bone of his Arm (transversly or overthwart) four or five
Fingers below the Shoulder. I being sent for went immediately unto him, and
there I beheld the whole business as it was, not without very great admiration;
I searched the Arm and Shoulder; and by a Surgeon I restored the bone unto
his former place, and commanded that convenient Remedies should be administered,
and applied unto the part affected. After three days I went again to visit
this Patient, that I might search and find whether or no all things had been
rightly ordered and applied. And having removed the Swath-bands and the
Splinters, we saw that the bone was returned unto its Natural Situation; and
we soon perceived it to be so by pressing down our Fingers upon the place. But
Lo, a little below this, about the Joint of the Elbow, a new Fracture of the
same bone (which as yet we had not seen) offered it self unto our view; very
sad and grievous pains excruciate the Patient; and therefore we again betake
our selves with all diligence unto our work, and endeavor again the restoring
of the broken bone unto its proper place. Upon which al things succeeded well,
and the pains were all calmed, insomuch that now he takes very comfortable
rest: but yet nevertheless, from that time forward the Swaths were never
unfolded; neither was he ever seen (hitherto) to make any use of that part. And
that which made me so much to admire the strange and wonderful unwonted frailty
and brittleness of the bones in this Person, was this, that he altogether
denied that he had been at any time troubled with any affects of the bones,
contracted either from the foul Disease, or from any other cause.

The other History we find in the sixty eighth of his Observations, in these
very words: Philibert Brachlea (of Sequsium) being now in the fifty nineth year
of her Age, of her own accord and without any manner of violence externally
offered unto her by any whomsoever had her bones broken, so that she died
thereof, in the year 1606. This Woman whiles on the Lords day (which it seems
according to the Rite and Custon of the Country was held more sacred then
ordinary) she was in the morning putting on a new Smock petticoat, lifting up
her Body as she lay in her bed, and her Hands stretched forth above her Head,
she perceived (by the great pain she felt on the sudden) that she had not only
dislocated, but broken the bone of one of her Arms; so that there was need of
the Chirurgeous help: who when he had fitly put together the extreme parts and
ends of the broken bones, and bound them up with Swaths, he moreover outwardly
administered fit and proper Remedies, and so at length had the happiness to Cure
that affect. But this miserable and unfortunate Woman was no sooner freed from
these streights, but she must yet again fall into a worse mischance, and undergo
the violence and grief of a greater Malady. For when as at last (after that she
had now a long time kept her bed) she desired to be raised up out of it by the
help of her hous-hold Servants; before she went to the Fire side, her Maid that
then waited upon her in putting on her Stockings, (so soon as ever she had but
endeavored it) only laying on her Hands to help her Mistress, brake the bone
of her right Leg in a transverse overthwart manner; which the Surgeon again
repaired. In these troubles and griefs the poor miserable Woman lived for the
space of two years; and having all this two years time been troubled with diverse
Fractures, and innumerable pains from day to day) she had at length her life
shortened and taken away by them. And the Author of this Observation writes,
that the strange and much to be admired fractures in this woman were not caused
either by the French Pox, or from any other Diseases, she having not been at
any time affected with the one or the other; nor ever in all her life troubled
with any such sickness. But his conjecture is, that the true cause hereof was
some occult and secret poison, proceeding from some extraordinary and notable
corrupting of the humors; which up and down, on al sides passing throw the
whole substance of the bones corrupted it in this strange and unexpressible
manner.

Signs Diagnostick:
A Transverse fracture, or that which is made in an oblique manner may easily
be known, because that by the very touch the extremityes of the broken bone
(being now separated) are soon discovered; and likewise in the place of the
fracture there is found a Cavity, or hollowness that is not Natural. And
moreover the body, and especially the broken Member cannot be moved after the
due and wonted manner. And there arises likewise, before the bones be set and
brought together again into their places, an extreme and most intolerable
pain, whiles that the extremities of the broken bone prick and grate upon the
parts nigh unto them, being very quick of sense and feeling. Which that it may
be the more rightly known, the member that is sound is to be compared (as Arm
with Arm, Leg with Leg) with that that is broken. And very often also it so
falls out that by reason of a broken bone the Member is made shorter then it
should be, whilst the Muscles draw up the inferior part of the bone. And for
the most part likewise fractures are generally and commonly well known; some
violent causes (having power enough to break the bones) usually preceding. But
then those fractures that are made longwayes in the bone, are not to be known
but with more difficulty: and yet notwithstanding they may be discovered from
the preternatural thickness of the Member, as also from the inequality, and
pain thereof.

The bones oftentimes likewise impostumate and drop forth, to wit, when all
their small parts and little pieces could not be brought back and set in their
proper places, and thereupon are left destitute and naked of flesh: and this is
known by the blackness of the bone, (if at least it lie open unto the view) or
else by the stirring and moving up and down of the bone, if it be found not to
adhere and stick close unto the other bones.

Prognostics.
1. The fracture of the bones made according to the length of them is more
easily cured then that fracture that is made either in an oblique, or in a
transverse manner. For there is no such need of any laborious replacing of the
bones; but it is sufficient, if the bones (gaping as it were) be again Joined
close together.

2. Among the Transverse and oblique fractures, that is most easily Cured (and
has least of danger in it) that is single or simple, and equal; and in which
the broken bones are not at al moved out of their places.

3. Those fractures in which the heads of the broken bones are retuse and blunt
have but little of danger in them: but when they are sharp-pointed, those
fractures are the worst and most dangerous of any; inregard that they are not
easily to be set close together (as having nothing of any blunt bone to rest
upon) and because they also hurt and wound the flesh, and sometimes likewise a
Nerve or Muscle, as Celsus tells us in his fifth Book, and Chap. 7.

4. The fracture is then very difficult to be cured, when the bone is divided
into many fragments; and the more the small pieces are, still the more difficult
is the Cure like to prove: and so also when there are sharp pointed stickings
out, which prick and wound the parts that lie near unto them.

5. By how much the greater the fracture is, and by how much the greater also
the broken bones are, with so much the more difficulty and slowness is the
fracture Cured.

6. When two bones Joined together (as in the Arm, the Radius and the Vlna; in
the Leg, the Ankle and the Fibula) are both of them broken, the Cure will be
more difficult then if only one of these be broken. For if one of these bones
remain whole and unbroken the Muscles cannot then so easily be contracted, as
being kept stretched out by the unbroken bone. And so likewise when the broken
bone is set again in its former place, if the other be whole, that serves
instead of a prop unto that which is broken; and a greater help and benefit it
is unto it, then are either the swathes or the splinters, or both of them
together. But on the Contrary, if they be both broken, al things that are
performed in the keeping in its place the bone after it is set must be done
with far greater Care, curiosity, and pains-taking.

7. The Fracture that is made in the middle of the bone is to be accounted
lighter, and less dangerous then that which is nigher unto the head of the
bone, whether it be the superior or the inferior head. For whereas nigh unto
the lower head there are many Tendons, and near unto the upper head very many
Nerves; the greater are the pains that are excited; and the Cure is rendered so
much the more difficult. But if the fracture be nigh unto the Joint, it is then
the most dangerous of any, in regard that there are in that place both Tendons,
and Nerves, and Ligaaments; and because that the broken part cannot there be so
conveniently bound up; and because also, in this bloodless and cold place the
heat is but very weak. And albeit that the fracture may in that place be
consolidated; yet nevertheless it leaves behind it a great impediment in the
motion of that Member, by reason of the Callus which binds (as it were) the
Tendons or Muscles.

8. A new fracture is very apt and ready to be consolidated. But if there be
any time delayed, the Cure is thereby altogether rendered the more difficult;
not only because that upon the happening of the inflammation that extension of
the part (which is required) cannot be performed without much danger; but
likewise because that the extremities of the bones become hardened, so that they
can never after this be brought to Join and grow together again; and this more
especially happens in aged persons. And there fore we must endeavor all we
can that as speedily as may be, the Extremities of the bones may be fitted and
Joined together the one to the other; for so by this means they will afterward
the more easily grow together again: for be it how it will, if so be that pain
and an Inflammation happen upon the fracture, they render the Cure the more
difficult.

9. If in a fracture of some one of the more eminent bones the fit and
Convenient Cure thereof be protracted and put off beyond the seventh day; there
will then be danger lest that something of the bones be be nummed and
impostumated; as Galen tells us, in his third Book of Fractures Text. 37.

10. And so likewise if there be a Contusion of the flesh, and a wound Joined
together with the Fracture, the Fracture is then very dangerous; and so much
the more dangerous, by how much the wound is the greater; and especially if any
of the greater Muscles (as of the thigh and shoulder) shall be Wounded. For then
Inflammations do very easily happen; and at length, the Gangrene, and
Sphacelus. And that likewise which here makes the Cure to be the more
difficult is this, to wit, that the splinters (and the other like things that
are necessarily requred for the keeping of the bones in after they are brought
back unto their proper places, cannot so conveniently and fitly be administered,
in regard that a hole is to be kept open for the better curing of the Wound.

11. If the bones be so broken and shattered that they cannot be reduced unto
their former wonted State and place, we cannot then any ways promise unto the
Patient the recovery of his perfect health again: for although the bones may
possibly grow together again; yet Nevertheless the Member is by this means made
much shorter then before, and so altogether unfit for the discharge of its
former offices.

12. The bones when they are so broken that they cannot possibly be restored
again, we must then know that it will not be long ere they be impostumated, and
fall forth; and so will likewise those that are wholly destitute and bare of
flesh: so Hippocrates in his third Book of Fractures, Text. 44. Now the bones
impostumate, and drop out, sometimes sooner, and sometimes it is longer ere this
be done. Those bones are soonest separated that are soonest withered, and
soonest driven forth by the flesh growing underneath them. And therefore the
small bone is soonest impostumated and separated, and that bone likewise that is
in some extreme part, and the bone also that is but thin; whereupon it is, that
in less then fourteen days such bones as these last spoken of use to be
separated. But the greater and more solid bones are longer ere they impostumate
and separate; for it is both a longer time ere they are withered, and likewise
ere they are driven forth by the flesh that grows up underneath them: and
hence it is, that they are seldom or never impostumated and driven forth before
the fourtyeth day at the soonest; but now and then the impostumation and
dropping forth of the bone is deferred unto the Sixtyeth day, and oftentimes
also for the space of many Months. Yea and sometimes it so happens that the
small fragments of bones shattered and broken al to pieces have not broken
forth until after many years; as we have an instance hereof given us by
Guilhelm. Frabricius, in his 4. Century. and 97. Observation. And I my self
likewise know a very eminent Commander, a Captain of foot, who at Norinberg was
with a bullet shot throw the right Arm; by which his shoulder bone was broken;
out of which wound even until this very year 1634. there brake forth fragments
and small pieces of Bones.

13. The Age likewise, the temper, and habit of the body, the course and kind
of life, the time of the year, the Region, the state of the Heavens, and even
all things else whatsoever that have in them a power of determinating the
Natural strength (either by augmenting or diminishing it) these al may render
the Cure more or less difficult. And therefore it is that the Curing of a
Fracture is in young persons a matter of no great difficulty; but in such as
are aged and decrepite the cure is much harder, yea and oftentimes altogether
impossible.

14. Fractures with an Inflammation and a bruising of the flesh are full of
danger; in regard that those cannot be fully and entirely Cured, until these
shall first of all be perfectly healed.

15. Touching the time for the Consolidation of a fracture, there can nothing
of a certainty be foretold; seeing that it differs, and is very various
according to the Age, habit of the body, the time of the year, and other such
like Circumstances. For in such as are young, if they be of a good habit and
Constitution, and observe a good and orderly Diet, and live under a temperate
Clymate; the bones in these are much the sooner consolidated: but far more
slowly in aged people, and such as are more weak and infirm.

16. And lastly, the Fractures of the Nose, of the Jaw-bones, of the Throat, of
the Breast, of the Shoulder blades, the Ribbs, the Spina or back bone, the
Ankle, heel, Hand, and Sole of the foot, are consolidated betwixt the twentieth
and the twenty fourth day; those of the Legs and Arms within Thirty five
days, or betwixt the 35. and the fourtyeth day.

The Cure.
The Simple or Single fracture (being as it is a species of unity dissolved)
has even one only common and universal indication, to wit, that what is thus
disjoined must again be united. And although that this uniting be the work of
Nature, as in Wounds; yet nevertheless, that Nature may the better attain unto
her scope, and effect her purpose, there are yet many other things necessary.
To wit, whereas the broken bones are for the most part removed out of their due
places; What things are necessarily required for the Curing of broken bones.
if this shall so happen, then the broken bones are again to be restored unto
their own proper places; and then in the next place, they are with all
exactness and accurateness to be fitted and joined together, as before in their
Natural state; and so being in this exact manner conjoined, they are thus to be
kept. Which things when the surgeon has with all his skill and dexterity
accomplished, the Uniting afterward of the bones, and the generating of the
Callus, are to be committed unto Nature, as her proper and peculiar work. And
yet Nevertheless, the Physician ought not to be remiss in affording unto Nature
the best of his help and furtherance: and this he may do, if he do what he can
for the preserving of the Natural temperament of the part; and take care that
the inflammation and all other the Symptoms that usually accompany and attend
these fractures, and disturb nature in her work, be prevented and kept off. Or
if they shall at all happen, that with what speed he may he remove them.

And therefore, in the first place, (as Cornelisu Celsus teaches us, in his B.
8. and Chap. 7.) we are to be well advised upon mature Consideration, whether
the broken bones be fallen out of their places, yea or no: for it is always
so, that when the bones are broken in a transverse or overthwart manner, they
fall out of their own natural Seats. Now it is known that the broken bones are
not removed out of their proper places, if in the place where the fracture is
there be no Cavity or hollowness perceived, neither any sense of pricking; and
that the Member does not appear shorter then before. And therefore in this kind
of fracture there is not any need at all that the member be any whit extended;
or that we trouble our selves in the least with the returning back and fit
joining together of the broken bones. For it may so very easily come to pass
(if this be but attempted by us) that pains may be excited, and the heads and
such parts of the broken bones that stick forth may hereby be crushed and
grated one against another, and so broken: but here we are only to endeavor,
that the broken bones may be kept in their own Natural Seats, and there again
united, as anon we shall further show you how this is to be done.

But if the broken bones shall be fallen out of their own proper places, so
that one shall be carried forth and cast upon another, then in this case our
first and main Care ought to be, that these broken bones may again be restored
unto their own places. Now this is to be done (chiefly and primarily) by two
operations, the former whereof is called C^tatasis or Antitasis, 1. e. an
Extension; but the other we term Diorthosis, i. e. Confornation or a putting
back again of the bones nto their own places. But now, so it is that none can
rightly perform these operations, but he that well understands the Nature of
the bones, and knows the differences of fractures. The Nature of the bones is
to be known out of Galen his tract. of the bones, and the books of other
Anatomists; especially by our own ocular inspection, and taking a right view of
them in our Anatomy Lectures. And for the differences of Fractures, Galen (in
his sixth B. of the Meth. of Curing, and 5. Chapt.) tells us what they are.

And first of all therefore in the restoring and returning back of the broken
bones into their places, there is requisite an extension of the part. For when
as without the Cutting assunder of any Muscle either the parts of the broken
bone are removed out of their proper places, or else that the Joint is fallen
forth of its due place, the Muscle whose beginning is annexed unto that part
into which either a part of the broken bone inclines, or the Joint falls
forth unto, is wholly drawn back unto its own Head; and so by this means
together with it self it carries along that part of the Member which is Joined
with it. Wherefore it cannot possibly be that either the broken bone should be
rightly conformed, or that the loosened bone should be again restored back unto
its own place and seat, before that it be so much drawn back as it was before
removed out of its place into this or that part. For otherwise, if (to wit)
there be not made a right extension, in Fractures, by attrition the eminencies
(or parts sticking forth from the bones) would be broken, by being crushed
together one against the other, so that they could not possibly be put back
again into their own places and Cavities, but that they must either externally
stick at the sides of the bones, or else they must still remain among the broken
bones, and by this means the Coaptation and due Joining together of the bones
should be very much hindered.

And therefore that the broken bone may be rightly conformed, Extension how to
be performed.
it is requisite that both parts of the broken bone be distended backwards, or
otherwise as need shall require; and this extension is by the Greeks called
Antitasis. But that the extension may be rightly done, we must endeavor that
it may be performed either with no pain at all, or no more then needs must. Now
this will be done, if the member to be extended be placed in such a Figure as
wherein the Muscles do nothing at all, but all of them are as it were idle and
loosened; that so all the Fibers of the Muscles of the said member may be
extended directly and straight forward: by which means there will be need of the
less extension, and the whole business performed with very little or no pain.

Now this extension and distraction is to be done either by the labor and pains
of one alone, or else by the Hands of many together; and this indeed likewise
either by their Hands only, or else also by certain Reins or Curbs, or by
Swaths, or other Engines and devices used for this purpose. When the Finger is
broken, or any other tender member, the extension may then be performed by the
help and pains of one alone, who is to lay hold on one part of the broken
member wi^h his right Hand, and on the other part with the left, and so drawing
them apart one from the other: or else it is to be done by two together, so
that one of them may hold the part of the broken member, and the other extend
and stretch it forth. But if the member that is broken be greater and more
strong, then the help of many together will be needful; so that one may indeed
with both Hands lay hold upon one part of the broken member, and another at the
same time may likewise lay hold with both Hands on the other part of the broken
member; that so they may by drawing toward them (one from the other) bring the
said broken Member close together. And sometimes likewise there will be need of
binding it round about with Swaths, Linen Clothes, and Stays; and of fitting
these on all sides unto the said broken Member, like as with a Cord, or Noose;
for the drawing of all which together, (that it may be rightly done, to wit, by
drawing several ways, the one from the other) the help and assistance of
diverse at once will be very requisite. And oftentimes likewise, even then when
there is occasion for a greater extension (but yet without any violence) there
are together with these certain Engines to be administered; touching which, see
Hippocrat. in his second B. of Fractures, Text 40. etc. and Oribasius, in his
Tract. de Machinam. and Paraeus, in his 15. B. and 7. Chapt.

Now this Extension is either equal, or Unequal. Extension how manifold.
We call that an equal extension, in the which the Member is equally extended
from both sides of the broken bone: but the extension wherein the Member is
more extended from one side of the broken bone then from the other, we then call
it an Unequal extension; and this has then is place, when but only one of the
two bones in the Ankle or the Elbow is broken: for that side is most to be
extended in which the broken bone is contained.

But now the Diorthosis, or Conformation, Canformation.
is the replacing and putting back again of the broken bone into its own place,
and the right Coaptation or fitting together of the extreme parts of the broken
bone; which is done, if after that the Member is so far forth extended that the
bones to be replaced cannot be brought to touch one another, the Surgeon
with both Hands lay hold on both parts; and that he then thrust back unto the
right part the Member that is fallen forth unto the left; and so on the other
side, that he thrust back unto the contrary part that Member that is fallen
forth forward; and so on the Contrary; and that he never leave thrusting back
the Eminencies or stickings out of the bones into their Cavities and hollow
Seats, until the extremities, i. e. the ends of the bones be rightly united,
and driven back into their proper places, and that the Member have recovered
again its Natural Figure. But now these stickings out of the bones are not with
any impulse or violence at all to be thrust back again into their Cavities,
lest that by this violent handling of them they should be broken; but rather
let them of their own accord (the extension being loosened) return back into
their own seats; and let them be gently directed hereunto by the Hands of the
Surgeon. And all these things are (as soon as may be) to be done, before
that an Inflammation happen: for if there chance to be any Inflammation, and
then afterward the extension of the Member, and the replacing of the bones be
attempted, a Convulsion may easily be excited.

But if the Surgeon be not called until the Inflammation be already begun,
so that by reason thereof the bringing back of the bones may not so much as be
attempted, then by all manner of means he ought to oppose the Inflammation; and
he is likewise to endeavor that it may speedily be removed by those
Medicaments that are above propounded, in the first Part, and 5. Chapt. of an
Inflammation. And in the mean time he ought to be very Sollicitous and Careful
of the part affected, lest that it readily receive the fluxion: and this may be
done by Repellers; and by placing the part in such a manner, and so handling
it, that no pain at al may be brought upon the Patient. When the Inflammation
is over and past, we must after that endeavor that the bones may be reduced
unto their proper places.

But then if the extremities of the broken bones break forth, and stick out of
the Skin, by what way and means such a Fracture is to be Cured, we shall show
you in the Chapter following. When these things are thus performed, we ought
then to take good notice, whether or no the bones be rightly fitted and placed
together. Now it may be known by this (as Hippocrat. tells us in his third B. de
Officin. Medic. Text 24.) if the Patient be no longer so much infested with
pain, as before; if the eminencies of the bones now conjoined within themselves
do no longer prick the part; if while the broken part is touched by the Hand
there be perceived no Cavity, no sticking out, or unevenness; and if the broken
Member being compared with its fellow that is sound, (that is to say) the
Shoulder with the Shoulder, the Thigh with the Thigh, and the Leg with the
Leg, it be found to be almost equal, and like unto it, both in its Figure and
Magnitude. Almost, I say, indeed, because that in the thickness there may be
some kind of difference betwixt them; in regard that by reason of pain and the
afflux of Humors, the broken Member does for the most part swel up and grow
somewhat big.

When we find and are sure that the bones are conformed, the extension is then
by degrees to be remitted; and we are then to take care that by a fit binding
up of the Member the bones when they are well fitted and placed together may so
remain united, and rightly conformed. And this is to be done by two other
operations, to wit, the binding up and the placing of the Member. Wherefore
there are some who write, that the Curing of Fractures cannot be performed and
completely finished, but by these four operations, viz. Extension,
Conformation, Binding, and placing of the Member.

Notwithstanding, before ever we attempt to roll any Swathe about the broken
Member, The binding up of Fractures.
some certain Medicaments are wont to be applied and laid on, for the
preventing the afflux of Humors, and the Inflammation, and likewise for the
helping forward of the Callus that is to be generated: but in this, for the
matter thereof, Authors do something differ. Hippocrates makes use of a Rose
Cerote: Celsus uses Clothes dipped in Oil and Wine. Others there are, who at the
first lay upon the Fracture a Cerote of Roses with a broad Linen Cloth, and
then afterward they put upon it a Linen Cloth well moystened in sharp black
Wine, or else the Juice of Pomegranates: others use hurds moystened thoroughly
in the white of an Egg shaken well together, and then a little Squeezed: and
others (which practice is now adays most in use) do anoint and spread upon a
Linen Cloth a mixture made of the white of an Egg, and Astringent Pouders of
Bole-Armenick, Dragons blood, Roses, Pomegranate flowers, the Roots of
Consound, Frankincense, and the like; and this they lay upon the Fracture.
Which said Medicaments are in all the bindings so long to be continued, even
until there shall be no further fear of an Inflammation, and that the Fracture
begin now to be stable: and afterward we are to apply (if it be in the Summer)
the Diapalma Emplaster; but in the Winter the Emplastrum Barbarum; or some
other that is in all respects suitable and Convenient. And this diversity of
the Medicaments seems upon very good ground (and not without Cause) to have
been brought into use and practice by Authors. For when there is an Indication
of Strengthening and Establishing the Fracture (and that pain and the fear of
an Inflammation forbid it not) the white of an Egg, and astringent Cataplasms
are made use of: but if the Patient be afflicted with sore pain, then we are to
use the Cerote and Oil of Roses, and Wine. Or,

Take of the dead head out of Lin-seed, Lin-seed poudered, unsalted butter,
Roots of the greater Comfrey, of each four ounces; Bole-Armenick, and Ceruss,
of each one ounce; the whites of fifteen Eggs; Make a Cataplasm; let it be put
upon the Fracture, and after two days removed. Repeat this five times, one
after another. Or,

Take of the finest Flower half a pound; Mastick, and Gum Arabic, of each one
ounce; Mummy, and Bole Armenick, of each half an ounce; with the whites of Eggs
make a Cataplasm.

Very useful likewise is the Emplaster of John de Vigo, which he mentions in
his 8. B. and 6. Chapter. And Guilhelm Fabricius in his 4. Cent. Observat. 99.
uses this Emplaster.

Take of Slobanus his Emplaster four ounces; Powder of the Root of the greater
Comfrey, of Red Roses, and Myrtles, of each two drams; the Stone Osteocolla
prepared, six drams: mingle them together over a gentle Fire, with a little of
the Oil of Roses, and make an Emplaster.

The common and vulgar Surgeons (in Fractures) are wont oftentimes (even at
the very first) immediately to apply the Oxycroceum Emplaster: or if this be not
the very first of all, yet it is a Remedy that they never fail to make use of
within a very few days after the Fracture is made. But this cannot be done
without much danger; as in the place alleged Fabricius shows us by an
example. For it being so that this Emplaster heateth the part affected, and
thereby attracteth the blood and Humors, it must needs produce an itching,
pain, Inflammation, and Gangrene; and especially in the Body that is Choleric
and Cacochymical.

After that fit Medicaments have been imposed upon the part affected, then we
must proceed to the binding of it up; and this must neither be over loose,
(lest that the bones be again removed out of their places) neither over
straight and hard, lest that it hinder the afflux of the Aliment, and excite
pain. Now this is to be performed with two Swaths; the one whereof (which may
not unfitly be first moystened with Oxycrate) is to be cast over the Fracture,
and upwards to be rolled round about it twice or thrice, (so that much of the
sound part be taken in in the Swathing) that so the bones when they are set
back again into their places may there be kept and continued; and likew^se that
the conflux of blood unto the affected part may by this means be prevented. The
other (longer then the former by the one half) is to be rolled about in a
Contrary manner; and being first of all cast upon the Fracture, (and beginning
from the same) it is some certain times to be rolled about downward, and then
again to be drawn up above the said Fracture; and at length to be carried
toward the sound part lying above it. For so by this means, if it should so
happen that by the first Swathe any Muscle should chance to be distorted and
made to stand a wry toward some one part, it is amended by the second; the
Humor is likewise pressed forth of the part; and the influx of the blood, (as
well from the inferior, as the Superior parts) is hindered and prevented. For
all bindings whatsoever have in them a power of pressing forth the Humors out
of those parts upon which they are first of all cast, into those parts where
they are ended.

And this binding which is performed by these two Swaths, is by Hippocrates
called Hypodesis; and the Swathes themselves he calls Hypodesmidai. But now
that in the greater bones the binding may be the more stable and firm, certain
coverings (which the more modern Authors term Plagulae and Splenia) are to be
put above upon them; and then after the putting on of these, the binding is to
be made firm and strong by two equal Swath bands (which Hippocrates calls
Epidesmoi) of which the one is from the lower part carried upward toward the
right hand, or toward the left; and the other is carried downward the quite
contrary way unto the former: which binding is by Hippocrat. termed Epidesis.
And here we ought to be very cautious, that the binding be not either in an
overloose manner (for this will not sufficiently retein and keep in their
places the bones that are newly brought back) or else too hard and close; (for
this may cause pain) but shunning the inconvenience of both the former, we are
to make choice of that middle way, that so we may enjoy the benefit and
usefulness of both. And if a few Swathings about be not sufficient to contein
and keep in the Fracture; then it will be best, for the more security, to add
unto the number of them.

And that the bones when they are reduced unto their proper place may be there
the better established and kept firm, Splinters to be put upon Fractures, to
strengthen them.
(that they be not again moved out of their places, Ferulae (or Splinters,) are
to be put above upon them, if the Nature of the place affected will bear the
same. For seeing that Swathes and the Coverings which they call Splenia are very
flexible and yielding, they cannot possibly keep the Fracture firm and direct,
but that it may easily happen, that whether the Patient wake or sleep, the
Member may be moved. And therefore that in those motions which are not much
heeded the Member may be kept firm, and held tight, there will be need of those
things that are stiff, and are not easily bowed, and yet nevertheless not over
weighty and ponderous. Unto which end and purpose (as Hieronymus Fabricius
speaks) Hippocrates could not in all the world again (after his Plagulae or
Coverings) have invented and fitted us with better instruments then these
Ferulae or Splinters, that are both stiff and inflexible; and likewise very
light, and not at all oppressing the part affected by their weight. But when we
want these Splinters, we may instead thereof make use of thin pieces of Wood.
And some there are that in the place of these Ferulae make use of the Rinds or
Barks of Trees. But if any will make use of these, let him look well to it, that
they be not green, but thoroughly dried. For those that are green, when once
they become dry, they then are contracted about the Fracture, and do excite
pain; and sometimes also they again remove the bones out of their places; as
Guilhelm. Fabricius by a peculiar example teaches us, in his fourth Century,
and 89. Observat.

And Lastly, (if need so require) the pipe may likewise be administered unto the
Member; The plasing of the broken Member.
touching which both Hippocrat. and Galen make mention, in their Tract. of
those things that ought to be done in the Curing of Fractures, Text 18. and the
member is rightly to be placed; and we must see well to it, that its position
be soft, equal and even, and turned upwards: soft, that so it may not press
together the broken Member in that part, neither cause pain and inflammation:
equal and even, that it may produce no pain, nor cause the Member to stand
awry: and it must be turned upwards, that so the Humors by their weight tending
downward may not blow unto the place affected. But more especially we must do
our endeavor, that there may be observed a middle Figure of the Joints; and so
likewise a middle figuration of the Muscles: unto which end also there may be
sometimes administered certain little Coffers or Caskets (the Latins call them
Capsulae) which all the whole time of the Cure may receive and contein the
broken Member. Hippocrat. (in his B. de Officin. Medic. Text 3. and 30.) in
giving a right and due Situation unto the Member, commands us to take notice
of, and well to heed these three things, Rest, the Middle or Mean position, and
Custom. Rest indeed, that so such a Situation of the Member may be chosen, as
a man is wont to keep at that time when he is most free from all manner of
business, and most addicteth himself to ease and idleness. But the middle
Situation is a posture betwixt extreme distension, and Contraction; and yet
nevertheless not always exactly, but such as comes nearest unto the mean or
middle position. As for example; in the Arm, that is to be accounted for the
middle Situation, which does not Constitute a right Angle in the Elbow, but
rather an obtuse and blunt Angle; and such as comes something nigh unto a
stretching of it forth: like as we see men when they are quiet and idle, they
hold not their Arms exactly in a just middle posture betwixt being altogether
stretched forth straight, and wholly bowed and bent together; but somewhat more
inclining and tending toward a stretching of it forth: which Figure is
therefore most pleasing unto them, in regard that it is most free from pain.
And then lastly, Custom is also much to be regarded and looked upon; because
that no other habit is so easily born as that unto which we have accustomed our
selves. Unto which we may likewise add a fourth, out of the same Hippocrates,
(in his 1 B. of Fracturer, and 1 Text) to wit, that such a state of the Muscle
is to be chosen, under which the broken bones may be drawn diverse and several
ways, without any great ado, or offering violence unto them; and such as when
the Member is contained under that habit, it is then free from all pain. He
only does both these, who so Figureth and places the Muscles, that their
Fibers may be direct, and stretched forth in a straight manner. Now they may be
said to be direct, and directly extended, when the whole Muscle is placed in
one part of the Member. For if the Muscle that has its beginning in the
interior part be so placed that the Situation thereof be in the middle from
the interior part, and extreme from the exterior; or so, that the Situation of
it be in the midst from the superior part, and extreme from the exterior, by
this means it is wrapped together about the Member, and so extended.

Now when the binding is right, and performed as it ought to be, it is known by
this; as Hippocrates tells us, in his 1 B. of Fractures) first of all, by the
moan and complaint made by the sick person, when you ask him whether he be
pressed too hatd by the said binding, and he shall answer, that he is indeed
pressed, but lightly, (and so that he can well endure it) and that especially in
the place where the Fracture is. And therefore whosoever he be that has his
Fracture rightly bound up, he must of Necessity confess that these things are
so. But when the Patient is abundantly troubled and pained under these swathes,
they are then speedily to be loosened, and more fitly to be bound; lest that
from the too hard binding dangerous symptoms should happen to arise. But on the
other side, if the windings about of the swathes be looser then is meet, and
that the Patient shall answer that he feels not the swathing at all, the
swathes are then to be drawn somewhat harder; in regard that these bindings if
they be over loose, they cannot prevent the Members being depraved in that part
where the Fracture is.

There are also other signs of a Moderate binding, and when it is as it ought
to be. If the same day and night in which he was bound up with these swathes he
seems to himself not to be lightly bound, but somewhat hard and straight; and
the day following, a soft and small tumor arise in the extremity of the Member.
For the smalness of the swelling and softness shows that there is something
pressed forth (by the binding) from the part affected unto the extremity and
utmost part of the Member. But if there appear no swelling, it shows that the
fracture was not bound hard enough: and if the swelling be great and hard (that
is, such as will not readily yield unto the touch) that is present in the
extreme or utmost part of the Member, it then gives us a sure sign and token,
that the part affected is too hard swathed and bound up.

And therefore if we find the signs of a due and fit binding up of the
fracture, and that there be no considerable pain present, neither any
inflammation or exulceration suspected, the rest of the work (which is the
producing of a Callus, by the which the broken bones are Joined together) is to
be committed to Nature, whose work it is; and the binding not to be loosned
before the third day. But on the third day let the swathes be loosened, and
again rolled about the fracture, to the end they may both be drawn harder and
closer upon the place affected; as also that there may be opened a passage
forth for the humors and vapors contained under the skin: which that they may
be scattered, and that there may be no itching excited (or if there be any
Itching that infesteth the Party) Hippocrates will have the Member to be bathed
in warm water (or the water to be poured upon it,) that so the pores may be
opened. But if we be slow in the loosening of the binding, there arise from
thence oftentimes great inconveniences; to wit, an exulceration of the part, a
putridness, and Gangrene, yea and even the hazard and danger of the life.
Examples whereof we meet with in Guilhelm. Frabricius, in his second Century,
and 91. Observat. And therefore he advises us that every second, or at least
every third day, the binding be always loosened: and that although after the
seventh day there be no such urgent Necessity of the often loosening the
fracture, yet Nevertheless his own practice was every fourth day to loosen the
swathbands; and (as he writes) his Custom was to take an exact view of the
part affected. And this binding is to be continued until such time as the
Callus be bred, and the fracture healed; which in the Thigh is wont to be done
in forty days, in the shoulder and Ankle in thirty, in the Radius and Elbow in
twenty, and in the bones of the Fingers in five days. But yet this time cannot
be so easily and precisely determined in all of them (as we told you in the
Prognostics) but it much varyeth according to the Aage, Constitution of body,
time of the year, and the Nature and Condition of the Fracture it self: for a
fracture is much sooner cured in a young person, then in one that is Aged; and
sooner in the spring time, then in the summer.

But in the Mean time (While these things are in doing) universal Medicaments
are not to be neglected; to wit, the opening of a vein, and purgation, even
according as this or that Constitution of the patient shall require. And al
these things are to be done for this end, that so the bones may be
conglutinated. Now this is done by the benefit of the Callus; which whether it
be something that is heterogeneous, or else in its substance like unto the
bones, we have shown you above, part. 4. Chapt. 4. But now the generating and
production of the Callus (by which the bones are conglutinated and made to grow
together) it is the work of Nature: The generating of the Callus.
but yet the Physician may and ought to help and assist Nature in this her
operation; and this he may do, if he take care to prevent and keep off
inflammations, or the like Accidents that might any way hurt the substance and
Temperament of the Member; and that the Aliment it self by drying Medicaments
be so disposed, that it may thereby the sooner be changed into a Callus. Now
this may almost wholly be effected by the Medicaments above mentioned; in the
place whereof (after a few days) there are to succeed likewise the Emplaster
Diapalma, the Emplastrum Barbarum, Oxycroceum, the black Emplaster, and the
like.

And furthermore let the Physician endeavor that there may be a sufficient
supply of a matter fit for the breeding of the Callus. Unto which end, the Food
administered unto the Patient let it be somewhat more plentifully given then
formerly; and let it be of a good and somewhat a Tenacious Juice; such as
proceeds from Rice, Wheat, and the like. But because that before the twelfth
day there is scarcely ever any Callus generated, or that so much as begins
to breed; and moreover that at first there are many Symptoms to be feared:
therefore this full Diet is not presently to be allowed of in the very
beginning, but a more sparing Diet is to be observed; yea and (if need require)
blood is to be drawn forth by opening a Vein, or purgation to be ordered unto
the Patient; and then after this, in the end (as we said before) when the
Callus begins to be generated, a more full Diet is to be allowed him.

And there are wont likewise some Medicaments to be administered inwardly, which
conduce much unto the more speedy generating and producing of the Callus; as
the Powder and Juice of Agrimony Roots. And very many there are, that commend
most highly the Osteocolla stone before spoken of; of which beaten small into a
powder they oftentimes give one dram, with Comfrey Water. But in such as are
young, and those that are of a good habit, this Callus grows and increases
too much by this full Diet: wherefore it is not to be allowed unto them without
much caution; but only unto such as are more stricken in years. Touching which
thing, as also touching the use of Meats viscid and tenacious (which most
Physicians conceive are to be appointed in Fractures) you may read Guilhelm.
Fabricius, in his 1. Century, Observat. 90. 91. and 92.

There may likewise be Decoctions prepared, of the Roots of Consound, (both the
greater and the less) Dragon-wort, Agrimony, and Primeroses. As,

Take Roots of Consound, and Dragon wort, of each one ounce; Storks bill, one
handful; Savine, half a handful; Mace, half an ounce; Zedoary and Galangal, of
each two drams; boil them in Wine in a double vessel: and let the Patient drink
twice a day of the straining.

The same Fabricius (in his 3. Centur. and 90. Observat.) makes use of this
Medicament.

Take the Ossifrage Stone carefully prepared, one ounce; Choice Cinamom, three
drams; Sugar, two ounces; Mingle, and beat them into a very fine powder: give
two drams hereof in Flesh broth every day in the morning. And for external
Remedies, he commends such as these.

Take Oil of Earthworms, two ounces; Grains of Juniper, two drams; the Juice
of Earth worms, one ounce; Mingle them, and make a Liniment, with which anoint
the Fracture. Or,

Take Vigo's Emplaster for broken bones, two ounces; Oxycroceum, half an ounce;
the Osteocolla stone prepared, one ounce and half; Earth worms prepared, and
poudered, one ounce; with as much of the Oil of Earth worms as will suffice;
make an Emplaster; and lay it upon the place affected.

When the Callus that is bred is come unto its Just magnitude, it is then to be
confirmed by Medicaments that Corroborate: and therefore such an Emplaster as
this is to be laid on.

Take Oil of Roses, two ounces; Wax, three ounces and half; the Powder of
Rosin, three ounces; Colophony, Mastick Frankincense, of each half an ounce;
Cypress Nuts, and the Root of Madder, of each one dram; Saffron, half a dram;
Mingle them, and make a Cerote^ which may be spread upon a Linen Cloth, or a
piece of Leather, and so applied.

The Diet.
And as for matter of Diet, there ought to be likewise a good and an exact
Course, such as before we told you of in Wounds. For if Nature be not offended
either by the quantity or the quality of the Food, she will then more rightly
discharge her Office and part in the generating of the Callus. And indeed some
there are who appoint Meats viscid and clammy, of the Feet, Heads, and
intestines of some of the Creatures. But we may well fear, lest that from such
like Meats as these there may be bred a thick and viscous Chile that may
afterward breed obstructions in the Liver and the Veins, and may infect the
whole Mass of Blood; like as Guilhel. Fabricius gives us an instance of this
very thing, (in his first Cent. and 92. Observation) in a certain person (a man
forty years old) who by the use of such kind of meats fell first into a
Cachexy, and soon after into a Dropsy, and of this Dropsy he died. And we
have sufficiently found by experience, that many sick persons in this Case have
without the use of any such Food been perfectly recovered.

Chap. 2. Of a Fracture with a Wound.
THe main and chief Difference of a Fracture (and that which very much varieth
the Cure) is a Fracture with a Wound. Now this happens when the sharp
Eminencies or points of the broken bones do perforate the flesh that lies upon
them. Which whenever it happens, the Member is made shorter then it was
before: but when the naked and bare bones are restored again unto their proper
places, the Member then returns unto its pristine Longitude. And yet
nevertheless sometimes these like fractures happen by some cutting Weapon, when
by it not only the flesh, but even the very bone it self is Cut.

But now in these Fractures with a Wound, the bone is sometimes made naked; and
sometimes again it is not left altogether bare: and moreover sometimes also we
fear the falling out of the bone, or some Fragment thereof; but then sometimes
again we fear no such thing.

Prognostics.
1. But now such like Fractures are yet far more dangerous, if they happen to
be with the Flesh and Skin lying over it remaining still whole and sound. For
that perforation exciteth a pain and an Inflammation of the Skin and Flesh; and
so the Muscles that are now affected with this Inflammation are forced to
suffer a double extension; one that is caused by the Inflammation; the other,
that which happens unto them from these things that befall them while they are
returning unto their former length.

2. But now this danger is so much the greater by how much the parts that are
broken and shattered are more noble and principal; as the Muscles, Nerves,
Veins, and Arteries.

3. And from hence it is, that a Fracture in the Thigh and Shoulders, with a
Wound, and the falling out of a bone, is the most dangerous of all: touching
which Hippocrates thus, in his third B. of Fractures, Text 47. But they seldom
or never escape (says he) whose bones (either of the Arm or Thigh) have fallen
outwardly: for as these bones are very great, and very full of Marrow: so
likewise there are besides these many other things wounded that are of very
great moment; to wit, the Nerves, Muscles, and Veins; whereupon also it is,
that if you put them back, Convulsions are wont to be excited: but then again
if you do not put them back into their former places, there will then arise
acute and Choleric Fevers, with a sighing, and a blackness of the place
affected. Yet notwithstanding they do not less escape, in whom we neither put
them back, nor so much as attempt the doing of it. But furthermore, they also
are more lively to escape, who have the lower bone, then those that have their
upper bone fallen forth outwardly. And they likewise do sometimes escape with
life (but this is very ra^e) that have these bones replaced and set where they
were before. And in Text 41. he says thus: And yet notwithstanding a
Convulsion is rather produced if these bones be restored unto their places,
then if there be no possibility of restoring and replacing them. And Celsus in
his 8. B. and 10. Chapt. says; That it is yet somewhat more grievous, when unto
the Fracture of a bone there is likewise added a Wound of the flesh, and
especially if the Muscles of the Thigh or of the Shoulder be sensible thereof:
for these have always the much more grievous Inflammations; and they likewise
have Cancers more apt and ready to seize upon them. Now the danger is much more
augmented if the bone fall forth from some domestic (if I may so term it) and
interior part, then if it be from a wild external part; for in the former
there are found parts of a far greater account and value. Whereupon it is that
Hippocrates (in his 3 B of Fractures, and 47. Text) writes; Neither is it
moreover a matter (says he) of little Consequence whether or no the bone break
forth unto the exterior part of the Arm or Thigh; in regard that through the
interior parts of them there are carried along many and those principal) Veins;
of which if any chance to be wounded, and battered together, they Choke and
Throttle the party; but the Veins that are conveyed through the Exterior parts,
as they are fewer, so they are less considerable.

4. A Fracture with a Wound, if it be made with some cutting Weapon, is
dangerous, if it be a great bone that is cut, such as is that of the Thigh or
the Shoulder. For such like bones as these (especially if the incision be
direct and straight) will very hardly be brought to grow together again;
because that by this cutting Weapon the pores of the bone, through which the
Aliment for the breeding of the Callus did formerly pass, are in a manner
obstructed, and so the Callus is the longer ere it be generated. And moreover,
in regard that such a Fracture is equal, the broken bones are most difficultly
kept from being moved; and so by this the Coalition and growing together of
these bones is very much impeded.

The Cure in General.
We have here two Indications given us: the former whereof is, that the bones
be again restored unto their own places, and there exactly Joined together; and
the other is, that the Wound may be healed. The replacing of the bones is here
altogether difficult, by reason of the parts that are wounded which without
great pain, and fear of a convulsion, cannot be extended. Now the way and means
to return these bones unto their places again, is, first of all by extending
them sufficiently, but yet without all kind of violence: which if it cannot
otherwise sufficiently be done, then we must have ready at hand firm and strong
Iron Instruments, (like unto Bars) something different in their bigness one from
the other; out of which some one of them that is fit and convenient, in the
inferior part is to be administered unto the lower part of the broken bone, but
in the superior part unto the upper part of the said broken bone, (like unto an
Iron Sparre or Leaver) and so by this means the broken bones shall be forced
and driven again into their proper places: touching which Hippocrates (in the
3. B. of Fractures, Text 39.) writes in these words: If (says he) the bone
also that is fallen forth upon another bone leave not any fit place for the
Iron Sparre; or if that it be so sharp that it start away from it, we must then
with a File hollow the said broken bone, until there be a place made for the
Iron Sparre, and that it firmly stick unto it. And the truth is, all these
things are to be done instantly, even the very first day, before any
Inflammation to arise. For if this should happen, neither the extension nor
such putting back of the bones can be so much as attempted without very great
danger. If therefore the Surgeon be not sent for even at the very first, and
that he come not until there now plainly appear to be present an Inflammation,
he ought to deferr the putting back of the bones into their places, until he
find the Inflammation over and gone. I my self once on a time was present at
the Curing of a certain Peasant, who getting up into a Tree to beat down the
Acorns, fell down from it, and brake his Leg near unto the Ankle, insomuch that
the bone sticking out rested it self and lay upon the Ankle bone. And he not
having in a readiness a fit and expert Surgeon, an Inflammation and Gangrene
happened, which wasted and consumed almost all the Skin and Flesh about the
Ankle. He was then carried into the City, where the Gangrene ceasing, the bone
standing forth by the Iron Sparre or leaver was lifted up, and restored unto
its former place; and then after this all things else that were necessary being
performed, the Fracture and Wound were healed.

But if it happen that any small part of the bone shall so stick out that it
cannot easily be put back again into its proper place, but that by reason of
its various Fraction one part and portion of the bone be an impediment unto
another; and that likewise it be not thought fit to attempt any stronger
extension of the soft parts, by reason of the pain and Convulsion that may
thence be feared; and that the bones may in their conformation rent and tear
those parts that lie near them, and thereby produce pain; in all these regards
Hippocrates (in his 3. B. of Fractures, Text 4.) advises us to cut them off,
either with the cutting File, or with the Saw, as it shall be thought most
convenient, and as may be done with most opportunity. And so likewise, if any
portion of the bone break the Flesh, and excite pains, (so that we cannot so
much as attempt the replacing of them without a greater disruption) and
excruciating tortures in the highest degree, even in this Case also we ought to
cut off the bone. But then withal, lest that what happens through necessity
in the Artificial operation should be imputed unto the Error of the Physician,
the Patient and the bystanders are to be foretold that that part will be
shorter then before. And this likewise Hippocrates (in his 3. B. of Fractures,
and 46. Text) admonishes us of, whiles he says, That it is also fit that we
know this, that of necessity the Bodies must there be made shorter, where the
broken bones are diminished, that is to say, Cured by being cut off. But now in
such Fractures as these that are Joined together with the Wound of the Skin and
Flesh lying upon them, we must look well to it likewise, (before ever we Join
the bones together, and also after that they are thus Joined) that nothing at
all stick betwixt the broken bones, which may any way hinder the
Conglutination: and if any thing be found sticking there, (whether it be some
small part of a bone, or any thing else) it is forthwith to be taken out; but
this must not be done with any violence, lest that a pain, Inflammation, or
Convulsion should be excited. And therefore if at the first, (even in the very
beginning) this cannot be performed without violence and pain, it will be more
advisedly done of us to defer it, for Nature her self will at length thrust
forth every thing that is Extraneous, and that should not be there; and yet
nevertheless we ought to help Nature (al we can) with attracting Medicaments.

The binding how to be ordered..
But now as for the manner how the binding up of such a like Fracture with a
Wound ought to be instituted and ordered, in this neither the Ancients, nor yet
the more Modern Authors, do agree among themselves: for some of them are wont
to bind up the Fracture, as otherwise they did when it was without a Wound;
that so the Wound may be likewise covered; and they also loosen this binding
every third day: and some there are that roll about the Swathes in such a
manner, that the Wound is not at all comprehended within them, but left naked;
so that we may from day to day use all due means for the curing thereof,
without any frequent binding up and loosening of the whole Fracture. Others
there are that use fewer Swathes, and bind up the Fracture after the usual and
ordinary manner: but then others there be that administer broader and more
Swathes; that so by the number of the Swathes they may accomplish that which
might have been done with fewer when hard and straightly rolled. And some there
are that altogether neglect and disregard the splinters; others there be that
make great use of them; and of those that make use of them, some apply them a
good distance off from the wound; but others apply them even upon the very
wound it self; but then in that part that lies upon the wound they make a
hole, that so the Pus may pass forth thereat, and that such Medicaments as are
needful may be applied through the same. Caesar Magatus (in his B. of Wounds,
Chapt. 6.) insisteth still in his own Method; and here likewise in this case he
has no regard at al unto the wound; and unless there happen to follow here
upon any thing else that may force him to do otherwise he deferreth the
loosening until the fifteenth day, and sometimes unto the thirtyeth, according
as the quality of the fracture, and the Nature of the wound seem to persuade:
and look how much the longer time the fracture requires for the making of it
firm and strong, so much the longer does he defer the loosening. And (as he
writes) the generating of the Pus in the wound does not at all deter him. For
(says he) if it be cured in this manner, there is then a far less quantity
thereof generated by reason of the heat of the strengthening Covering; and as
for that which is bred without the wound, he writes that nature expels
forth this. And that this may be the more easily done, he opens and makes
slits (over against the wound) through all the linen Clothes by certain small
cuttings; through which the Sanies (or thin excrement) that is bred may be
driven forth.

Now although that in such operations and handy-works we may oftentimes in
diverse and different manners attain unto the same desired end; yet
notwithstanding both Hippocrates, and likewise all the more Skilful and
experienced Surgeons, take it for a most certain and undoubted truth, that
the first binding ought so to be instituted, that the wound may not be left
naked and bare; but that it may be comprehended within the swathe. And
therefore the swathe is first of al indeed to be cast upon the Wound itself:
for if it be otherwise done, the humors will be pressed forth from the Superior
part downward toward the wound, and many dangerous Symptoms are from thence
excited. And the danger of thus doing we may see experimentally even in one
that is sound and free from any such fracture. For if in any such person you
bind any one part both above and beneath, and leave the middle part untouched,
then the said middle part by the Humors that are from the adjacent Members
forced and pressed unto them, is lifted up into a Tumor; and from the influx of
the Humors (as we see) it soon changes its color. And albeit that in the first
binding the Member shall be all of it wrapped up within the Swathes; yet
notwithstanding there will not from hence be any cause to fear the least
danger; in regard that for the first three days there flows forth but very
little either of Pus or Sanies, that is to say, the thick or thin Excrements.
But here also even in this kind of binding it is to be observed, that we are to
make use of a Swathe that is somewhat broader than ordinary, and then otherwise
when there is no Wound present; and that there be indeed a sufficient
compression made; it being then to be accounted sufficient, when it can retein
and keep together the bones: but yet it must be somewhat less then if there were
present no Wound; lest that the wounded part being pressed together, a pain and
Inflammation should thence be excited: and the number of the Swathes may
compensate the more loose and easy binding and rolling of them; since that it
is far more safe to roll about the Swathes oftener, then any way to hurt the
part by Compression.

On the third day the binding is to be loosened; and then it is again to be
ordered after the first manner. And then most fitly and conveniently there may
be a hole cut through the Emplaster or Cataplasm that is imposed upon the
Fracture; yea and in the midst of the very Swathes there is a hole to be left;
(and so also in the Splinters, if there shall be any applied) that so there may
fitting Medicaments be administered unto the Wound; and that the Wound may also
be thoroughly cleansed and purged, without any loosening of the Fracture. And
this way of binding is lively set forth unto us by Ambrose Parry, in his 14. B.
Chapt. 18. and 23. For whereas the broken bones (that are wont to perforate the
Skin) are not always lo sharp (as in those Fractures that are made by the
Sword) that together with them the flesh is bruised together, and a hole made
through it; which when of necessity it must be turned into Pus, abundance of
the said Pus must necessarily be bred; which if it be retained (as needs it
must, if the Wound be wholly bound up) soon becomes sharp, and so exciteth an
i^ching and pain, and diverse other mischiefs; although that Nature be strong
and vigorous; yet nevertheless the generating of abundance of the said Pus
cannot be avoided; since that all whatsoever is bruised must of necessity be
converted into Pus.

And although that Magatus does cut and make little slits in all the Linen that
he puts upon the Wound, that so there may be a free and ready passage for
the Pus; yet notwithstanding all the inconveniences that proceed from the
retention of the Pus cannot by this means be prevented. For if those Swathes
and Linen Clothes shall not be shifted before the fifteenth, and sometimes even
the thirtieth day, they must certainly be very much desiled and polluted by the
Pus and Sanies; whereupon in the wounded part an itching, pain, and
exulceration may follow. But then on the other side, if the Swathes be still
kept whole, and not at all cut, and thereupon to be loosned every third day; it
is then to be feared, lest that the Pus retained may in the mean time excite
some mischief or other; and also lest that in so many loosenings and new
bindings up again the bones may be removed out of their places, and having been
well set and joined together they should again be depraved and disordered: which
may easily be avoided, if the binding be but seldom loosened, and the Wound
kept open. And yet notwithstanding as often as the Wound is dressed, it may be
covered over with a new Swathe, (which may contain both Medicaments and those
Coverings they call Splenia) and may defend the Wound from the external Air; and
it may be loosened as often as there is any need thereof; but then indeed it
must be without any agitation, shaking, or violent moving of the broken Member.

And there must also no Splinters be applied, lest that they too much compress
the Wound, and beget a pain and Inflammation. And if any will needs apply them,
yet notwithstanding they are not to be put upon the very Wound, but near unto
the same. Yet the truth is, the number of the Swathes may very well supply the
use of these Ferulae or Splinters. And these things are thus simply to be
performed, if there be neither any bone naked and bare, and that we fear not
the impostumating and falling cut of any broken piece and fragment of the bone.

Chap. 3. Of a Fracture with a Wound, in which there is no bone made bare, and
yet nevertheless a Cause to fear the falling forth of some fragments of the
broken bone.
IT happens oftentimes notwithstanding in Fractures with Wounds that there is
no bone at all left naked and bare: and yet nevertheless we may have great
cause to fear that some broken bone may impostumate and drop forth: and this is
done when the bones are made dry and withered, so that they cannot be
agglutinated unto the sound bone; or in a Fracture, when they are so separated
from the rest of the bone, that they can no more be joined therewith. For then
Nature endeavors to thrust forth whatsoever is troublesome and burdensome unto
her, and what cannot be united unto the rest of the bones; neither is she at
rest until whatsoever offends be wholly expelled out of the Body: and this
oftentimes she does at length perform although it be a long time first.

Now this happens, when the bones are either corrupted by the Sanies, or else
when they are altered by the external Air; or else likewise when they are so
separated (in a Fracture) from the rest of the bones, that they cannot possibly
be any more conjoined with them.

Signs Diagnostick.
Now what the Signs are of a bone like to be impostumated, and to drop forth,
we are told by Hippocrates in his 3. B. of Fractures, Text 18. The First Sign
is this, that there flows forth a greater abundance of the Sanies (or thin
Excrement) then could rationally be expected from the greatness and
Constitution of the Wound. Secondly, That the Lips of the wound do not meet
together; or if they do at any time meet together, yet they soon seem as it
were to be broken, and to be stirred up and provoked to excretion; and they
become as it were loose and spungy; and there is perceived in the wounded part
a certain silent motion. For Nature does not entirely heal a Wound, when there
is something remaining within that cannot possibly be agglutinated with the
rest. Thirdly, If the bone be left bare of Flesh, it is then altogether a Sign
of its separation and dropping forth; in regard that then it may be altered and
corrupted by the external Air, and that the Veins and Arteries (which convey
the Aliment) can no longer run forth unto it. And Fourthly, It is then likewise
a Sign that the bones will fall out, if they be broken and shattered into many
small pieces and fragments: for then they cannot all of them be easily
Conglutinated.

Prognostics.
1. It is a Sign of an Abscession instantly to follow, if there be good Flesh
bred in the sides of the sound bone.

2. But the time in which the bones are wont to recede and fall forth is
various, and not at all times alike. For in those of a tender Age, and in the
Summer, and if the bone be not very great, it is twenty, thirty, or perhaps
forty days, ere the bone will be separated and fall forth. But if the bone be
any thing great, in one of a full and ripe Age, and in the Winter time, it is
usually threescore days, yea and sometimes longer, ere it impostumate and drop
forth.

The Cure.
If the bone that is like to fall forth be moved out of its place, and that it
stick in the very Wound, it is immediately (as we told you before) to be drawn
forth with the Volsella or Pincers; if it may indeed be so drawn forth without
any pain and violence: but otherwise the whole business is to be committed unto
Nature, which by degrees will at the length separate that which cannot be
agglutinated. And yet nevertheless she is to be assisted and helped by the
Physician; and therefore the binding ought to be instituted in a loole manner,
and often unbound, that so the Pus and filth may not be detained, but that it
may freely and easily flow forth. And likewise there are no Splinters to be
imposed upon that place by which the bone is like to fall forth, lest that by
compression they cause pain.

And so also there are Medicaments to be laid upon the Wound, that have in them
a power of drawing forth of the Wound the bones and whatsoever is extraneous
and no way belonging unto the part affected; and such Medicaments we have above
mentioned in the place alleged.

But if there be some great and extraordinary portion of the bone like to drop
forth, and this because that the parts of the broken bone cannot be again
composed and made to Join with the other; ( for whatsoever bones shall refuse to
be replaced, we ought to know that these will separate and fall forth; as also
those that are naked and bare of Flesh; as Hippocrates writes (in his B. of
Fractures, Sect. 3. Text 44.) such like wounded parts are to be handled with
all gentleness. For by reason of motion and compression there happen many times
most vehement pains, the small parts of the broken bone not rightly placed
together pricking the parts that lie near unto them, these parts being very
sensible of pain: whereupon it is that those bindings that in other Fractures
are very convenient, in such Fractures as these would excite most vehement
pains.

Now Hippocrates (as he tells us in his B. of Fractures, Section 3. Text 21.)
that so he might avoid these inconveniences, makes no use of the Swathe, lest
that he should press together the part too much, and lest if the part should at
all be lifted up he might excite pain; but having finished the replacing of the
bones, (as far as it may be done) and having taken away all those fragments of
bones that may be taken away, he then applies unto the Wound the pitched
Cerot, or some other Cerot fit to be put upon bloody Wounds: and then after he
has thus done, because that there is an imminent danger of a fluxion, from the
weakness of the part, and from pain, (and likewise that the flux of Humors may
be driven back, the part strengthened, and the Fracture made firm and stable)
he puts round about it those coverings we call Splenia, doubled; or the
Plagulae of thin Linen; in breadth half as broad as half the Palm of the Hand,
and no narrower; but then in length a little shorter then that they should come
twice about the wounded Member, but yet something longer then to compass about
but once only. For if they should be longer, then of necessity (when the
Medicaments are renewed) the Member must be lifted up: and if they were
shorter; they could not then sufficiently strengthen and establish the
Fracture. Those Linen Clothes being first thoroughly moystened in sharp or sour
Wine, and so many in number as are necessary, (that so there may be place
without them) are so to be applied unto the Member, that their Heads may be
drawn by the place affected, not round and Circularly, but a little sloping, so
as that from the Contrary part (where they began,) they may be brought together
the one to the other, after the similitude of the letter X. and that so they
may cut cross one another like unto the aforesaid Letter, by drawing the right
Head unto the left part, and the left Head unto the right part. Which Splenia,
in regard that they are not very long, and may be taken away, that the part may
not be lifted up, in this respect they are very convenient. And instead of the
Wine we may likewise very fitly administer other Medicaments also, which are as
good for the very same use.

There may likewise notwithstanding be administered a binding which is
completed with once only rolling about; and it may be performed with a Swathe,
which is to be folded together with a twice or thrice doubled Linen Cloth,
(after the manner of a Cross-cloth) and so very dexterously to be sewed
together in their sides; and so broad that it may cover the whole Wound.

But now because that binding by which the bones (when they are again set in
their places) are so to be kept from starting out of their said places has not
any being or use in this case, therefore those Wooden Coffers, Pipes, or the
like engines are to be administered, that they may keep the broken part in its
proper place. And yet notwithstanding this is carefully to be heeded, that
nothing that is hard be immediately applied unto the part; but that betwixt the
wounded part and those Engines there be interposed some soft Splenia coverings,
that so there may be no compression made: touching which see Hippocrates, in
his 3. B. of Fractures, and 23. Text.

And Lastly, If the extremities or ends of the broken bones break out and stick
forth without the Skin, we are then to do our utmost endeavor that they may
not be altered and corrupted by the external Air, so that afterward they must
of necessity be cut off; and therefore we must labor that they may forthwith
be replaced, and covered with their Natural covering the Skin: which in what
manner it ought to be performed, we have told you above in the Second Chapter.

Chap. 4. Of the Preternatural Affects that happen unto Fractures.
BUt now, in regard that there are various Preternatural affects that are wont
to succeed and follow upon Fractures, (which partly retard the Cure, and partly
remain even after the Fracture is cured, and are to be taken away) we shall
likewise treat of these. Now there are many of these like affects, as Pain,
Inflammation, and a Gangrene following upon this, an Itching, an Excoriation,
an Exulceration, a depraved Figure of the Member, a Callus either greater or
less then what Justly it ought to be, an Extenuation of the Member,
slenderness, and debility; touching all which we intend now to speak.

Pain.
If there be any pain present, this is altogether to be assuaged and taken
away; for otherwise by reason hereof the Humor will flow together unto the part
affected, and so an Inflammation and other mischiefs will be excited. But now
that it may the better be taken away, we are to consider from what Cause it
proceeds, and that (if possibly it may be) is instantly to be removed. And
therefore we are to be well advised, whether this pain be from some bone that
pricketh, or from the Swathes too hard drawn; or whether it be from the ill
Situation of the Member; or else from the afflux of the Humors.

If the pain arise from a bone that pricketh, (and this is known by the light
and gentle handling of the part, and the pricking pain following thereupon)
then the Swathes are to be loosened, and the pricking bone is either to be put
back into its proper place, or (if it may conveniently be done) taken forth, or
cut off. Touching which Celsus thus, in his 8. B. and 10. Chapter. A Fracture
(says he) does sometimes vex the Flesh with certain sharp pricks as it were,
which being known by the itching and pricking, it will be best to open it, for
there is a necessity of cutting off these sharp pricks.

If the pain arise from the over hard binding of the Swathes; this is found by
the swelling that appears in the extremity of the part, and the sick person
complains that he is vehemently pressed. And then the Swathes are forthwith
to be loosened, and the binding to be made more easy.

If the pain proceed from an ill Situation and posture of the Member, the sick
person does easily discover this; and it requires a change of the Situation;
which ought so to be ordered, that the Patient may now confess himself that he
is without pain.

And Lastly, If the pain be from the afflux of the Humors, the way and means of
curing it is the very same with that of an Inflammation in its beginning; as we
shall by and by show you.

Inflammation.
For if there be a pain excited from the afflux of the Humors and an
Inflammation follow thereupon; we are then to oppose the very first beginning
of the Inflammation, in that manner as we told you above, in the first part,
and 5. Chap. To wit, the Member that is bound up must be loosened, and fomented
with the Oil of Roses, either alone, or mingled with the white of an Egg: or
else such a like Cataplasm is to be laid on.

Take Barley meal, three ounces; the powder of Marsh-Mallow Roots, and Camomile
flowers, of each one ounce and balf; Roses, one ounce; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water and sour Wine; and then add Oil of Roses, three
ounces; and make a Cataplasm. And for the rest, see in the place alleged.

But before the Inflammation be ceased, the part is not to be bound up, or
certainly, (at least) not to be hard bound; neither are the Splinters, nor any
one of those kind of Engines, to be imposed; unless it be that they may prop up
the member, and contain the Medicaments.

Gangrene.
And there happens oftentimes likewise unto Fractures (and especially those
that are made with a Wound,) a Contusion of the Skin, by reason of the
Inflammation following thereupon; which how and in what manner it is to be
Cured we have already told you above, in the 2. Part, and 19. Chapter.

Itching and Excoriation.
But if from the Sanies there be caused an Itching in the Wound, as also an
Excoriation, and Exulceration, then Water temperatly hot is to be made use of,
that the Sanies may be washed away, and that it may be called forth and
dissipated: and there may be likewise taken such Water as is moderately salt,
which cleanses more powerfully.

And afterward let the place be anointed with the white Camphorate Unguent,
with the Unguent of Roses, of Litharge, of Diapompholyx, and the like: unto
which likewise there may be added the Juice of Plantane, or Nightshade.

Chap. 5. Of Distorted and ill set Bones.
ANd very often likewise it chances that after the broken bones are again made
to grow together they receive not their former wonted and convenient Figure,
but are distorted and writhed; whereupon the motion of the Member is much
hindered, and a lameness or halting caused in the Foot; or else in the Arms
their laying hold on any thing is hurt. Now this comes to pass, either from
the unkilfulness and neglect of the Surgeon who sets the bones, and
binds up the Fracture; or else through the inordinate motions of the sick
person.

The Cure.
This evil is Cured (if the Callus be new and has not been bred above six
months, and the sick person of a ripe age, and strong, and the broken bone not
very great, and the action of the Member not much hurt) if the Callus be again
broken, and the bones rightly fitted and set together. Now this breaking of the
Callus is the more easily done, if the Callus be first for some days fomented
with the Decoction of Emollient Herbs, as for instance, the Roots and Leaves of
Marshmallows, Mallows, Figs fat and dry: and then let a Cataplasm of the same
Roots and Herbs be afterward laid on, or else an Emollient Emplaster. Or else
you may administer some such Emollient Unguent as this that follows.

Take Unguent Dialthaea, one ounce and half; Bdellium, Mastick, Turpentine, of
each half an ounce; the Marrow of the Legs of Veal, Oil of sweet Almonds,
Camomile, the fat of a Hen, of each six drams; the Mucilage of Linseed, and
Fenugreek, of each one ounce; Wax as much as will suffice; and make a soft
Unguent.

The Callus being sufficiently mollefied, The Callus how to be broken.
the Member is by the help of two Assistants to be drawn this and that way, and
so to be extended: but then let the Surgeon put again into its place that
which sticks forth in the place where the Fracture is; and if he be not well
able to do it otherwise, he may then on that part upon which the bones do most
rest and incline lay a Tile wrapped up in Wool, and so by binding of it he may
force it back again unto its former seat, and there accustom it to abide: or
else let him altogether break the bone, which may be done in the aforesaid
manner; or else if the Surgeon put the broken Member (in which the Callus
is) upon his Knee, and then on both sides press down the bone as hard as he can
with both his Hands. And then the Heads of the bones are rightly to be fitted
together, and a Convenient Cure instituted for this new Fracture.

But if the Callus be now already old and of long continuance, and that it be
waxen very hard, and that the Patient be weak, or aged, the best course will be
(as Albucasis advises) not to lay Hands at all upon it, by reason of the
dangerous Symptoms that are wont to follow thereupon, in this kind of Cure. For
it is much better, of two evils to choose the less; and to be content rather to
live yet longer (though deformed and lame) for many years, then by a cruel Cure
to attract dangerous and deadly Symptoms. Yet it is a thing impossible, (if the
Callus be old and obdurate) to break it; but if any will needs attempt it, the
bone is more likely to be broken in some other place then where the Callus is;
and so by this means grievous Maladies will ensue unto the sick person; and as
for what he desires, he will be deceived in his hopes; for the deformity and
writhedness of the Member will not hereby be corrected, since that the Crooked
Callus cannot possibly be amended.

Chap. 6. Of Correcting the Callus that is greater or less then what it ought
justly to be.
ANd sometimes also it so happens that there is generated a Callus less or
greater then what it should be. And indeed the Callus is generated less then it
should justly be, by reason of the scarcity and want of that thick Aliment
whereby the bones are nourished, and from which the said Callus is bred: and
this scarcity of the Aliment is either from too spare a Diet in the Patient, or
from the Patients not using of those meats that are most fit for the breeding
of the Callus; or from the swathes being rolled on too hard and close; or else
lastly, because that the Medicaments administered being over astringent have
hindered the afflux of the Aliment.

Now the Callus when it is less then justly it should be is known by the touch,
Signs thereof
by which it is discovered to be but small, and the Member is somewhat weak in
its motion; and the above mentioned causes went before.

What to be done, for the breeding of a greater Callus.
But now that there may be generated a greater Callus, we are to allow unto the
sick person a full diet, and meats that breed a thick and viscid Juice; the
swathes are likewise to be loosened, and the part to be plied with warm water
until it appear to be very red. For in this manner there is drawn unto the
part affected a greater store of blood, that so there may be supplied a more
plentiful matter for the generating of the Callus. There are likewise
Medicaments to be imposed, and Dropacisms (as they call them) that are
moderately heating and attracting a more plentiful Aliment unto the place
affected. There is likewise to be administered one dram of the Stone Osteocolla
with the Water of the greater Comfry (ground small upon a Marble) in Prisan,
flesh broth, or Wine, which has a singular virtue to generate the Callus; as
by examples Guilhelmus Fabricius proves in his First Century, and Ninetyeth
Observation.

The Callus bigger then it justly should be
But then sometimes (on the contrary) the Callus is generated bigger then what
justly it should be; which proceeds from the over-abundant afflux of the
Aliment (especially when it is too thick) as also by the giving of the
Osteocolla Stone hand over head; which although it has indeed a notable virtue
in generating the Callus, yet Nevertheless it is more suitable and convenient
for aged persons, and such as are of riper years, then for such as are very
young. For if it be administered unto these, there is then generated a Callus
greater then what justly it should be, as by an Example Guilhelm. Fabricius
teaches us in the place before alleged.

Signs thereof.
Now this Callus is known by the very touch, by which it is easily discovered;
as also by the pain which arises from the Compression of the Muscles and the
Nervous parts; whereupon the part also is rendered unfit for motion, and
especially if the fracture be made near unto the Joint.

The Callus how it is to be made less.
Now the Callus if it be overgreat is diminished and made less by discussive and
digestive Medicaments; as by frictions of S^^ Nitre, and Oil, and by a
perfusion and fomentation made of Salt water, or a decoction of the Leaves of
Beets, Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, Sage, flowers of Camomile, and of
Melilote; or else a Cataplasm made of these is to be laid on.

Or else let the part be anointed with this Unguent. Viz.

Take Goose fat, Bears fat, Man's fat, of each two ounces; Juice of Earthworms
one ounce; Ammoniacum a dram; and mingle them.

But yet if the Callus be harder then ordinary, then let Emollients be added
unto Digestives; and before the application of Cataplasms let the place
affected be fomented with some Decoction. As,

Take Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, Roots of white Lilyes and Bryony, of
each half an ounce; Flowers of Marshmallows, and Mallows, of each one handful;
Camomil and Melilote, of each half a handful; Linseed and Fenugreek, of each
half an ounce; boil them for a fomentation; and of the mass make a Cataplasm.

But let these fomentations be used, not only until the part wax red, and begin
to swel; but that also the part may again fall, and become lank and wrinkled.

Let this Diet be very sparing; neither let him eat much food that yields a
thick and clammy Juice.

Guilhelmus Fabricius (in his 1 Century, and Observat. 21.) makes use of these
Medicaments, for one whose Callus was grown too great, by the use of the Stone
Osteocolla. First of all he twice a day fomented the Callus with the following
Emollient Decoction.

Take the Roots and Leaves of Marshmallows, Bryony, white Lillies, Bears
Breech, Flowers of Camomile and Melilote, of each one handful; Common
Wormwood, and Red Roses, of each one ounce; boil them in Vinegar one part, and
Water four parts; unto the Consumption of the third part.

After this he anointed the Callus with the following Unguent,

Take Man's fat, Bears fat, and Goose fat, of each two ounces; the Juice of
Earthworms, and Vinegar of Squils, of each one ounce; Mingle and make an
Unguent.

After the Inunction he applied the following Emplaster spread upon Leather.

Take the Emplaster of Frogs with Mercury, and of the Mucilage, of each one
ounce; and mingle them.

In this manner he proceeded for six days, until he saw that the Callus was
not only much mollified, but also most manifestly diminished. And afterward
instead of the Plaster he fitted unto it a Leaden Plate, and with a Swathe he
bound it fast and firmly upon the Callus. And by the use of the Remedies, and
the blessing of God upon them, the Callus was softened, Resolved, Extenuated,
and Depressed; and the sick person restored again unto his former health.

Chap. 7. Of the Slenderness and Weakness of the Member.
ANd furthermore it happens oftentimes, that after a Fracture the Member
remains slender and weak: which is caused either through the scarcity of the
Aliment, whiles that by the long and various bindings of the Swathes the Veins
carrying the Aliment unto the part are streightened, and welnigh closed up; or
else when the sick person has not food enough allowed him to Eat and Drink:
and that likewise which makes very much hereunto is a long continued rest of
the Member, and its Cessation from Motion.

And therefore we must by all means endeavor, that a more plentiful Aliment
may be attracted unto the part. And therefore as much as is fit the Member is
to be moved, and reduced unto its wonted and accustomed motions; and to be
fomented with Decoctions that only attract the Aliment unto the part affected,
and do not any ways scatter it. And Dropacisms are here likewise of singular
use. Or,

Take Oil of Costus and of Camomile, For broken bones that grow not together as
formerly.
of each half an ounce; Oil of Castor, and the Martiat Unguent, and Man's fat,
of each one ounce; and mingle them.

And sometimes also it happens (especially in aged persons) that the broken
bones will not be brought to grow together again; of which thing Guilhelm.
Fabricius (in his 1 Cent. Observat. 92.) has a History. The very like
whereunto there happened here of late, in a very learned man, who is yet
living. This man was in the very same case with the other mentioned and
described by Guilhel. Fabricius. For he can indeed write with his right Hand;
but if at any time he desire to list up his whole right Arm (which he had
broken) either forward or backward, he then needs the assistance and support
of his left Hand.

Now this comes to pass, if the bones (after they be set,) be not kept in
their places steady and unmoved; and this likewise was the cause of what
happened unto that learned person we but even now mentioned. For he being very
Fleshy and Corpulent, and his Shoulder that he had broken being not possibly to
be bound up in a right manner, and hard enough, and he in the night time
sleeping very unquietly, and continually turning himself in his bed; and
moreover, by reason of his extraordinary sweating in his Shoulder, the
Medicaments applied thereto being continually kept so wet and moist that they
could not stick close enough to put forth their virtue, the bones could not be
consolidated, nor brought to grow fast and firm together, but they lay at a
certain distance one from the other.

But now such Fractures as these are afterward very hardly to be cured, (unless
it be so that they are new and of no long standing, in which the usual way of
Curing is to be administered, and the Osteocolla Stone to be given the Patient,
as we have already shown you how, and in what manner; of which very thing we
find an example in Guilhelmus Fabricius his third Cent. Observat. 90.) in
regard that a Callus is drawn over the extremities of the broken bones, by
reason of which the bones can no more be brought to grow together. Yet some
there are that think that such inveterate Fractures as these may likewise be
Cured. And Cornelius Celsus (in his 8. B. and 10. Chapt.) writes of them, in
these very words. If (says he) the Fracture (to wit, of the bones that grow
not well together) be inveterate, the Member is then to be extended, that it
may be something hurt. The bones are with the Hand to be divided one from the
other, that by coming together again they may be exasperated; so that if there
be any thing fat, it may by this means be taken away, and that it may wholly
become new as it were: and yet great care ought here to be had that the Nerves
and Muscles be not hurt. And then the Member is to be fomented with Wine in
which Pomegranate Rinds have been boiled; and the same is likewise to be laid
on mingled with the white of an Egg. The third day it is to be loosened, and
fomented with Water in which Vervein has been boiled. On the fifth day the
like is to be done; and Splinters are to be placed round about it. And as for
all the rest that is to be done (both before and after) it is the very same
that we wrote before. But this way of Curing is very dangerous, and (which
Celsus himself likewise fears) by thus doing the Nerves and Muscles may
easily be hurt; and thereupon an Inflammation or Convulsion excited.

Chap. 8. Of the Fracture of the Arm.
ANd thus much (in general) may suffice to have been spoken touching Fractures.
But now because that the bones which are broken are various, and in regard that
according to the variety of the broken bones the Cure does something differ, we
shall now therefote speak something of Fractures in their species, and
particularly. But as for the rest of the differences, in regard that they make
very little or nothing at all either for the knowledge or Cure; and that all
that may be said of them is contained in those things which we have hitherto
spoken of Fractures in general; we shall therefore pass them over, and shall
treat only of those differences that are taken from the subject, and the
diversity of those broken bones. And because that very frequently the Arm,
Shoulder, Leg, and Thigh, are broken, we shall therefore in the first place
speak of them; and afterward we intend to treat likewise of the Fractures of
the rest of the bones.

And indeed as touching the Fracture of the Arm, The Fracture of the Arm:
in regard that the Arm together with the Hand is the Organ or Instrument of
laying hold on things, and of many labors, and is likewise exposed unto
external injuries, it is wont to be often broken.

Now the Arm, or that part which is from the Shoulder to the Wrist, consists
of two bones; of which the greater that lies lowermost is called Cubitus or
Vlna; but the less which lies above the Elbow is termed Radius. Now sometimes
both these bones are broken, and sometimes but only one of them.

Prognostics.
1. The Fracture of the Arm is more easily Cured when but only one of the bones
is broken, then when they are both broken; as we told you above, in the first
Chapt. and sixth Prognost.

2. If only one of these Arm-bones be broken, the Cure is more easy; if the
upper bone, (or Radius) then if the lower bone (or Cubitus) be broken; for the
upper needs less extension then the lower: and if the lower, (to wit, the
Cubitus) be preserved sound, it serves instead of a Basis and prop as it were,
to keep the broken bone from being moved out of its place. And Secondly,
Because that it is more easy to be set in its place again; unless it be in
that part next the Hand. And thirdly, Because that the Elbow bone being kept
safe and sound, it is carried more safely in the Scarf or Linen Swathe.

3. But the worst Fracture of all is, if both the bones be broken together. For
first of all, they have no prop, nor any thing at all to sustain them. And then
again Secondly, They need a greater Extension; since that the Nerves and
Muscles are more contracted toward the place from whence they spring; in regard
that there is nothing whereby (when they are extended) they may be so kept. And
Thirdly, because that the near neighboring parts a^e more hurt.

4. But now the bones of the Arm are for the most part made to grow together
within thirty days; although (as we said before) there may be great difference
in the Age, and Nature of the Patients.

The Cure.
Whatsoever things they are that are required unto the Curing of the Fractures
of the other parts, they are here likewise necessary. But as for the Extension,
there is less need of strength and force when the Radius is broken, then when
the Cubitus or Elbow is broken: but the greatest need of all, when both the
bones are broken. And indeed, if both the bones are broken, the Extension that
is made ought to be equal; but if only one of the two bones be broken, the
greatest and strongest Extension ought to be in that part where the bone is
broken. The Extension being made, the broken bone is again to be directed into
its proper place, and there set fast. The broken bone being thus replaced, the
Fracture (as we told you before) is in a convenient manner to be bound up and
rolled about with Swathes; and all other things are here to be performed that
were before spoken of in the Cure of a Fracture in general; and then at length
the Arm is to be fitly placed and Scituaced. And indeed (as Hippocrates
advises in his first B. of Fractures, Text 22.) in the placing thereof there
is great care to be had, that the Hand be not lower then the Elbow; lest that
if the Arm hang down the Blood should flow toward the Fracture; but something
(and not much) higher then the Elbow; and yet nevertheless so that no pain at
al may be caused. And the Arm is also to be placed in that Figure, which may
not in the least pervert any of the Muscles, and breed pain. And therefore the
Arm is neither to be wholly extended, neither ought it to be wholly doubled and
bowed together: neither is it likewise to be placed in a Supine or Prone
manner. For these are the four extreme habits; and extension is contrary unto
bending and crooking; and so is Supine also contrary unto Prone. But now, there
are also two other manners; one that betwixt extreme bending and extension
(called Angularis by Hippocrates) the other between prone and supine. And
always, if the Arm be rightly placed, the Muscles that arise in the fore part
of the Elbow will be wholly Situated from the interior part; and those that
are from the exterior part will likewise be contained in this; and so there
will not be at all any extension or perversion of the Musches. And indeed, the
Arm being thus bound up and Situated, it will be very fit that the sick person
keep himself in his bed for ten days. But after this, in regard that the sick
person will not be willing any longer to keep his bed, but will now desire to
walk about; from the Neck the Arm is to be hung in a broad and soft Garter or
Scarf, equally sustaining within it good part of the Arm, with part of the Palm
of the Hand, so, that none of the bones that are set and joined together may by
any means be moved out of their places.

Chap. 9 Of the Fracture of the Shoulder.
Prognostics.
The Shoulder bone grows together in forty days: for it being somewhat a great
bone requires the longer time for the generating of the Callus.

The Cure.
And therefore the first care (as in all Fractures) ought to be, that the
broken bones may be restored unto their own places; and being Joined together,
that they may be so preserved. That this may be the better performed, there
will first of all be need of Extension; which how it ought to be done in this
Case, Hippocrates has accurately described in his 2 B. of Fractures, and
Offic. Medic. The Sum of all is this; that the sick person either sitting or
lying along be kept so steady and immovable, that he may not be stirred so as
to give ground in the Extension of the part: and let the Shoulder be kept in
about the upper part of it, and the broken bone drawn this and that way. Now if
this cannot be done (in those that are of full and ripe age) by the help of the
Hands alone (by reason of the thickness and strength of the Muscles in that
place) then there will be need of Engines and Cords; of which Hippocrates (in
the place alleged) makes mention. The Extension being performed, the bones
are conveniently to be set and placed together; which may here be done without
any difficulty. Unto the broken bones set right and straight fit Medicaments
(touching which we have spoken before, in the first Chapt.) are to be laid on;
and afterward Swathes are to be cast about it, beginning from the Fracture it
self: and here we are to be very heedful, that the Member be evermore bound up
in that Figure in which it ought to remain; that is, that the Elbow with the
Shoulder may make a right Angle, lest that in changing the Situation the
Swathe press too close in one part, and be overloose in another, and so the
(...) be perverted. Hippocrates binds on (...) Splinters the seventh or the
nineth day, because that in the Shoulder by reason of the greatness of the
Muscles (by which it is contained) those bones that are about the Fracture in a
longer time become altogether slender and loose: for then at the length we come
most sitly unto the applying of the Splinters. But we must have a care that
these Splinters touch not the extremities of the Joints; and therefore (as
Celsus in his 8. B. and 10. Chap. tells us) they ought on the outside to be
very long, somewhat shorter from the brawn of the Arms, but shortest of all
under the wing of the Shoulder. But if the Splinters be instantly fastened on
at the very first of all (according to the practice of some, and indeed most of
the Modern Artists) they ought then to be tied on but loosely; but then after
the seventh and nineth day they are afterward to be loosened, and bound on
something harder. And then in the last place the Member is rightly to be placed;
and that the Shoulder may not be perverted and turned awry, let the broad
Swathe that encompasseth the Shoulder be drawn in a round manner about the
Breast; and when the Shoulder ought to rest, let the first many times wrapped
about be cast and drawn under betwixt the side and the Elbow, lest that the
Shoulder touch upon the side; but yet let there be a space in the middle,
whither when the Shoulder is forced by the Reins drawing it into the breast, it
may not at all be depraved and disordered. Let the sick person lie upon his
back, putting his hand upon his Stomach; and let soft pillows be put under the
Shoulder, that so it may not remain hung up as it were; but the Elbow is to be
lifted up by a Scarf put about the Neck, that so the Angular Figure may be
preserved, and that it may not be moved whilst the Patient sleeps.

Chap. 10 Of the Fracture of the Leg.
THe Leg is that part that is extended from the Knee unto the Foot. Now it
consists of two bones: of which that which is the thicker, and is Situated
in the inward part of the Leg we call Tibia or the Shinbone; but the thinner
and outward bone is termed Fibula. Now these bones are broken, sometimes both of
them together, and sometimes but only one of them; and the Fracture happens
either in the midst, or in the upper, or in the nether part.

Signs Diagnostick.
If both the bones be broken, this is most easily known; because that the whole
Leg may then be bowed and bended. And it is likewise no hard matter to know the
Fracture of the shinbone, if it be wholly broken; because that this whole bone
comes easily to be seen as being in a place where there is but little or no
flesh. But if the Fibula only be broken, this is not so easily known, because
that it is covered with much flesh; and yet nevertheless the broken part
inclines inwardly.

Prognostics.
1. If only one of the bones be broken, the Cure is then easier then if they be
both broken.

2. If the Fibula only be broken, it is more easily Cured; and the sick person
will be sooner able to set his Foot to the ground, in regard that the Legs are
easily extended; and because that the Shin-bone susteineth the greatest part of
the weight of the Body.

3. If the Shin-bone be broken, it is very hardly Cured; because that there is
here need of a greater Extension; and the sick person is much longer ere he
dare adventure to walk.

4. But now these bones for the most part are consolidated within forty days,
and very seldom sooner.

The Cure.
And therefore, whether only one, or both the bones be broken, the Leg is (as
much as may be) to be extended; that so the bones without any damage at all may
again be restored unto their own places, and there joined together. Which most
commonly is to be done by two strong able men; who are to draw the Leg toward
them, they standing on both sides of the same; one into the superior part, and
the other into the inferior part. And it will be but a Vainglorious act in
them to make use of any kind of Engines, when the Case does not require it. But
if they cannot accomplish it otherwise, let them then make use of the Reins and
Engines that we so often have described, and which are so generally well known.
And when the Leg shall be sufficiently extended, the broken bones are then to
be settled in their places. And afterward convenient Medicaments are to be
imposed; and the Leg is then to be rolled and wrapped about with Swathes, (as in
general we have already told you;) which ought to be both broader and longer
then in the Arm: and the Leg is so altogether to be Situated and composed,
that it may not be turned awry unto any part; and that the broken bones may not
be disordered when he goes to his bed, or to ease Nature. Touching the
Situation of the Shank or Shin-bone, see likewise further hereof in Guilhelm.
Fabricius his 1. Centur. Observat. 93. And at length the Leg when it is
extended and stretched forth straight, is to be placed upon a Cushion, or some
other soft and plain thing, and so the Splinters and Pipes are then to be
administered as in general we told you before, in the first Chapter; in which
thing we are to observe, that they be not applied upon the extremities of the
bones sticking out; or upon that Tendon which tends and passes along from
the Leg unto the Foot, and is there knit unto the Heel. For these parts having
in them a very exquisite sense will not endure compression; but if they be
pressed together they are then pained and inflamed.

And there is here also sometimes need of blood-letting, and purging, as in the
Fracture of the Arm.

As for matter of Diet, we ought altogether more and longer to extenuate the
body of the Patient (as Hippocrates commands) when the Leg, then when the
Arm is broken; by how much that is greater and thicker then this; and because
there is also a Necessity that the body should rest, and lie still.

Chap. 11. Of the Fracture of the Thigh.
THe Thigh bone of all the bones in the body of man is absolutely the biggest,
thickest, and longest; and this may also chance to be broken, either in the
midst, or in the Excremityes thereof, and the places near adjoining.

Prognostics,
1. Touching the Fracture of the Thigh Celsus in his eighth Book and Chap. 10.
writes thus: If the Thigh be broken, it must of necessity be made shorter;
because that it never more returns into its old place. But yet
notwithstanding there is much more weakness in the Thigh, where the Negligence
of fortune is likewise added unto the fracture. Which opinion of Celsus is
(according to Peccettus in his fourth Book, Whether the Fracture of the Thigh
do necessarily cause lameness.
Chapt. 24.) thus to be understood by us not that by no means the broken bones
may be restored unto their wonted seat in the Thigh, and there be well sitted
together, that therefore the Thigh bone must necessarily be shorter; but when
the part is less distended then need requires, and when the bones are not well
and most exactly set and sitted together: since that we see from day to day
Many who have suffered a Fracture of the Thigh (it having been well fastened
together with Iron instruments) have yet walked straight and upright without
any lameness at al. And the very same we are taught by Avicen, Book 4. fen. 5.
tract. 3. Chap. 14. by Guido de Cauliac. in his 5 tract. Doct. 1. Chap. 7. by
John de vigo, in his sixth Book and 14. Chapt. by Andreas, in his second B. of
Surgery, and 14. Chapt. and diverse others. But Guilhelm. Fabricius (in his
5. Cent. and 86. Observation) writes that he never saw nor knew any that after
this kind of Fracture escaped without a lameness, besides one young Maid only,
unto whom he administered a new and peculiar kind of Cure. And this especially
happens if the Thigh be broken nigh unto the Hip. And of this kind of
Fracture the Authors alleged are to be understood: But if the Thigh bone be
broken toward the knee or in the midst, and that there be diligence used and
care taken in the curing thereof, the fracture may then be healed without any
great difficulty, or lameness. But that if the said thigh bone be broken toward
the Hip, lameness for the most part follows, these are the causes, as
Guilhelmus Fabricius reckons them up. The first is this, because that the
Thigh bone is not straight, as the shin and Arm bones are, but that it is
naturally dilated into the external part, as it were into a bow: wherefore if
it shall chance at any time to be broken it is easily bowed and bended toward
the inward part: but then toward the external part it buncheth forth as it were
into a bow. Secondly, there are present the greatest and strongest Nerves and
Muscles from the inward part of the Thigh, which so soon as the bone is broken
they drawing, the said bone (which as we have said was now before naturally
bowed) toward their original, (to wit, the place where they have their first
beginning) do easily and in such a manner indeed draw it into a bow, that the
extremityes thereof about the Fracture do disjoyn themselves, and stick forth
toward the external part. Thirdly, because that it is but one only bone,
wherefore it is not so easily to be detained in its own place, as if it had
some other bone adjoined with it, as the shin and the Arms have. Fourthly,
because that the part is very fleshy, and the bone situated as it were in the
midst of a pillow, experience teaches us that it can very hardly be kept in
its own proper place by the benefit of the splinters, and the Splema Coverings;
and especially if the Fracture be made obliquely. For those very strong Nerves
and Muscles do again (notwithstanding that they were from the very first
rightly set and replaced) draw the bones out of their proper places. But yet
nevertheless, if any one will follow that Method propounded by Guilhelm.
Frabricius himself, he writes that it may very easily be avoided, that the Leg
shall not at al become shorter, or that any lameness follow thereupon.

2. The Thigh will at length in fifty days be brought to grow together again,
and to be Consolidated, and not sooner; in regard that (as I said before) it is
the greatest of all the bones, and therefore requires the longer time, that
the Callus may be generated, by which it is brought to grow together.

The Cure.
The Thigh bone being broken, if the bones be removed out of their places,
there will then be need of a very strong and forcible extension; since that the
Muscles that encompass about the Thigh are the greatest of all the rest, so
that these strong Muscles (when they are contracted toward the place of their
original) may easily overcome and master those bonds by which the Extension is
made: which if it should so be, the Leg is thereby rendered shorter; which is
altogether a great deformity, and very much inconvenient. For although the Arm
be somewhat shorter, yet it may be concealed, neither will there be any great
hurt thereby; but the Thigh if it be made shorter it unavoidably causes a
lameness, and unseemly halting.

There being made a sufficient extension, the Muscles (being of all other the
strongest) do easily draw up the lower part of the broken bone unto the upper
parts. But now nevertheless that this may the more rightly and decently be
done, (a sufficient extension being made by the parts of the Palms sticking
forth, as in all other Fractures) let the bone be set directly straight, and so
pressed close together. And afterward, let a Necessary and fit Medicament be
imposed thereon, and the Fracture conveniently be bound up: and here it will not
be amiss to cut in pieces some linen Clothes, and to wrap them round about upon
the Hip, and near the Ilia Guts, as likewise the Groins, and that which is
betwixt the Arse and the Genitalls; as for other Causes, so likewise more
especially for this, to wit, that the external Splinters offend not the naked
part.

The Pipe that is fitted unto the Thigh ought either to take in the whole
Thigh, The Pipe of what kind it must be.
or else not at al by any means to be administered. For if the Pipe that is
fitted thereto be any whit shorter then that it reach even unto the Ham, and
beyond it, it will bring more hurt then help thereunto: for it cannot be
prevented, but that upon the motion of the body, or the Leg, the Thigh also
must be moved. The Pipe will also be very troublesome unto the Ham, and it will
suffer the Knee to be bowed. And therefore if any bend the Knee, there is a
Necessity that the Thigh bands be likewise therewithal moved, and the Muscles
figured in this and that manner, and the broken bones moved out of their
places. And therefore it seems to be the most expedient course, that the
Thigh be al of it conveyed into the said Canalis or Pipe, which is to reach
from the Hip even almost as low as the Foot. But now this Pipe is at a fitting
distance to be bound on with many bands both unto the Thigh and Leg; and on
both sides woollen Clothes are to be applied, that so the Member may not
decline unto either part; and this is altogether to be done, that so the whole
foot, (to wit, the Thigh with the Leg and foot) may lie a long softly and
without pain; but yet so firmly, that the sick person may not either through
impatience, or whilst he sleeps, move the same.

For it is to be observed, (as well in the Fracture of the Thigh as of the
Leg) that the bottom of the heel be kept in as much as may be, and rightly
placed: for if the foot hang down, and the rest of the Leg be supported and
propped up, there is a Necessity then that the bones should be seen to stick
out in the forepart of the foot: but if the Heel be placed higher then what is
Just and fitting (the rest of the Body being gently lifted up,) the bone in the
fore part of the Leg will necessarily show it ^elf more flat then what is Just
and meet; and this so much the more, if the Man's heel be naturally greater then
ordinary.

And this is likewise (in the Fracture of the Thigh and Leg) to be taken
notice of, that if by reason of the swathes, or the binding on too hard of the
splinters, or else from any other cause, there arise in the Ham, or the parts
beneath it, a swelling greater then what might Justly be expected; then that
which is too straight and close, and presses the part too much, is to be
loosned; but the swollen part is to be fomented or anointed with those things
that have in them a virtue of asswaging pain, as also of digesting and gently
driving back the humor; such as the moist and oily wool, thoroughly wet in wine
and oil; or the like Medicaments.

But yet Nevertheless, (as already has been said) in regard that although this
cure should in this manner be accomplished, lameness and halting does for the
most part follow thereupon; therefore Guilhelm. Fabricius (in the place
alleged) propounds a new and artificial way and Method of Curing the
Fractures of the Thigh, declaring it by an example; and withal he writes that
he had reduced the way of curing the Fracture of the Thigh (which has always
hitherto been accounted most difficult) unto that facility, that even any
Novice or young Practitioner may without any hesitation or doubting cure such a
like Fracture, if he will but use a little diligence, and be but provided of fit
Instruments. But now as for that way and Method of Curing (together with the
Instruments described and delineated to the life, we refer you for a sight of
them unto the place alleged.

Chap. 12. Of the Fracture of the Nose.
ANd these bones, to wit, of the Leg, Thigh, Arm, and shoulder, are those that
are more frequently broken then any other. But yet nevertheless it so happens
sometimes, that other bones may also be broken; touching all which we shall now
proceed (in our progress) orderly to treat of them all, even from the Head unto
the foot.

And first of all, as touching the Fracture of the Nose; The Fracture of the
Nose
this may happen many ways, as Hippocrates teaches us, in his Second Book of
the Joints, and 37. Text. For either a part of it may be broken off, and yet
notwithstanding the Nose it self is still kept that it neither hang downward,
neither be turned and made to stand awry, or that either of these should
happen; and this either in that part that is Gristly, and sticks forth; or
else in the rest of it which is kept and held together with bones. And sometimes
also even in the very midst of the Nose (where it is sharp) the flesh near unto
the bone is bruised and battered, or the bone is likewise somewhat hurt, but yet
not much: and now and then also a wound happens unto the Fracture.

Prognostics.
1. The Nose of all the parts of the body is most easily set together again:
and if it be not forthwith set right and straight, it will not at all be set
right and straight, but that it will stand awry.

2. In the Nosethrills a Callus is soon bred, and increased; for the Nose
(unless it be corrupted) is in ten days healed, as Hippocrates tells us in his
second Book of the Joints. But others notwithstanding there are that say it is
not to be done in less then eighteen days; and others assert, that it is not
done in less then twenty days time: which difference happens according to
the several constitutions of bodies. For Nature differs from Nature.

The Cure.
If therefore the broken Nose be equally beaten down unto the inferior part,
and be rendered flat; then something is to be put into the Nosethrils that may
set it up straight again, as the Probe or searching instrument, or the
instrument they call Spatha: or else that which is broken is to be lifted up
with the finger thrust up into the Nosethrils, and so to be restored unto its
Natural situation, and place. And outwardly likewise we ought on both sides to
lay hold on the Nose, and to draw it upward.

But then, that the bones of the Nosethrils (that are again brought unto their
wonted form and figure) may be preserved in their Natural seat, either
Liniments folded together, or the shavings of Linen (commonly called Lint) or
else some such like thing wrapped up in the Linen, or Leather, or a leaden or
silver pipe covered over with a soft skin, are to be put up into the
Nosethrills.

But if the nose be broken only in one side of it we ought then also to set it
right and straight (in a Convenient manner) from that part which declineth, and
so to restore it unto its natural seat; both by thrusting in the finger, or
some fit Instrument, into the Nosethrills (in that place where the Nose is
hurt; as also by setting the Nose straight outwardly, But then, lest that bone
which is composed and set together again in its due place should again be
depraved, and fall down; there are to be thrust up into the Nosethril that is
hurt either Linen rags, or a great Goosequill anointed with a Gum, and covered
over with a soft skin, or a pipe or plummet of Lead, or little staff of silver,
wrapped up in a soft Skin. Neither is it much material what it is we thrust up
into the Nosethrills; only that it be something that may keep the broken bone of
the Nose from falling down; and that it be somewhat that is sofe, and free from
an offensive smell. Neither are spunges also (or the like things) to be put up
into the Nosethrills, in regard that by soaking in the Moisture of the Nose
they become thick, and are dilated; and so being dilated they distend the part,
and again move out of their places the bones after they have been well set
together. That which is put up ought to be anointed with some emplastick
Medicament, of Mannathuris or the fine flour of Frankincense, Gum Tragacanth,
Mastick and oil of Roses.

But if the Nose be broken, and writhed in an oblique manner near unto the
Gristle, then we must agglutinate unto the Nose (in that part into which it
inclines) a little loop or fillet (of a fingers breadth) with that kind of Glue
which we mentioned before, touching the dry future or stretching in Wounds; and
afterward it is to be stretched forth, as much as shall be thought fit, that so
the Nose may be set straight again. But let this fillet be so long, that it may
afterward being drawn below the Ear be drawn likewise about the Head: and as
for the two ends thereof, we may agglutinate them unto the forehead. For this
Rein will justly set straight the Nose, and it may be either streyned or
slackned, according as we find occasion. And if the Tents that are put up into
the Nosethrils do stir up and cause any pain, they are to be taken from thence;
and all this while the Nosethrils are to be kept straight with the Reins
aforesaid. But after the fourteenth day the Reins are to be removed, and a
Cerot to be laid on, and care taken that the Callus do not grow forth more then
what is just and fit.

If the bones of the Nose shall be broken and shattered into small pieces; we
are then (as much as may be) to put them all, and each particular of them, back
into its proper seat; or else they are to be driven back by Instruments fit for
that purpose; neither must we easily admit of the taking forth of any bone, and
not at all, if it may by any means be agglutinated, in regard that it breeds
deformity. And afterward some Cerot or some other Medicament is to be imposed,
for the confirming and strengthening of the bones.

If a Wound shall happen with the Fracture, then some Emp^aster that is fit and
convenient in bloody Wounds is to be laid on: and such like Wounds are most
easily Cured of any.

If any Ulcer begin to breed within the Nosethrils; then tents anointed with
fit and proper Medicaments are to be put up into them; and by all means care
must be taken that there grow forth no flesh within the Nosethrils. For which
end likewise very useful is the Leaden Pipe put up.

Touching the binding up of these Fractures Authors differ much; The binding up
of Fractures.
and of these, some of them allow of these bindings up, but others altogether
disapprove of them. And indeed it seems altogether more safe wholly to omit
these bindings up, and the Swathes; seeing that either they perform nothing at
all, if they be loose; or if they be harder and closer drawn together, they
then set the Nose awry, and make it flat; and very easily may the broken bones
of the Nose be kept fast in their places by convenient Emplasters, without any
binding up at all. And in no other case does this binding seem convenient, but
only in this, if in the middle of the Nose (where it is sharp) the flesh be
bruised about the bone, and the bone stick forth; that so the Nose being
pressed together in that part may acquire its own Natural Figure again. But
here also, as for binding, although it seem altogether necessary, and very
profitable: yet nevertheless we deny it to be at all necessary, since that a
Cerot or an Emplaster may suffice. And if at al it be requisite to apply the
Swathe, it is to be cast upon the middle of the Nose, and both the ends thereof
are to be tied together at the hinder part of the Head.

Ambrose Parry uses this:

Take Frankincense, Mastick, Bole-Armoniack, and Dragons blood, of each half an
ounce; Roch Alum, and Rosin of the Pine, of each two drams. Let them be very
finely poudered, and then incorporated with the white of an Egg. See more
hereof in Hippocrates his 2. B. of the Joints, from the 36. to the 46. Text.

Chap 13. Of the Fracture of the Jaw Bone.
ANd sometimes also the lower Jaw is broken; and this is very easily to be known.

Prognostics.
1. If the bones of the Jaw have not an Inflammation happening unto them, even
from the very beginning, they are then consolidated within twenty days, and
the Teeth remain entire and safe.

2. But if the Cure be long delaied, the Teeth may be vitiated, and rendered
unuseful.

The Cure.
If the Jaw Bone be so broken transversly, that yet notwithstanding the bones
stick together one to the other in any part, we ought with the Fingers on both
sides (to wit, as well those that are put up into the Mouth, as those that are
outwardly applied) to press the bone together, and so to force it into its own
seat again. But that the Jaw Bone is again restored into its own place,
appears by the equality and evenness of it, and of the Teeth.

But if the whole Jaw bone be broken in a transverse manner (which nevertheless
very seldom happens) and so that indeed bone stick out upon bone, and that
one Tooth stand out upon the next Tooth unto it, then by putting the Fingers
into the Mouth, and likewise by applying the Hand externally, the broken bones
are to be set in their places again: and unless it may be done by a single and
simple compression, there ought first of al an extension to be made (the
Physician extending it before, and some assistant that helps him keeping of
it back) and afterward the bones ought to be set and Joined together. It is a
sign that the Jaw bone is rightly set and replaced, if we see that the Teeth
are again restored and disposed of unto their former Natural Situation.

The Teeth which have been moved and loosned in their holes are with a Thread
of Gold, Silver, or Iron, to be Joined and fastened unto those that stand next
them; until they shall again become firm and stable in their places.

These things being thus performed, some Medicament that is fit and proper for
the Fracture is outwardly to be applied unto the Jaw bone, that so the broken
bones being now set together again may be firmly fastened in their seats; and
externally we are to apply a Splinter of Leather or some other convenient
matter, answering in length unto the Jaw bone. And after this a sit convenient
binding is to be instituted; which is done with a Swathe slit at both ends, two
Fingers broad, and in the middle part of it cut also long ways, that it may on
both sides take in, and contain the Chin. And therefore there being four Heads
of the Swathe thus slit at both ends, the two lower of them are to be brought
and drawn along unto the top of the Head, and there to be tied together or
sewed unto the sick persons night Cap; but the two uppermost are transversly to
be drawn unto the lowest part of the Head behind; or else to be sewed likewise
unto the same night Cap.

Let not the sick person lie upon the broken Jaw Bone, but upon that Jaw Bone
that is sound and unbroken; and yet nevertheless let him not rest himself
thereon, but rather upon his Head, lest that the Jaw bone that is set in its
place be again distorted and made to stand a^ry. Let the Jaw likewise be kept
immovable; and therefore let not the Patient speak much, neither chew hard
Meats, but let him be nourished with Food that is soft and moist, until the
Callus be hardened. If any thing shall be observed to be again removed out of
its place, on the third day the binding is to be loosened; and if any thing be
fallen out, it is again to be replaced.

Chap. 14 Of the Fracture of the Channel bone, or the Bone of the Throat.
HIppocrates (in his B. of the Joints, Text 62.) reckons up six Differences
of the Fracture of the Channel bone. For either this bone is broken in a
transverse manner, or else long ways. If transversly, this happens either
near unto the Joint of the Shoulder; or else it is broken more toward the
breast bone; and furthermore, the Throat bone is either so broken, that that
part which is from the breast is carried upward; but that part which is from
the top of the broad bone of the Shoulder is carried downward; and this very
often (and for the most part) happens: or else on the contrary, that part
nigh unto the Shoulder blade is carried upwards; but that which is near unto
the Breast is carried downward; and this very rarely happens.

Signs Diagnostick.
Now this Fracture of the Channel bone is known rather by the touch, then by
the sight; as also by the pain.

Prognostics.
1. If the Channel bone be broken transversly, it is the more easily Cured; if
long ways, it is the harder to be Cured. For that which is transversly broken
may easily (by extension, and the compression of the Fingers) be brought to
return unto its Natural seat; but the other Fracture (that is in the length of
the bone) has evermore something that sticks out, which can very hardly be
fitted together. And then again, because that the Throat bone cannot be so
wrapped round about with the Swathe, that what is cleft and broken in the
length of the Bone may be again compelled into its own seat; but on the
contrary, that which is broken transversly is more easily by the Ligature to be
forced back into its own seat again.

2 The Fracture of the Throat does indeed nothing at all hurt the Commissure of
the Shoulder, or any other part: and yet nevertheless because that (although
the utmost diligence shall be used) the Neck and the Throat cannot (as the Arms
and the Legs) be closely wrapped about with the Swathe, the Callus therefore
leaves a very great deformity; because that in a thin bone the Callus does
easily become greater: but it is only in the beginning that it seems
deformed, while it is yet new; but in process of time, when we are once
accustomed thereunto, the deformity seems the less.

3. But the Throat-bone does easily grow together again, like as do other thin
bones; and indeed in twenty days at the very utmost it is Ferruminated.

The Cure.
But now that this Fracture may be Cured, there are necessarily required two
able assistants, for the extension of this Fracture; of which, let the one with
both Hands draw back unto the hinder part the Shoulder that lies near unto the
broken Channel bone; and let the other quite contrary draw rather toward him
the opposite Shoulder, or the opposite part of the Neck; that so the extension
may be made. Which so soon as it is done, let the Surgeon with his Fingers
restore the broken bones unto their places again, by pressing together with his
Fingers that which sticks up too high, and by lifting up that which is
pressed down; o^ by restoring it back again into its Natural seat, in any
manner whatsoever that shall be thought needful. Some there are, who to
Facilitate the restitution of the bone, do put something that is round under the
Arm-pit of the sick person, that it may fill up the Cavity thereof; and then
withal they greatly press the Elbow unto the Ribs; and so by this means they
again restore the bone unto its own place. But if the extremities of the broken
bone be so depressed that they cannot in this manner be brought back again
upward, then the sick person is again to be laid flat upon his Back upon a hard
Pillow or Cushion put under his backbone between the Shoulder-blades; but the
Shoulders are by the strength of the Hands lying upon them so to be pressed
down, that the extremities of the broken bone that are depressed may be lifted
up so high, that they may again be restored unto their own Natural Situation.

But if the Channel bone be broken and shattered into many small pieces, and
that some fragment thereof cause a pricking in the flesh, and difficulty of
breathing; then there is an incision to be made in that part of the flesh, and
the fragments to be taken forth; or the sharp pricks are to be cut and shaved
off; and the bones when they are made plain must be joined together; the Lips
of the Wound are likewise to be drawn close together, and some Medicament
proper for the Fracture (and which may withal resist and hinder Inflammation)
is to be laid on. But if there be found to be many fragments of the bone, (the
Skin remaining entire and sound) that yet are not sharp, neither do at all
prick, then a Splinter is to be provided of Leather, or some other convenient
matter, and being anointed with a fit Medicament it is to be applied unto those
fragments.

The broken Channel bones, being rightly set together, some, Medicament fit and
proper for the Fracture (such as are above propounded in the first Chapter) is
to be imposed. After this three Coverings of a convenient thickness and length
(so that they may fill up the Cavity or hollowness both above and beneath the
Channel bone) are to be provided; of the which two of them are to be put upon
the sides; but the third that is thicker is to be imposed upon the Fracture
sticking forth. For so by this means both the broken bone that sticks out
will be depressed, and the broken bones so kept in, that they shall not be
moved either upward or downward; neither shall these broken bones (being once
se^ together) be removed out of their proper places unto the sides. And after
this a right binding up is to be instituted, which may be done with a Swathe as
broad as the Palm of the Hand (or four Fingers breadth) of a sufficient length,
having a double Head; it is to be made Cross wise, in the form of the Letter X;
which is rather to be often drawn about the place of the Fracture, then that
the said Fracture should be too close and hard bound; and it is so to be rolled
about, that it may draw the Arm unto the hinder parts. And the Cavity also
under the Armpit near unto the part affected is to be filled up with Linen
Clothes folded together. For so the sick party will the better and more easily
endure the binding. The sick person must also be ordered to take his rest, and
to keep himself as quiet as he can; and he himself is to bend back his Arm
toward the hinder parts. But ler not the Swathe be loosened before the seventh
day, unless an Itching, or some urgent Cause require it: and if it be from day
to day to be loosened, it may likewise be daily drawn a little closer and
harder together.

Chap. 15 Of the Fracture of the Shoulder Blade.
THe Shoulder Blade (by the Greeks called Omoplata, but by the Latins Scapula,
or that Triangular bone, near unto the Vertebrae of the hinder part of the
Neck, and adhering unto the Back and Breast, not by any Articulation or
Joynting, but only by the intervention of the Muscles, and before Joined
together by Articulation with the fore part of the Shoulder and the Throat;
touching which see more in the Anatomists) may be broken in any part of it; but
yet notwithstanding more rarely in that process that is termed Acromion; but
oftentimes in the part that is nigh unto the Spina or Back bone; and in all
other its Extremities.

Signs Diagnostick.
If the Acromion be broken, this is perceived both by the sight and touch, and
a certain unevenness is likewise easily to be discovered; especially if we
compare together the sound and unsound part. If a broader part thereof, or any
part in its extremities be broken, then there is by the touch discovered a
certain Cavity; and there is perceived likewise a pricking pain in the part;
but a kind of stupidity and benummedness seizes upon the Arm stretched
directly forth.

Prognostics.
1. The Fracture that is in the top of the Shoulder or the Acromion is more
difficultly Cured, then in any other parts of the Shoulder Blade.

2. If the Fracture be in the Neck of the Shoulder blade, or in the
dearticulation of the Shoulder, it is then hardly ever to be healed. For in
regard that near about this Joint there are the Veins, and Arteries of the
Armpits, and the Nerves arising from the Vertebrae of the Neck behind, an
Inflammation and most grievous Symptoms do happen.

3. The Shoulder Blade bone broken is usually consolidated within twenty four
days.

The Cure.
If the broken bone adhere still unto the Shoulder Blade, it is then by the
Surgeons Hand to be restored back again into its proper place. But if this
may not easily be done, and that there be need of more force and strength, then
a bal of Linen may be put under the Arm-pit, and let the assistant draw the
shoulder downward, by drawing about the Elbow unto the Ribs; but let the
Surgeon himself with his Hand press down the Fracture, and set the bone that
is broken. But if the broken bone do not cohere with the Shoulder blade, but
that it only yet hangs thereunto by the Ligaments and the Periostium, and
that it exciteth no great danger by pricking, it is then also to be restored
even unto its own place again. But if the broken bones be altogether separated
both from the Shoulder Blade, and from the Periostium also, and the Ligaments,
and prick the flesh, the Skin and the Flesh ought then to be cut, and the
fragments to be taken forth. But if they prick not, they are then to be left
remaining. For Nature at length expels of her own accord that which cohereth
not with the rest; although it be sometimes long ere this be done; like as
Ambrose Parry (in his 14. B. and 9. Chapt.) relates, that a certain Marquess
had after seven years time certain fragments of bones breaking out of his
wounded Shoulder Blade, the Cicatrice being opened. The bones being rightly set
in their places, fit Medicaments are to be imposed upon the Fracture, and a
Convenient binding is to be instituted; and if the top of the Shoulder be
broken a Linen ball is then to be bound under the Wing thereof; and the binding
is not to be loosened before the seventh day, unless there happen something
else. Let the sick person lie on the opposite side; and let him (all he can)
keep the part in quietness.

Chap. 16 Of the Fracture of the Sternum, or Breast Bone.
THe Sternum (or Breast Bone) it self is sometimes broken, either by a fall, or
by a blow.

Signs Diagnostick
Which is known from the pain, and especially, from the inequality, which is
discovered by the touch; and at the compression of the Fingers the broken bone
retireth inwardly; and there is a certain sound or noise heard; and there where
the bone is broken, there may be notice taken of a Cavity. And there is also
difficulty of breathing, the Cough, and spitting of Blood, that for the most
part follow thereupon.

Prognostics.
1. The Fracture of the Stern is very dangerous; in regard that by reason of
the Pleura Membrane, (which is easily hurt together with the Stern) and the
noble parts that lie under it, it is wont to attract sad and grievous Evils.

2. But yet it is consolidated in twenty, or twenty four days, in regard that
it is spungy and thin

The Cure.
Now that this bone when it is broken and depressed may be restored again unto
its own seat, the sick person being laid flat upon his Back, a Pillow is to be
put under the Spina or Back bone, over against the Fracture; and by some
Servant of the Surgeon the Shoulder is on both sides to be pressed down; but
let the Surgeon himself with his Hand press together the Ribbs on both
sides, and so let him bring back the broken bones into their places. And after
this, those Medicaments that are wont to be administered in other Fractures (and
which prevent Inflammation, and serve for the Conglutination of the Fracture)
are to be imposed; and the binding is to be instituted with fit Swathes above
the Shoulders, in the Cross Figure of the letter X; and this binding must not
be over hard, lest it hinder the breathing.

Chap, 17, Of the Fracture of the Ribbs.
ANd sometimes also the Ribbs are broken from violent causes, as a fall, a
blow, or the like.

But now the Ribbs are sometimes so cleft (as Celsus writes in his 8 B. and
Chapt. 9.) that indeed not the top of the bone, but the inward part thereof,
(which is thin) may be hurt; and sometimes so that this fall has wholly broken
them. And indeed the broken bones do sometimes decline inwardly; and sometimes
they stick forth outwardly: and sometimes notwithstanding that they are wholly
broken, yet they are not moved out of their proper places; and sometimes
likewise the flesh about the Ribbs is battered and bruised.

Signs Diagnostick.
If the Whole Ribb be not broken, then neither is there any blood spit forth,
neither any fever following thereupon, nor any thing suppurated, (or but very
rarely) neither is there present any great pain: and yet nevertheless this
place is l^ghtly pained even upon the very touch.

But if the Ribb be wholly broken, and yet the broken extremityes thereof not
moved out of their places, by being either driven inwardly, or forced into the
Exterior part, there are but very few that are hereupon taken with a fever. And
many there are also that do not at all spit blood; neither is there any Pus
contracted in the Chests of some, and those indeed not a few.

But if the Ribb be both wholly broken, and the extremityes thereof moved out
of their places, there is then a certain inequallity or unevenness, and Cavity,
that may be both discovered by the sight, as also by the touch; and there is
likewise a certain rattling noise heard: unto which also there are diverse other
symptoms Joined. There is present a very great and grievous pain, and
especially if the internal part of the Ribb be broken; (and this pain much
resembles the pain of such as have the Pleurisy) the breathing is very
difficult, the Cough extremely troublesome; and now and then likewise spitting
of blood follows thereupon (the Lungs soaking in the blood flowing forth of
the broken vessels) and a fever is also herewithall joined, and accompanyeth
the same. But more especially two evils there are that usually attend the
Fracture of the Ribbs. The first whereof is, the puffing up of the flesh lying
upon the Ribb; which is discovered both by the touch and sight; and if the
place be pressed together with the hand, there is heard a certain noise and
sound of the Air going forth thereof. Unto which unless timely Remedies be
administered, (in the second place) an Inflammation, and a fever, and an
Impostume are wont to succeed. The cause of which thing is the separation of
the flesh from the bone, and a weakness brought upon the part with the blow,
which cannot therefore sufficiently concoct the Aliment, that by reason of the
pain is more abundantly attracted, and flowerh thereunto: which remains
thereupon partly crude and is partly resolved into vapors and flatulencies or
windiness. And sometimes the Corruption of the Ribbs is wont likewise to follow
this Malady. For when the flesh is separated from the bone, the Air gets in
in the place thereof; by the contact and impression whereof the bone is
offended and corrupted.

Prognostics.
1. If the Fracture be single, without any Contusion or bruising of the parts
lying near thereunto, there is then little or no danger at all: and the Ribbs
will grow together again within twenty days.

2. But if the flesh about the Ribbs be battered and bruised, then the evil is
very dangerous (by reason of those symptoms that as we have before told you do
happen herupon) and sometimes deadly. Touching which Hippocrates; (in his 3. B.
of the Joints, Text. 65.) if the Contusion (says he) or the bruising that is
caused about the Ribbs be neglected, although upon this a worse Mischief does
not follow, yet notwithstanding it has the flesh more soft and spungy in the
bruised place then it was before: and where such flesh is so left, and not by
curing thereof restored unto a good habit, the thing is so much the worse, if
filth and snottiness be left about the bone itself; in regard that the flesh
will now no more fasten unto the bone in like manner as formerly; and in regard
that the bone it self is rendered more apt and ready for diseases: and for this
very cause many have their bones vitiated, because that the evil is a long
while protracted, ere it can be Cured.

3. And thirdly likewise, the Fracture is full of danger if the Ribb be driven
inward and there prick or wound the Pleura Membrane; and then almost al those
symptoms that are wont to infest those that have a pleurisy do follow upon the
said fracture; and the Cure is scarcely ever perfectly accomplished in less
then forty days.

The Cure.
If the whole Ribb be not broken, (or if wholly broken, yet not removed out of
its proper place,) and that there be no Contusion of the parts incumbent and
lying near, then some gentle Medicament that is fit and Convenient for a
fracture and inflammations, is to be laid on, of Frankincense, sine flour Bole
Armenick, the White of an Egg, and the like.

But if the broken Ribb stick forth outwardly it is to be pressed together with
the hand, and to be reduced unto its Natural situation: and here also a
Convenient Medicament is to be imposed.

But if the broken Ribb tend inwardly, we must endeavor that it may be brought
back into its own place. And therefore we must first of all see whether by the
Cough, and the holding of the breath, or by the help of the hands the broken
Ribb may be restored again into its own place: which if it succeed not, then we
must lay on some Emplaster that will attract, and that will stick fast unto the
Ribb; and then this Emplaster is again with violence to be taken away, that so
the Ribb may be brought back again into its own place.

And very Convenient for this use is this Emplaster also.

Take The finest wheat flour two ounces; Tragacanth, and Frankincense powdered,
of each five drams; Missleto of the Oak, (to wit, the Glue) six drams;
Ichthyocolla or Fish Glue one ounce and half; Whites of Eggs two ounces;
Rose Water as much as will suffice; and mingle them.

Or an Emplaster made of Turpentine, Rosin, blackpitch, Barley Meal, or
Beanmeal, Mastick, and Aloes. And such like emplasters as these are often to be
applied, and then to be taken off when the sick person shall breathe more
freely. And I my self remember likewise that some years since a certain Cooper
having a Ribb broken and depressed in his right side by the violent recoyling
of a hoop, which he was bending to make a hoop for a Hogshead, or tub, (so that
he could very hardly draw his breath) Coughed extremly, and was not able to
lift himself up straight. I applied and laid on such an Emplaster as this that
we have mentioned, and thereby brought back the Ribb again into its proper
place.

Some there are indeed who endeavor the bringing back of the broken Ribbs into
their places again by the applying of Cuppingglasses: but Most Physicians
dislike this practice, there being great cause to fear lest that by this means
there be more of the humor attracted: and that otherwise the flesh above the
Ribbs is wont to be puffed up. But if any broken fragment of the Ribb prick the
Membrane, so that thereupon most grievous pains and other ill symptoms arise,
(in so much that there be great cause to fear death) that part wherein the Ribb
is broken is to be opened with the incision knife, that so we may the better
come at the fragments that prick, either to pluck them forth, or to cut them
off. And if likewise there be present any contusion or bruise, a vein is then
to be opened, lest that an Inflammation follow.

The Ribbs being reduced unto their own places again, Nature will then indeed
of her own accord generate the Callus; which that we may the better assist,
some Emplaster that is convenient for a fracture of the bones is to be imposed;
among the which this that follows is one of the chiefest.

Take Powder of Myrtles, and red Roses, of each one ounce; the Meal of Barley,
of the bitter vetch orobus; and of Lentiles, of Beans, and of Mastick, of each
two drams; Acron Cups, Cypress Nuts, (the rinds of them) Frankincense, Dragons
blood, Earth of Lemnios, Aloes and Myrrh, of each two drams; Oil of Myrtle, of
Roses, and oil omphacine, of each nine ounces; Wax and clear Turpentine, of
each half a pound; and make an Emplaster.

Some there are that (in the progress of the disease) wet and soak the swathes
in Rosemary water; which (as they write) is a very special and effectual water
in all fractures of the bones.

But if the flesh be moist and flaggy, then the Medicaments before propounded
are to be imposed; and the place is to be streyned together with swathes and
other Coverings, that so the flesh may again be conjoined with the bone. And if
through Negligence of the Physician, or the sick person himself, the Malady be
now become old and inveterate, and that the flesh be rendered soft and snotty
(so that there be cause to fear lest that the bones, Gristles, and Membranes
may be hurt) we are then to do our endeavor that the said snotty Juice may be
discussed by such digesting Cataplasms as we shall anon speak of. But if this
may not be done, the burning iron is the best Remedy; and yet here we are to be
very cautious, that the bone be not made hot, or the inward parts hurt.

If that which was bruised tend toward a Suppuration, the Matter is then to be
resolved, and evacuated with a Cataplasm of Barley meal, Bean meal, or of the
bitter vetch Orobus, Camomile flowers, and the like. As,

Take Meal of Beans and Barley, of each two ounces; Wormwood, half an ounce; the
powder of Camomile flowers, Melilote, and Eldern, of each one ounce; boil them
in Spring Water; and then add Oil of Camomile and Roses, of each one ounce; and
make a Cataplasm.

But if the matter cannot yet be discussed by these Medicaments, all delay is
to be avoided, for fear lest that the bone be vitiated; and therefore in that
part wherein it most swells the part is to be opened either with the
Penknife, or with the hot Iron, that so a free passage forth may be opened for
the Pus.

The Diet
Let the Patients Diet at the first be thin and very sparing, and such as is
required in other acute Diseases. Let the sick person keep himself as quiet as
he can, without any Coughing, or Sneezing (as much as may be) let him not talk
much, nor laugh, nor Chafe. See Hippocrates, in his 3. B. of the Joints, Text
54. etc. Galen in his Comment. upon the place; and Ambrose Parry, in his 14. B.
and 12. Chapter.

Chap. 18. Of the Fracture of the Spina Dorsi, or Backbone.
ANd sometimes it likewise so happens, that from external and violent Causes
the Spina Dorsi (or Backbone) and its Vertebrae are broken.

Signs Diagnostick
If the Spina or Backbone be hroken, then there appears a Cavity in that
place, and there is a pain and pricking felt; in regard that of necessity those
broken fragments of the bones must needs be very Thorny and Pricking, as Celsus
tells us in his 8. B. and 9. Chap. And if any process of those broken bones that
stick forth be broken, this is discerned by the touch, because that it may be
moved this way and that way. And moreover, if the sick person lie upon his Face
the pain is so much the greater, and far more then if he stand upright. For
there the Skin is extended, and bruised with the sharp broken fragments: but if
the sick person stand upright, the Skin is then loosened, and not so much
pricked by the sharp points of the broken bones, that prick as if they were
Thorns or Goads.

Prognostics.
1. The process of the Vertebrae is easily of it self consolidated, unless some
other evil happen to follow, in regard that the bones are Spungy and thin.

2. Otherwise this Fracture is for the most part Mortal, by reason of the
hurting of the spinal Marrow, and the Membranes, and the Nerves; and especially
if the Fracture happen near about the Vertebrae of the Neck.

3. And if there happen a Fracture in the Vertebrae of the Neck, there
follows a Palsy of the Arms and Hands; but if the Fracture chance in the
inferior part, then there follows a Palsy of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet; and
this is deadly: but if the motion and sense be not altogether abolished, there
is yet some small Hopes left of recovery.

4. If in the Fracture of the Vertebrae there shall appear any voluntary
Egestion of the Excrements, and that there happen a suppression of the Urine,
it is a very desperate and deadly Sign.

The Cure.
Although there be here but little ground for Hope; yet nevertheless that the
sick person may not be wholly left in a helpless condition, the broken
Apophyses of the Backbone are again to be put back into their own places (if
they be not altogether broken off) and Medicaments are to be imposed that may
moderate the pain, prevent an Inflammation, and further the Conglutination of
the bones; and such medicaments as these have already been very frequently
mentioned. But if the process be wholly broken off from the Periostium, the
Skin is then by an incision to be opened, and the piece of bone to be drawn
forth, and the Wound afterward in a due and convenient manner to be healed. And
this is likewise to be done, if the fragments or broken pieces of the other
Vertebrae press together and prick the spinal Marrow and the Nerves thereof;
for otherwise the life may be much endangered.

Unto the Fractures of the Spina there belongs also the Fracture of the Os
Sacrum, The Fractu^e of the holy bone, and the Crupper.
and the Crupper-bone; which if they shall be so broken and bruised that
thereupon the Spinal Marrow be hurt, the Malady then is very dangerous, if not
altogether deadly. But if there be any the least hope left, the Finger being
put up into the Arse even unto the broken place the bone that is broken is to
be driven forth; but outwardly by the other Hand, (or else by the help of some
assistant) the bones are to be made equal and even, and so to be put back into
their own places again; and afterward Medicaments convenient for the Fracture
are to be applied and laid on.

Chap. 19. Of the Fracture of the Bones of the Hand.
THe Bones of the Hand (which are divided into the bones of the Wrist, upper
part of the Hand, and the Fingers, are likewise sometimes broken.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Fracture in these bones is easily known both by the sight and touch; in
regard that these bones when they are broken do for the most part decline
either unto the exterior or the interior parts.

Prognostic.
These Bones without any great ado, (and indeed within twenty days) do
perfectly grow together again, and so are healed.

The Cure.
Let the sick person stretch forth the Hand that is hurt upon an even and
smooth Table: and then let the Surgeons assistant stretch forth the broken
bones, but let the Surgeon himself restore (with his Hand) the bones into
their places again. When the bones are well set together, then some Medicament
(such as is wont to be administered in Fractures) is to be imposed: and then
afterward the part is to be wrapped about with a Swathe. And indeed if the
Fingers chance to be broken, they are to be tied fast unto those sound Fingers
that are next, that so by them (as it were by Splinters fastened on) they may
be kept unmoved in their places. And then at length the hollow of the Hand is
to be filled up with a bottom or ball of Linen rolled up together. For so by
this means the bones when they are set are the more easily kept in their
places, and the Fingers preserved in a middle Figure. But if either in the
extending or contracting the Fingers there be any Callus generated, the Office
of the Hand in laying hold on any thing is much hurt. And let the Hand also
(with the Arm hung in a fit Scarf or Swathe from the Neck) be kept in rest and
quietness.

Chap. 20. Of the Fracture of the Hip-bone.
THe Hip bone consists of three bones; of which the First is the Ilium; the
Second, the Ischion bone; and the Third, the share bone; which in Infants may
even be separated; but yet nevertheless in persons of ripe Age they grow so
fast together that they can very hardly be parted assunder. But now these bones
may be broken (like as those of the Shoulder Blade) either in their
Extremityes, or long ways, or in the middle.

Signs Diagnostick
This Fracture is easily known by the pain which is more especially exasperated
by the touch and compression; by the Cavity and unevenness; and also by the
pricking and benummedness in the Leg of the same side.

Prognostic.
These Bones are consolidated in the space of twenty four days.

The Cure
The broken bones are with all possible speed and diligence to be set together,
and to be restored into their own places; and then afterward fit and proper
Medicaments are to be laid on. But if any fragment of the bone be broken off,
and by pricking excite pain, and that there be any fear of an Inflammation,
there are some who persuade us that even at the very first dressing an incision
is to be made in the Skin, and the broken piece of bone forthwith taken out.
But whereas it is very seldom that these fragments lie hid under the Skin
alone, but even under the very Muscles themselves, such a like Section as they
advise us unto may not be instituted without much danger. And he that will
needs attempt it, let him be very cautious lest that he hurt the Heads of the
Muscles, or some one of the principal Vessels; or that greater Nerve which is
stretched forth into the Muscles of the Thigh and Leg.

Chap. 21. Of the Fracture of the Whirl-Bone in the Knee.
ANd sometimes likewise even the Whirlbone it self is broken; and this happens
sometimes in the length of it (in respect of the whole Thigh) sometimes in a
transverse, and sometimes in an oblique manner; and sometimes it is broken into
two parts, and sometimes into very many pieces; and sometimes again this Fracture
is with a Wound, and very often without.

Signs Diagnostick
The Fracture of this bone is easily discovered by the distance of the broken
bones, appearing by the touch; by the Patients weakness and inability in going;
by the Cavity that is perceived (in the place where the Fracture is) both by
the sight and by the touch; and by the Crashing Noise and sound that is
observed in the handling thereof; and in its motion.

Prognostic
1. The Whirle-bone indeed (as all other thin bones) easily grows together
again, if it be but rightly Joined together, and so preserved.

2 And if the fracture be made in the length thereof, the bones may very easily
be joined together; and being so Joined they may without any great difficulty
be so kept in their own places by the use of pillows and Swathes. For whereas
about the whirl-bone the extremityes of the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth'
Muscles, that move the ankle and leg, run along together, and end in that most
strong Tendon that is implanted in the Whirl-bone; and that the Muscles are
wont of their own accord to be moved and drawn toward the place of their
original; therefore even without any great industry and pains, the fracture
that is made long ways may be reduced into its own place again and the bones
most closely conjoined as before; and so no great cause to fear the bunching
forth of any callus, and a lameness following upon this fracture. Paraeus
indeed (in his 14 Book. and 22 Chapt.) writes that he never saw any, who
having this bone broken was not lame, so that he halted al his life after it:
and this even therefore, because that the Concretion of the Callus being
produced, the Consolidation does hinder the free bending of the knee. But
although this may easily be granted as touching the transverse fracture; yet
notwithstanding Guilhelmus Fabricius (in his fifth Cent. and 88 Observat.) has
rightly determined, that this is not always necessary (especially in the
fracture that is made in the length of the bone) in regard that there is no
necessity that there should evermore be bred a Caslus so sticking forth, that
it should cause an impediment of the motion in the knee, and so consequently a
lameness and halting: and we may see that in the fractures of other bones
Nature does usually so generate the Callus, and with that Neatness and skill,
that oftentimes there scarcely remains any the least sign or token of any
fracture appearing; and this especially happens when the Periostium is whole
and unbroken, which reteineth the matter of the Callus, that it may not grow
forth overmuch, nor bunch out too far.

3 But if the fracture be made either transversly or obliquely, all the
industry that we can use will hardly so cure it as that no lamenes^ nor halting
shall follow thereupon. For seeing that the Seventh Eighth and Ninth Muscles
moving the Ankle draw it upward toward the hip, but the Tendon that under the
knee is inserted into the shinbone draws the whirlbone downward, the bones of
the broken whirlbone are so di joined that they can hardly by any art be joined
together again, or being joined can be so kept together; whereupon the Callus
buncheth forth, and the Muscles moving the Leg and Ankle are hurt, and so a
Lameness and halting follows.

The Cure.
The Leg is first of al to be extended: And then after that by the Surgeon
the Whirlbone (whether it be broken into two or more parts) is to be Joined
together again; and an Emplaster or Cataplasm be fitting the Fracture (that may
keep together the bones when they are set) is to be laid on; and the Member is
conveniently to be bound up; and by imposing of r^wls of Straw (as is wont to
be done in the Fracture of the Leg, the Member is to be kept immovable, and
great Care must be taken that the Leg be not at al bended: for if this should
be the broken Fragments that were set together would be again removed out of
their places.

If some sharp fragment of the bones be separated from the rest of the bone,
and prick the Sk n, some there are (as I told you before touching other
Fractures) who advise us to cut into the Skin, and so take forth the bone.

If grievous Symptoms shall happen to follow, we must timely oppose them with
such Remedies as in other Fractures.

Chap. 22. Of the Fracture of the Bones of the Foot.
ANd Lastly, The bones of the Foot are likewise sometimes broken; of which how
many bones there are. As for that we refer you unto the Anatomists. But
Hippocrates (in his 2 Book of the Joints) writes that the bones of the Foot,
as likewise of the Hand, are not at al broken, unless the fleshy parts be
wounded by something that is very sharp or heavy. For these bones being harder
then ordinary, these things that are sharp and very heavy, if they break these
Bones, they leave not the Skin lying upon them whole and sound but much
bruised. And Paulus Aeginet. (in his 6 B Chap. 106.) writes, that the Ankle
can by no means be broken; not only by reason of its hardness, but in regard
that it is fenced and guarded round about.

Signs Diagnostick
If the bones of the Foot be broken, it is easily found by the sight and touch,
in regard that these parts are void of flesh: and therefore if they shall stick
forth upon their breach, this is easily discovered by the sight, and touch.

Prognostics.
1. The Fracture of these Bones is not of it self very dangerous; yet because
they are greatly broken by reason of the forcible and violent Cause, the parts
incumbent and that lie near (being Fleshy and Nervous) are withal bruised and
wounded; whereupon most grievous pains, Inflammations, and other Evils do arise.

2. And yet notwithstanding for the most part they grow together again in
twenty days, unless such as are nigh unto the Leg: for these being greater
require the longer time for Consolidation.

The Cure
The Cure is almost one and the same with that of the broken bones of the Hand.
To wit, there ought (in the first place) to be a fit extension; and the Bones
(whether they stick forth unto the Superior or the Inferior part) are to be
forced back into their Natural seats; which may most fitly be done, if the sick
person stand with the broken Foot upon a plain table covered over with a
woollen cloth. And then Secondly, fitting Medicaments (such as the Fractures
require) are to be administered. And Thirdly, The Foot is to be wrapped about with
Swathes. And since that Splinters cannot conveniently be imposed upon the Foot,
by reason of the unevenness of the place the Splenia Coverings are to be made
use of, and the place to be bound with Swathes, that so the bones being set in
their places may be there kept. And yet nevertheless the Situation and placing
ought to be ordered otherwise then in the Hands. For our Hands being given us
to lay hold upon, the Fingers (as we told you before in the 19. Chapt.) are to
be placed in a Crooked Figure; but our feet being given us to stand upon, and
to walk withal, are to be Situated in a straight Figure, and not crooked, lest
that their Action be depraved and hindered.

And thus much we thought good also briefly to speak touching Fractures. For in
regard we have extant the most learned Books of Hippocrat. upon this very
subject, touching Fractures and the Joints, and the most accurate Comment of
Galen upon them, I held it altogether needless and not worth while to treat
more largely of them, as I see that others have done before me: but think it
fitter for me to refer the Reader unto them, if he desire to see more hereof.

THE FIFTH BOOK, THE SIXTH PART. Of Luxations.
Chap. 1. Of Luxations in general.
THere are very many Bones in the Body of Man which are composed and joined
together after diverse sorts. But they are chiefly composed by a Symphysis and
Articulation. A Symphysis is a union of the Bones without motion: but the
Conjunction by Articulation is composed for motion; the differences of it are
chiefly two, a Diarthrosis, and Synarthrosis. Diarthrosis is with a manifest
motion; Synarthrosis with an obscure one, of which consult with the Books of
Anatomists.

When therefore the Bones which are joined by Articulation do fall out of their
place, What Luxation is.
the Disease is called by the Greeks Exarthrema, by the Latins a Luxation,
which is the falling down of the Joint out of its place (which is called the
Acetabulum or hollow) into another place; by which voluntary motion is
hindered: where by a Joint is understood, What a Joint is,
as Galen and Hippocrates also do teach Artic. 1. Text. 1. not that aggregate
of the two ends of the Bones joined together, but only the head of the joint.

The Causes.
Internal Causes
But the Causes of a Luxation are either Internal, or External. The Internal are
humors which falling down upon the joints either do relax the Ligaments that
they suffer the Bones to fall out of their seats, or by filling them up do
shorten and contract them, that they draw the heads of the bones out of their
seats. To which haereditary defects must be referred, whenas Experience does
teach us, That oftentimes those that have bunches in their backs do generate
the like, and lame folks beget lame. But the external violent Causes are,
External
blows, falls, violent extension, and the like, which can expel or draw forth
the Bones from their seat; and that sometimes is done even in the Birth, and
the Arms or Thighs may be luxated while the Infants are drawn forth with
violence by ignorant Midwives; nay in the Mothers Womb Infants may have a
luxation of their bones by a blow, fall, compression, as Hippocrates seems to
intimate 3. de Art. 88. and 94. and 4. de Artic. Text. 2. and 3. but al causes
of what kind soever do cause luxations either by violent distension or
impulsion; most commonly a luxation is caused by violent impulsion, when from
causes happening from without, as falls, jumping, blows, and the like, the bones
are violently expelled out of their seats. Al other causes are to be referred
to distension, to wit, when the Cavities receiving the heads of the bones
(which the Greeks call Cotylae) are rendered either narrower, or larger and
relaxt, this Cavity is made narrower, when a humor or some matter does possess
the bosom of the joint and drives the bone out of its seat, which happens
sometimes in pains of the joints: but the Articulation is made larger or looser
when the brows including the bosom are broken, for so the bones may more freely
wander and sal forth; and the Articulation is made looser also, when some humor
does too much mollefie and relax the Ligaments, and renders the whole
Articulation more loose. The same happens when the Ligaments are too much
distended or broken.

But the Bones are more and easier luxated in Children and young folks whose
Ligaments are softer and weaker than in those of riper age, whose Ligaments are
firmer and stronger. It happens also in them whose bodies are wasted and have
weaker Ligaments; but those who are fleshy and well habited have not their
joints easily fall forth, when as the joint is on every side straightly girt in
with strong Muscles; also those joints are easier luxated which are composed
for many sorts of motions; but those which have fewer different motions do not
so easily fall forth of their seats; those joints also which are contained with
one Ligament are more easily luxated than those with two; the greater bones
also are more difficultly luxated, and not unless by a violent cause; the
lesser bones more easily: last of al, some bones do more easily, some more
hardly fall out of their places, according to the nature of the Articulation, as
afterward shall appear in particular. This must be observed in general, That the
joints which are in a plainer bosom are more easily luxated; but those which
are hid in a deeper bosom more difficultly.

The Differences.
The proper Differences are taken either from the Subject, or the Form, The
Differences from the subject
or the Efficient Cause. From the Subject, because the bones which are luxated
are joined either by a Synarthrosis and with an obscure motion (as when the
broad bone of the shoulders departs from the shoulder bone;) or the Channel
Bone from the top of the broad bone of the shoulders, or the radius from the
Elbow; which kind of Luxation the Arabian Interpreters call a disjunction, when
the bones gape as it were; or by a Diarthrosis with manifest motion, which
Luxation is most properly so called. There is also a peculiar kind of Luxation,
but improperly so called, when the Epiphyses of the bones are pulled from the
bone on which they were placed, which happens chiefly to young folks.

From the Form because the Joint sometimes wholly falls out of its seat: From the
Form
which Luxation is called by the general name Exarthrema, or Luxation; but
sometimes it falls forth only in part, and to the brink of the bosom or hollow,
which the Greeks call Pararthrema, the Latins a Subluxation; to which kind of
Luxation also belongs that elongation, when the Ligaments being luxated and
made longer, the joint indeed according to the longitude does sometimes depart
from its seat, yet falls not wholly out of it.

But from the variety of the Situation to which the joint falls forth there are
fetched three differences chiefly: From the variety of the situation
The first is, if the bone which is naturally placed in the upper part fall out
to the lower; or on the contrary The second is, if that become on the right
side which ought to be placed on the left; or on the contrary it fall from the
left to the right, which others call outwardly or inwardly. The third is, if
that which was placed in the fore part fall to the hinder, and on the contrary
that which was placed behind fall out to the fore part; and the joints of some
parts may be luxated into al these differences, some only into certain
differences, not al; so the elbow, hand, thigh fall forth into four differences,
viz. To the inward, outward, forward, backward, but cannot upward; the knee
falls out into three scituations, viz. The inward, outward, and hinder part
toward the ham; but the opposition of the patel bone hinders its falling out
to the fore part, of which shall be spoke hereafter in the Luxations of the
particular parts.

The Difference is taken from the Efficient Cause, From the Efficient Cause
because the Luxation is sometimes from external Causes, as falls, blows,
jumpings, running, and from a violent distorsion, extension, and impulsion of
the part, but sometimes from internal causes, as while a humor sliding into the
cavity of the joint drives it out of its place.

There are also certain improper Differences, Improper Differences
or rather complications of other preternatural Affects with Luxations, as that
an Inflammation, fracture, wound, or somewhat else is joined with the Luxation.

Signs Diagnostick.
A Joint being fallen forth into another place is easily known by the sight and
touch; for there appears a Tumor in the part into which the joint is fallen,
but a hollowness in the place from whence the joint is fallen; and that appears
so much the easier, if the body be not very thick and fat, or the place be void
of flesh. Again, if the Luxation be perfect, that Member is made shorter,
whenas the joint no longer included in its Cavity, but falling out of it, is
drawn upwards: yet sometimes the Member becomes longer, as is afterward said in
particular. When then the Member luxated is always unlike to the sound one in
situation, figure, and longitude, we must always compare the Member affected
with the like sound part of the same name, Arm with Arm, Thigh with Thigh in
the same man; where yet we must observe, that the Member with which we compare
it be found, and have no fault. Thirdly, because Articulations are made for
motion, if a joint fall out of its natural seat it must needs be that the motion
of the joint is hurt; therefore where there is a suspicion of a Luxation, yet
the motion is not hurt, we must conclude that there is yet no luxation made.
Lastly, because a joint falling forth of its seat does compress the sensible
parts into which it is fallen, as the Tendons, Nerves, Muscles, from thence
there is raised a pain.

And these are the signs of a perfect Luxation; but if there be only a
Subluxation, the Signs propounded will either be more gentle, or some of them
will be wanting.

If there be a Luxation of a joint joined by a Synarthrosis, in which the Bones
do gape, it is known by the thickness of the Member greater than usual, and by
a greater bunching out than the heads of the bones do consist of.

As concerning the Causes, The signs of the Causes
the external and violent are apparent by the relation of the Patient, and the
Luxation proceeding from thence happen suddenly; but if the Luxation he by
reason of the looseness of the Ligaments, it happens by degrees; and the luxated
Member is moved and totters up and down with inordinate motions; and whiles the
joint is forced into its seat, the Member indeed acquires its natural
longitude, which being let alone again presently it becomes longer.

Also if the head of the Bone luxated be thrust with the fingers to the
contrary part, it easily recoil back; every where about the joint there is a
Cavity begotten, that if the finger be thrust into the joint it easily goes in,
no body resisting, as if al were empty.

When some Epiphysis is pulled off from its being, it is known by the impotency
of motion, and by the crackling, when they are handled and moved.

Prognostics.
1. In the Bodies of Children and young folks, and those that are softer the
bones luxated are easily restored, yet being restored are not so faithfully
retained; the contrary happens in riper and harder bodies.

2. The Joints which are dedicated to fewer differences of motions are more
difficultly replaced, but better contained.

3. By how much the further the joint is fallen from its bosom, by so much the
more difficultly it is restored; by how much the nearer, by so much the sooner.

4. The Luxations in which the brows of the bones are broken are worst of al;
for though the joints be restored to their places, yet they continue not long,
but fall out again upon the sleightest cause.

5. The joints which are fallen forth by reason of the Laxness of the
Ligaments, though they be replaced, yet do easily fall forth again.

6. Those Luxations which have a great pain, inflammation, or wound happen on
them, are hard to be cured, and want not their danger, and cannot be restored
without danger of Convulsions, nay of death. Wherefore if the bone being
reduced the Nerves be distended, it must presently be forced out again, as
Celsus does counsel.

7. Old Luxations and which are grown hard with a Callus, and which have a
clammy humor filling up the Cavities of the Bones, are never or very hardly
cured; therefore every Luxation must presently be replaced.

8. They who in their Childhood have had their joints fall forth, and are not
replaced, they grow less than others.

9. What Member also soever has been troubled with a long continued Luxation,
by how much it is the less able to be moved by a natural motion, by so much the
more it is extenuated and wasted, both because by intermission of motion the
Native heat of the part is dulled, and because the Vessels are comprest by the
luxated joint, and the necessary influence of blood and spirits is hindered.

10. A Luxation of the head brings death, by reason of the compression of the
Spinal Marrow presently at its first rise, and the prohibition of the influx of
animal Spirits.

We shall afterward speak in particular of the Prognostics of the rest of the
joints.

The Cure.
The Bone luxated, and which is fallen out of its natural seat, shows a
reposition to its natural place; and this Indication is satisfied, and
Luxations are cured by straining and forcing them to the part opposite to that
from whence the change is made; which replacing of the joints fallen forth of
their seats is called ton arthron embole, and arthrembole. But the replacing of
luxated Bones is completed three ways, either by the hands of the Surgeon
and his Servants, which is the most simple, and is called Palestrical, because
'twas used in the wrestling places if at any time the Fencers Limbs were
luxated; and it is convenient in soft bodies, and where the evil is fresh; or by
some vulgar instruments the joints are forced into their seats, as by the help
of reins, swathes, ropes, ladders, seats, two leaved doors, which is called the
Methodical way, and is convenient for children, women, and the stronger males,
and for old luxacions; or it is performed by instruments and certain singular
engines, and it is called organical, and it is applied to stronger bodies and old
Luxations, and altogether to those which cannot be restored the two former
ways. But concerning such Engines see Hippocrates de artic. et fractur. and
Oribasius de machin: Others hold only two ways, the Palaestrical, and
Physical; and under Physical comprehend the Methodical and Organical.

But what way soever the restitution of the luxated bone is performed, How many
Operations are required to the reducing of luxated parts.
four operations are necessary to it, Extension, Replacing, Rolling, and
Confirming and placing of the Member reduced: for first of al, whenas the
Muscles are contracted, as we have said of Fractures, these is need of
extending the luxated member, which must be done presently after the Luxation
is made; or if the Surgeon be called late, when the fear of Inflammation is
over; and so far it must be made, that some free space may be left between the
bones, Extension:
left the joint or head of the bone be rased, or the brows of the bosom be
broken; and in the Extension a convenient figure of the part must be observed,
and the Muscles on one part must be kept whole, and not be distorted, to wit,
lest the Head of the Muscle be in the internal part, and the end of it in the
external. But Extension is made either by the hands of the Surgeon, or his
servants; or with Reins, Ropes, and Swathes, or with Instruments and Engines,
as was said before.

Sufficient extension being made, the bone which is fallen out of its place
must be replaced in it, Replacing
which labor the Greeks call Mochlia, and Mochleusis, viz. the compulsion of the
bone luxated and extended into its seat: but that this operation may be done
rightly, both the nature of Articulations, and how all the bones in the body are
joined together, and the differences of Luxations ought to be known; for the
Surgeon will not know certainly into what place he ought to force the luxated
bone, if he do not rightly know before, out of what natural place it is fallen;
for the Surgeon ought to consider from whence the Joint has first fallen,
what progress it has made in its fall, and whither it is come at last; and from
the end of its fall, the same way by which it fell forth, to force it back again
to the Joint from whence it fell: as if a Joint be fallen forth from the left
toward the right, he ought to force it toward the left; if it be fallen from
the right toward the left, then toward the right; that which is fallen
toward the forepart must be forced to the hinder part; that slipped forth to the
hinder part toward the sore part. And there are so many ways of this
reduction, as there are Joints; for example sake, the Shoulder is one way, the
Foot another, and the Vertebrae another way reduced into their place; and the
Shoulder otherwise when it is fallen into the Arm-pit hole, otherwise when to
the fore part. But the bone must be forced into its place gently, and if need
be applying first of al laxative and mollefying Medicines, lest there be a
contusion or grating of the head and bosom upon one another, or a pain or
Inflammation be caused; and we must avoid wheeling about the head of the bone,
lest it break.

But we shall know that the Joint is rightly reduced, if the member and juncture
recover its natural figure, longitude, and lost motion, and it wholly agree
with the like named sound member, and the pain which was present before do
cease. There is wont also for the most part to be heard a certain crackling and
sound when the bone returns into its Cavity, but we must not trust to this sign
alone, for sometimes there is a crackling made, and a noise heard by reason of
the breaking off of the brows of the bone, which may be, when the head of the
bone is so struck against the brows, that somewhat of them is broke off; and
then whenas that part of the brow broken off does sooner get into the bosom
then the Joint, the replacing cannot be right. A crackling and noise also may
be caused, when in a violent reducing the joint or head of the bone hits
against the bosom, and contuseth it, whence the Cartilage is separated from the
rest of the bone, and there is a difficulty of motion; therefore all the other
signs must be joined together.

The Joint being reduced into its seat, Binding:
the distention must be bated, and we must suffer the Muscles to return to
themselves, and afterward the member must be so strengthened that the Joint
cannot again go out of its place; which is done almost after the same manner as
in Fractures; for first of al before binding up be ordered, astringent
medicines must be laid on, which hinder a flux of humors and Inflammation, and
contract the Ligaments relaxt, and strengthen the part; of Bole, Sanguis
Draconis, Pomegranate Pills, Pomegranate flowers, Roses, Frankincense, fine
Flour, and the like, mixed with the white of an Egg; if the pain be great those
things also which together with an astringent faculty do mitigate pain, as Oil
of Roses, Mastick, and the like. Or,

Take of the greater Comfrey, Bean flour, Bole armenick, of each three ounces;
steep them in Vinegar and dry them: afterward

Take of Litharge, Wax, Rosin, of each three ounces; melt them over the fire
and add the things forementioned steeped in Vinegar; and last of al two ounces
of Tragacanth. Make a Plaster. Or,

Take of new Wax three ounces, Missleto of the Oak, Mastick, Rosin of Pine, of
each half an ounce; mix them.

Then the Member must be conveniently bound up, with Rowlers and Bolsters, as
we said concerning Fractures. And Gabriel Fallopius teaches at large, Tract.
de Luxat. c. 5. that the bone may be kept in its place, and the flux of humors
hindered. If need be, and the figure and nature of the part will suffer it,
Splints must be laid on of Pastboard, or Leather, or some other convenient
matter.

Last of al, the member must be placed gently, evenly, Placing of it:
and that the position keep a middle and natural figure, lest pain be caused,
and it must be kept unmoved til the fourth or seventh day, unless an itching,
pain, or other Symptom do urge; and afterward it must be strengthened with
convenient Medicines.

Chap 2. Of a Luxation with Pain, Inflammation, Wound, Fractures.
BUt it happens sometimes that the Luxation is not alone, but other
preternatural Affects, Pain, Inflammation, Wound, and Fractures are joined with
it. But if before the Physician be called Pain and Inflammation has already
seized on the part affected, we must not try to restore the luxated Joint, til
the Pain and Inflammation are allaied; for if that be tried before this is
done, it is to be feared, lest by the distension of the Nerves a Convulsion, or
some other dangerous Evil arise; therefore before the replacing of the Joint be
attempted the pain must first be mi^igated, and the Inflammation allaied, by
those medicines which are formerly mentioned. If after the Joint be replaced,
and the binding be loosened, there be an Itching, the place must be sprinkled
with warm Water, Itching:
that the humor the cause of Itching may be discust, and the pain abated;
otherwise if there be no Itching we must forbear warm sprinklings, lest the
Ligaments be relaxt; or rather when the binding is loosened, the place must be
fomented with some strengthening Decoction. As

Take of the Leaves of Myrtle, Oak, Wormwood, of each one handful; red Rose
flowers half a handful, Pomegranate rind one ounce, Pomegranate flowers,
Missleto of the Oak, of each half a handful: Boil them in harsh Wine.

A Luxation with a wound:
If a Wound be joined with the Luxation, that is very dangerous and oftentimes
kills the man, whenas from distention of the Nerves and Muscles, a Pain,
Inflammation, Convulsion, acute Fevers are caused; and the danger is by so much
the greater, by how much the Member is greater, and the Nerves and Muscles
about it are the greater; whence a Luxation of the Shoulder and Thigh with a
Wound for the most part brings death: and the danger is the greater by how much
the Wound is nearer the Joint; and therefore Hippocrates is against the
reducing of luxated bones and their bindings up, and commands to use at the
beginning only things that assuage pain, and take away Inflammation, and thinks
that none of these can safely be reduced, besides the Fingers, Hands, and Feet;
and in these also he commands al things to be done very diligently; for neither
a Finger (in which there is least of danger) ought to be replaced when there is
an Inflammation, but either before the Inflammation comes, or after it is
allaied. But much more is this to be done in other Joints, of al which
Hippocrates (Artic. 4. Text. 16. and 17.) says, For in whomsoever the bones of
the Leg luxated with a wound made, do wholly hang forth from the joints of the
foot, whether they tend inwardly or outwardly, they are not to be reduced, but
let them suffer he that will to replace them; for ye may know, that if they
remain reduced they shall die, and their life shall be of very few days, for
there are few of them which pass the seventh day; for that which kills them is
a Convulsion; moreover it happens also, that both the Leg and the Foot do
gangraene. We must know for certain that these things will so come to pass. And
there also Text 28, 29, 31. which places there you may see, and also Galens
Comment. And therefore presently at the beginning, and before an Inflammation
come in a Fracture with a wound, we must try whether the joint may be restored
into its seat with moderate extension (for it can by no means endure strong)
which if it succeed to your mind we must labor chiefly in this to keep off an
Inflammation; but if the joint being replaced an Inflammation or Convulsion
does happen, the joint must be thtust out of its place again^ (if it can be
done without violence) or if we fear this danger, it is safer (especially in the
greater joints) to defer the reducing til the Inflammation is ceased, and the
fear of it is past. When the Inflammation is now ceased, which is wont to be
about the seventh or ninth day, both must be signified and foretold to the
standers by; and the danger which is at hand by the reducing, and the weakness
of the part, by which the man is rendered lame and maimed if the joint be not
restored: and if they urge the restitution of the joint, it must be attempted
without any violence; afterward the Cure of the Wound must be ordered as in a
fracture with a wound, but the member it self must be so placed that the
Patient (as much as may be) may be free from pain. See Hippocrates of these
things in the place before alleged. Sometimes also it happens that a Fracture
is joined with a Luxation, therefore the Surgeon must be wary; and if the
Fracture offer it self near the Joint, let him consider whether the Joint be
whole or luxated, lest while he cure the Fracture he neglect the Luxation. Thus
I remember a Neighbors Child, a Boy about nine years of age, whenas a Vessel
into which they were wont to pour their hot Drink after it was boiled, fell upon
his Thigh, and his Thighbone was broke, and the Joint of the same luxated,
which when the Chirugeon observed not, and only Cured the Fracture and restored
not the Hip-joynt, the Boy became lame. But if there be a luxation with a
Fracture, the Member must be extended the common way, and the luxated Joint
must be reduced into its proper place, and the broken bones must be conformed
and composed; and first of all indeed the luxated Joint must be replaced if it
may be done, then the Fracture must be Cured, and fit Medicines must be laid on
them both, of which we have spoken already; and convenient binding up must be
ordered; but if the Joint cannot be restored to its place without danger before
the Fracture be cured, then the Fracture must be cured first; afterward when
the callus is generated, we must endeavor that the luxated Joint also be
restored.

Last of al, The Cure of an old Luxation.
if a Luxation by reason of an Inflammation coming upon it, or a Wound or
Fracture joynd with it, cannot presently be restored, but there is a callous
hardness contracted about the Joint, the place must be fomented either with
plain warm water, or with a mollefying Decoction made of Marshmallows,
Mallows, Camomile flowers, Fenugreek seeds, and the like; but after the
Fomentation the Joint must be anointed with Ointment of Dialthaea, or some
other mollefier, or this like Cataplasm must be laid upon it.

Take of Marsh-mallow roots, wild Cowcumber, of each three ounces; Mallows,
Marsh-mallow leaves, of each a handful: Boil them til they are soft, and searce
them through a hair Searce; add of the Flour of Fenugreek, Flax seed, of each
half an ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds, Hogs grease, as much as is sufficient;
make a Cataplasm.

If the hardness be greater, add to the things boiled, wild Cowcumber root, and
lay on it Diachylum magnum.

When the Member shall be sufficiently mollefied if need be Digesters may be
applied; as Betony, Sage, Hysop, Groundpine, the Plaster of Betony, and the
like. Or Suffumigations wish a fire-stone or Mil-stone, or Bituminous and
Sulphurous Baths, if they may be had; Lastly, when whatsoever was hard is
mollefied and discussed, the joint in convenient manner must be restored to its
place, and the rest must be performed as was said above, Chap. 1.

Chap. 3. Of a Luxation of the Mandible.
ANd let it suffice to have said this briefly of Luxations in general; now we
must say somewhat in particular of the Luxations of the chief joints.

And first of al as concerning the Luxation of the Mandible; whenas Nature has
made only the lower jaw movable in all creatures, the River Crocodile excepted,
(which as Aristotle witnesses, 1. Hist. Animal. c. 11. and 3. Hist. Animal. c.
7. moves its upper Jaw) it is easily apparent that that only can suffer a
Luxation. The which notwithstanding is not easily luxated, by reason of the
most straight coarticulation of it with the bones of the head, and the
exceeding strength of the Muscles that draw it upwards; but into what part the
Mandible may be luxated, its structure and insertion do plainly teach us: For
as concerning its structure, it has two processes in its hinder part on each
side; the former of which drawn forward being broad and thin ends as it were in
a point; but the latter is carried backwards and makes a long and transverse
head; that is inserted into the Os Jugale, but this is fitted to the second
bosom engraven in the Temple bone.

The Differences.
From which it does manifestly appear that the lower Mandible cannot be luxated
to the hinder part, because the Teat-like processes of the Temple bone do
hinder it; not to the right (especially in those of ripe age) because the left
head of the Jaw hinders; not to the left, because the head of the Jaw in the
right side hinders that. In those of ripe age I said, for it is well known by
Anatomy that the lower Mandible in Infants is cleft, and in the midst of the
Chin is joined with a great deal of Cartilage; which Cartilage if it be relaxt
by a flux of humors, or the Chin be struck, that the bone be separated from the
Cartilage, perhaps the Jaw may be luxated to the right or left side, the which
yet seldom happens, and therefore is not considered. But in the riper aged
because that Cartilage has so degenerated into a bony nature, that it can by
no means be separated, no not by boiling, nay not the least footstep almost
remains of a line, or any seam, but it appears one continued bone, Physicians
do rightly affirm that the luxation can be made only to the fore part. But this
Luxation happens, if the former and sharp process, like to a Beak, which by the
Greeks is called Corone, do slide forth below the Os jugale, that it becomes so
much lower then it, that it can no more return upwards again into its place;
for otherwise though this process be let lower then the Os jugale, yet there is
not presently a Luxation made, but the mouth being shut it returns into its
place again; but this Luxation is made either in one side only, when only its
right or left part slips forth; or in both sides together, when the whole bone
of the lower jaw on both sides is fallen out of its seat.

The Causes.
But the most common Cause of this Luxation, nay almost the only Cause, is the
too much opening and gaping of the mouth, whether it be by yawning, or by
taking some heavy burden in the Teeth, and lifting it on high, so that the
forenamed process becomes lower than the Os Jugale, as was said, and withal be
turned aside; for its return into its seat is not prohibited unless it be
turned aside. Yet this very thing happens seldom and hardly, and the Jaw is
seldom luxated, by reason of the strength of the Muscles by which it is tied to
the upward parts. For from both processes of the lower jaw arise Nervous and
most strong Tendons, with which the Muscles are inwrapped which are called
Crotaphitae and Masseteres.

Signs Diagnostick.
That the jaw is fallen out of its seat may be known in general, because the
lower jaw hangs forth to the fore part, and the process of the bone like to a
beak stands out by the jaw. For if the process resembling a beak fall out of the
Os Jugale it must needs be that there also it hang forth, which in a man not
very fat is easily known both by sight and touch. The mouth remains open,
whence the speech is hindered, and the spittle flows forth involuntarily.

If the jaw be luxated on one part, that with the chin is inclined to the
contrary part which is not luxated; the mouth is distorted, whence the Teeth
cannot be joined, neither do they answer to their equals, but the dog-teeth are
under the Cutters. In the luxated part there is perceived only a certain
bunching out, and the temporal Muscle appears stiff. But if the jaw be luxated
on both sides, al of it with the chin hangs forth, and that straight out
toward the fore part or to the Breast; the lower Teeth go further out than the
upper, yet they answer one to another, the Cutters to Cutters, the Dog-teeth to
Dog-teeth; near the Cheeks on both sides there appears a certain eminency,
which the acute beak-like process does make; the temporal Muscles, whose
Tendons this process does receive, (yea is wholly compassed by them) appear
stretched, stiff, and hard.

Prognostics
1. The Luxation of the Mandible is a dangerous evil; and a jaw luxated (as
Hippocrates teaches 2. de Art. and Galen in his Comment) must speedily be
replaced; since that the temporal muscles and the Nerves inserted in them (and
consequently the brain it self) are easily drawn into consent. For the temporal
Muscles have the greatest consent with the brain, and do receive nerves from
the brain of the third conjugation, from whence do arise not only pains,
inflammations, continual fevers, dull sleeps, but also death it self is often
hastened about the tenth day.

2. Those whose Mandible is not reduced, are wont to void by stool filthy and
thin Choler; and if they vomit, the vomit is pure.

3. Yet there is greater danger instant; and the replacing is harder if the
jaws be luxated on both sides, then if only on one side, whenas all the Muscles
with which the jaw is contained are then distended.

The Cure.
The Mandible luxated shows that it must be reduced into its seat again; which
how it ought to be done, Hippocrates teaches 2. de Artic. t. 15. and 16. in
these words. One ought to hold the head of him that is luxated, another the
lower jaw, the man gaping as much as he can conveniently, and taking it about
the chin with his fingers both within and without, first a little while to stir
it up and down, and then with his hand to move it aside, and to command the
Patient that holding the luxated jaw he further it, and be very obedient to him
moving it. Then endeavor must be used, that at once of a sudden we strike it
off of its three figurations; for the lower jaw must at once be promoted from
its distorsion to its natural position; and it must be driven backwards, and
the Patient obeying these ought to shut his mouth, not to gape any longer; and
this indeed is the reducing of it, which cannot be done by other figurations;
but afterward a little Physic will suffice, a bolster laid on with a Cerote,
we apply a loose binding up; yet we perform this office more safely if the man
be bended backward, and his head supported with a leather Cushion well stuffed
put under it, that it may yield as little as may be.

If the jaw be luxated on both parts
For we must see first whether the jaw be luxated to both sides or one; if both
parts of the jaw are fallen forth, let the Patient be placed on some low fear,
and let his head be urged either to the wall, putting between some hard Cushion;
or let it be held fast by a servant placed at the back of the Patient, or the
Patient lying on his back, as you may see by the figure in Hippocrates in the
place alleged, text 17. let it be held fast by a servant standing at his
head, and kept unmovable.

Afterward the Surgeon ought to put both his Thumbs wrapped up in linen on
the grinders, but with the rest of his fingers to lay hold on the jaw outwardly
about the chin, and try to reduce it by a manner and motion contrary to that
which is fallen forth; which he may do, if first of al he draw the jaw
downwards; because the temporal Muscles have snatched the acute process upwards;
secondly because the jaw is fallen to the fore part he must force the same to
the hinder part^; thirdly because it was drawn downwards he must drive it
upwards; al which operations a skilful Surgeon may speedily and in a moment
perform.

But if the jaw be fallen out of its seat only on one side, If on one side
the way of reducing it is the same, this only must be peculiarly observed,
that the Jaw being drawn downwards and forced backwards, afterward also must
be stirred to the opposite side, and at once thrust upwards.

Reduction being made, a Cerote of Wax and Oil of Roses must be applied to the
heads of the Jaw or Temples; and if there were strong extension made, to hinder
an Inflammation astringent Medicines must be laid on with the white of an Egg,
or others, as in other Luxations.

At last convenient binding up must be made, which must begin from the Chin,
and tend toward the crown of the Head, and it must not be loosed before the
third day. Let the Patient forbear from much talk, opening of his mouth, and
gaping, and chewing of hard meats, and let him be content with Liquids.

If an Inflammation or other grievous Symptom be at hand, that must be
conveniently opposed, as has been often said; and if there be joined a pain of
the Eyes and Neck, we must let blood in the Arm, as Celsus advises, l. 8. c
11. and the Temples and Neck must be anointed with Oil of Roses and Worms.

Chap. 4 Of a Luxation of the Channel Bone.
THe Channel bone also is sometimes moved out of its seat, which Galen proves by
his own example, in l. Hippoc. de artic. com. 1. tex. 62. where he reckons up
at large, how when he was thirty five years old in the wrestling place this
joint was so luxated that between the top of the shoulder blade and the throat
there was three fingers space, and what was done about it.

But the Channel Bone is luxated either against the Breast bone, or against the
top of the shoulder bone; yet both of them seldom happens, by reason of its
firm conjunction with both bones.

Signs Diagnostick.
But a Luxation of this Bone is not easily known; and Ambrose Parry writes, l.
15. c. 11. That he has known many Surgeons, who being deceived have taken a
Luxation of the Throat for a Luxation of the top of the Shoulder. But it is
known, because the top as it were of the shoulder does swel, and in the place
from whence the Channel Bone is departed there appears a manifest Cavity; there
is also a pain, inflammation, and an impotency to move and lift up the Arm, and
to other motions that are performed by the help of the Shoulder.

Prognostics.
1. This bone is hardly reduced and returned into its natural sea, but for the
most part hangs forth more or less from the upper part.

2. But unless it be restored the Patient will fail in some motion of his Arm,
and cannot move his Hand neither to his Head, nor Mouth.

The Cure.
This Bone according to the variety of the Luxation requires diverse
Restitutions. In general, the Arm must be extended, and the channel bone thrust
back into its place, which is done, if helie on his back with a hard Cushion put
under his Shoulders, that the Shoulder and Breast may bunch forth outwardly,
and by lifting up, pressing down, or drawing the Arm forward, and backward, as
need requires, and pressing it with the palm of the hand, this bone may be
forced into its seat; afterward sit Medicines and many bolsters must be laid
on, and the part must be bound straightly; which strict binding few men can
endure; yet Galen writes that he suffered such strange binding, that he could
perceive the motion of the Arteries under his Throat.

Chap. 5. Of a Luxation of the Back bone and Ribs.
OFtentimes also the Vertebrae of the Back bone are luxated, and especially
those which are in the Back, whence is a bunch in the back; but whereas I have
treated of this, l. 2. par. 2. chapter 11. I will not do it over again, but send the
Reader to that place; two things only I add, the first concerning a Fracture
which is made on the outer parts; if it be new, and made by a violent cause, it
must presently be replaced by the help of a Surgeon, of which business do
treat Hippocrates l. 4 de art. Galen in his Comment. Paulus Aeg^neta, l. 6. c.
177. Oribasius de match. c. 35. Celsus l. 8. c. 14. Parry, l. 15. c. 15. and 16.

A Luxation of the Vertebrae outward:
But because this Evil steals by degrees upon Infants, and it is oftentimes
hereditary, for the most part it is incurable: yet if there remain any hope of
recovery, the Cure is done by convenient Plasters which bind and strengthen
the part affected, on which an Iron Plate must be laid, which by degrees may
force the Vertebrae into their place. But that Plate ought to be so long and
broad, that i^ comprehend the whole bunch; and that it may press it the
stronger, the inward part which is next the bunch ought to be filled with
Cotton closely bumbasted, and covered over with Linen; but this Plate must be
so fastened and sewed to a Stomacher made of Linen or Bumbast, that when it is
put on it may comprehend the part affected. This Stomacher must be tied with
Strings, in other parts moderately, but about the part affected very straight,
that the Place may compress the bunching Vertebrae: and it the Luxation be in
the Vertebrae of the Loins, this Stomacher ought to comprehend not only the
Breast, but all the lower Belly also, to the Privities.

Such a Plaster may be made.

Take of common Oil, Hogs grease, of each three ounces; Deers suet one ounce
and half; melt them and mix them over the sire, then cast in two ounces of red
Lead: Let them boil with continual stirring til they begin to look black and
grow thick; by and by add two ounces of Pitch: Afterward by degrees strew in
two ounces of white Vitriol poudrered, then add two ounces of Litharge: and at
length when they are almost boiled to a just thickness, add one ounce and half
of Tacamahacca; stir them again and boil them to the consistence of a Plaster.

Gulielmus Fabricius Centur. 5. Observe. 67. propounds such a one.

Take of the Plaster Slotanum half an ounce, new Wax two ounces, Osteocolla
one ounce, Powder of the roots of the greater Comfrey, Terra Sigillata, of each
three ounces; Powder of Pomegranate flowers, Cypress Nuts, red Roses, of each
one ounce; Oil of Roses or Mastick as much a^ will suffice; mix them.

But before such Plasters and Places be laid on, it will be good for some time
before to foment the part with the following Decoction, and to anoint it to
mollefie it, if any thing be hard, that it may be rendered more fit to be
replaced. As,

Take of Sage, Marshmallows, Flowers of Camomile, Melilote, St. John's Wort, of
each one handful; let them be boiled for a Fomentation.

Take of Oil of Worms, of Orrace, of white Lilies, of each one ounce; Ointment
of Agrippa half an ounce, Dialtheaea one ounce; mix them.

Secondly, A Luxation of the Vertebrae inwards
if the Vertebrae be luxited inwards, the restitution of them is altogether
more difficult; yet in tender bodies, if the Evil be new, some Plaster firmly
sticking to the Skin may be applied to the place affected; and the luxated
Vertebrae may be drawn forth thither.

In those of riper age Guil. Fabricius, Cent. 5. Observe. 69. thinks an extreme
Remedy is rather to be attempted, then to reli^quish the Patient, who otherwise
must lead the miserable life of the Disease, or die. To wit (as Fabricius
teaches) Incision must be made with a Knife even to the descending appendix of
the Vertebra; then through the same Wound putting in the Knife again, two
Incisions more must be made, one to the right, the other to the left side of
the Appendix; then the Appendix being laid hold on by Instruments fit for this
purpose, it must be drawn upwards, and the Vertebra replaced in its natural
seat: but in the interim whiles these things are done, it must needs be that
the Back bone be extended, for the Vertebra will the easier start into its
natural position. The Wound must be small or great according to the greatness of
the dislocation; for if only one Vertebra be pressed in, a small Wound will
suffice, but if two or more, it must needs be great, that both the luxated
Vertebrae may be laid hold on. If a Flux of blood do hinder, so that the
operation cannot be done presently after Incision is made, it must be stopped
with Hurds closely wreathed up, and wet with the White of an Egg, and strewed
with a powder to stop blood; where this must be observed, that the whole Wound,
especially on each side of the Appendix be most carefully filled up with those
Hurd; but that this may be done commodiously, many little pillows must be made
of Hurds wreathed up into this fashion, and so one after another must be thrust
into the Wound, til it be filled; afterward let some Plaster that will stick
fast be applied, and let it be bound with a Rowler; after some hours when the
blood is stopped, the Hurds must be taken out gently, that the blood break not
forth again; afterward the Instrument must be applied as was said, but the
Instrument must be strong and toothed, as we use in drawing forth a Stone, if
two Vertebrae be luxated, both must be laid hold on, and that with two
Instruments.

There must therefore be two Surgeons, who must equally and with one consent
draw upwards; moreover let the Surgeon have a care, that the Incisions be
not made too deep at the sides of the Appendix, by reason of the Nerves which
proceed from the spinal marrow to the sides of the Vertebrae; moreover it is
necessary, that this operation be done at the beginning of the Disease, while
the strength is firm, and before the part affected is possessed with an
Inflammation and Tumor; neither makes it any matter whether the Patient be
without Speech or Understanding, which sometimes happens. But if the Surgeon
be not called at the beginning, the second, third, or fourth day at least
before the operation the place must be fomented with the Decoction of Be^ony,
Primrose, Sage, Camomile, Melilote, Roses and Juniper berries; to which he may
add some things mollefying as Mallows, Marshmallows, and then try to reduce
them; after the operation the Back must be anointed with Oil of Roses and
Worms, and the Wound also must be handled after the manner of other contused
Wounds.

I have writ in the place alleged, that this operation seems to me not safe
enough, and to which few will submit ^ although Guil. Fabricius with Celsus l.
3. c. 33. affirms, that it makes no matter, whether the Remedy be safe or not,
which is the only one; and he thinks this operation is not so dangerous, since
that in the middle of the Back there are no great Vessels of Veins and
Arteries, besides the Nerves in the Appendixes are small.

Of the Luxation of the Ribs has been spoken, l. 2. p. 2. c. 25.

Chap. 6. Of a Luxation of the Shoulder.
THe Shoulder bone with its round head covered every where with a Cartilage is
joined to the bosom of the neck of the Shoulder Blade by a most perfect manner
of Articulation, and most commodious for the undergoing and performing of all
motions, and when as this bosom is not deep enough engraved to receive the head
of the Shoulder, lest this Joint should be subject to often Luxations,
provident Nature has provided by strong Ligaments and a peculiar process, and
moreover besides the Cartilage with which she has pargetted over this bosom,
she has joined another about it, which indeed grows not to the bosom; yet
being tied with Ligaments begins thicker and by degrees is extenuated toward
the Center* yet if a violent cause come this Joint falls out oftener and easier
then the rest.

The Differences.
But this Joint falls out downwards (for the most) part or under the Arm-pit
hole; for whereas as (as Galen renders the Causes of this business, 1. de
artic. tex. 2.) there are six places about every dearticulation, Above and
Below, Before and Behind, Without and Within, the inner part of this Joint by
which it tends plainly upwards has a fleshy part of a Muscle cast over it,
which by some is called Deltoides from its likeness to the Greek letter D; but
by that part it declines toward the Neck it has the back of the
Shoulder Blade, where by the conjunction with the Neck-bone the top of the
Shoulder is made which is called the Acromion; where it looks inward, that
process meets with the Shoulder Blade, which for its fashion some call the
Anchor-like, some the Cornicular process, which wholly forbids that the Joint
fall forth into that part. But that it may fall into the hinder part, whenas
there it leans on the Shoulder Blade, Who is there amongst us that can so much
as conceive it? There are four parts then remaining, which want a Guard, into
which it is likely the Joint may fall. Hippocrates in the alleged place
admits of no other Species of Luxation of the Shoulder but under the Arm-pit^
nay he plainly denies that it can fall forth to the fore part; yet Galen has
seen it five times, once in Asia, and four times at Rome; and no wonder, whenas
in the Cities where Hippocrat. lived there were scarce so many Men, as in one
Street at Rome, and therefore there were more Examples of Diseases, especially
the wrestling place coming into use, by which their Limbs were diversely
distorted and perverted. Parry, l. 15. c. 21. 29. and 30. adds two differences
more, viz. upwards and outward, but those are very rare, and you may see the
places alleged concerning them.

But it is doubted whether the shoulder can suffer only a perfect Luxation, or
also a Subluxation. Hippoc. 1. de artic. tex. 22. denies it, and not without
cause and reason; for whenas the head of this joint is round, and inserted into
Cavities which have their brims round, it cannot stay in them; and this is
altogether true, if the Luxation happen from an external violent cause; but if
the thick humors flow into the bosom of the shoulder blade, and there by their
long stay do stick concreted and hardened, they may by degrees thrust the head
of the shoulder out of its seat, and cause an imperfect Luxation; yet this
happens seldom in the shoulder, more often in the Hip.

The Causes.
From which it appears now that the Cause of a perfect Luxation of the shoulder
is a violent cause, a fall, a blow, vehement extension or distorsion of the Arm;
but the cause of a Subluxation is a thick humor fallen into the bosom of the
shoulder blade.

Signs Diagnostick.
That the shoulder is fallen under the Arm-pit is easily known, and it is most
certainly shown by its proper and inseparable sign, viz. somewhat round and hard
under the Arm-pit is sensibly obvious to the touch, to which notwithstanding
other signs also are added, not proper, but common; for there appears an
unusual Cavity at the top of the shoulder, but that is a common sign, both of
the shoulder fallen forth, and of the broad bone of the shoulder blade. In
which things that Physicians are often deceived Galen teaches at large both by
his own and others example, 1. de artic. tex. 61. the same falling forth of the
shoulder is showed by its unlikeness compared with the sound one, by a sharp
bunching out as it were of the upper process of the shoulder blade, by a
departing of the Elbow from the Ribs more than usual, and the difficult and
painful bringing of it to them; and the exceeding length and inequality of the
same compared with the sound one (unless the shoulder fallen downwards be
nevertheless drawn up by the Muscles) and the impotency of the Arm to any
motion; which sign also is not inseparable, whenas the Muscles about the
shoulders what way soever hurt whether by a Luxation, or by any other Cause,
are unfit for motion.

If the shoulder be fallen forth to the fore part, there is seen an unusual
Cavity in the hinder part, and too great a bunching out in the fore part, the
head of the shoulder is distorted toward the Breast, the Elbow tends to the
hinder parts, and is with difficultly stretched out to the fore parts, and the
signs are wanting of a shoulder luxated into the Arm-pit.

Prognostics
1. The head of the shoulder fallen to the fore part is easier reduced than if
it be fallen into the Arm-pit.

2. An old Luxation of the shoulder is very hardly reduced, and being replaced
it falls forth again.

3. They who have their shoulder reduced (which is true also of other joints)
the parts adjoining being affected with no Inflammation, may presently use
their shoulder without any pain; and these think they have no need of any
further care or providence, but it is the Physicians part to correct their
opinion; whenas these have their shoulder more easily fall forth again, then
those whose neighboring parts are possessed with an Inflammation, for these
cannot use their joints.

4. They whose head of the shoulder could not be reduced, if they grow still,
that shoulder is not equally augmented as the sound one; and though it be
augmented somewhat, yet it is rendered shorter than the other; which happens by
reason of the compression of the Muscles and Veins, and because the whole joint
is immovable; but in those who at ripe age have the head of the shoulder break
forth, and'tis not restored, the part which is above the joint is extenuated,
and becomes more slender habited.

The Cure
That the joint of the shoulder fallen forth to the Arm-pit may be restored
into its seat from which it fell, three things must be done, as Galen teaches,
1. de artic. text. 5. First the head of the shoulder is to be forced to the
fore part, then to the upper part, at last to the hinder part, to wit that a
contrary way to the Luxation may be undertaken; for the head of the shoulder
departing from its proper bosom is first forced to the fore part, secondly by
its weight it is carried downwards, thirdly it is drawn backward to the Arm-pit
hole by the Muscles. But if the shoulder be fallen forth to the fore part, it
must be forced a contrary way to the hinder part; yet that it may be freed from
the Muscles with which it is detained, there must first be some extension of
the shoulder made, yet but little.

But the ways of reducing it, as we may see in Hippocrates. 1. de artic. and
other Authors, are various, of which we will reckon up the chief and most usual,
and those which require least preparation, and are most safe.

The first way of reducing a luxated shoulder
The first way is by bringing about the head of the shoulder about the neck of
the shoulder blade, to wit, when the Surgeon puts his hand most straightly
under the Arm-pit, and wheels about the shoulder with the other hand, that the
middle joints of the fingers force it into its Cavity; which way indeed wants
not its danger; for by the circumvolution not only the nervous and membranous
bodies, but also the brows of the bosom may be razed, nay the Cartilage
compassing the bosom cannot easily be pulled or hurt without great damage; yet
it has its place in children and other softer bodies, so that the Surgeon
do exercise it warily.

The second way is by the heel, after this manner: The second way
The Patient must be laid with his back on the ground, and between the hollow
of the Arm-pit, the head of the shoulder and the ribs, a bal of a middle size
made of Leather or some other matter not very soft must be fitted to it; but
the Surgeon sitting right against the Patient let him apply his right heel,
if the right shoulder be luxated, or his left heel if the left, upon the bal
put under the Arm-pit, and with both hands let him draw the shoulder downwards
(when the head of it is rapt upwards by the strength of the Muscles) but with
his heel let him drive the shoulder at once to the fore part and upwards; and
at last let him force backwards the head of the shoulder into the Cavity of the
blade; the which he may easily do, whenas the Muscles do not only much help
this motion, but oftentimes alone do wholly perfect it. Two Servants may make
this way of reducing easier, the one of which with a swathe or rein may draw
the shoulder blade upwards toward the head of the Patient, and by this means
facilitate the motion downwards, but let him press with his foot the top of the
shoulder, and so he will hinder the shoulder blade from following, whiles the
Surgeon draws the shoulder downwards; but let the other hold the opposite
sound Arm, and by this means he shall hinder that the whole body do not follow
upon the extension made by the Surgeon on the affected side. And this way
because it is done by a way contrary to the falling forth of the bone, and with
extension too, is almost natural, safe, and not so laborious: yet because it
wants an impulse, Galen thinks it recedes from a convenient manner.

The third way is by a Ladder, and it is also safe and commodious enough; The
third way
to wit a Ladder is raised up firm and fast, upon whose uppermost step there
must be bound some round body, which must be fitted to the Arm-pit of the
Patient, and may drive forth the head of the shoulder; at the bottom of the
Ladder a footstep is placed which the Patient gets upon; afterward his Arm-pit
is placed over that round body, the luxated Arm is drawn downwards by the
Surgeon, and the shoulder is moved up and down, in the interim the sound Arm
is most strongly drawn downwards at the same time by a servant on the opposite
side, and the footstool together is drawn from under the feet of the Patient,
that he remains hanging on the Ladder, and by this means the shoulder is
restored.

The fourth way differs not much from this, The fourth way
which is performed by a Pestil. To wit, the Pestil is wrapped up with some soft
Swathe, and is thrust between the side and the head of the shoulder, but it
must be of that length that the man standing may almost hang upon it; but if it
be shorter, let the man sit so that he can scarce cast his shoulder over the
Pestil, then let the shoulder and arm be extended along the Pestil, but let
another force his body the other way, flinging his hands about his Neck near
the Throat; but this way is not so safe, whenas the Pestil under the Arm may
easily give way, and there is danger lest that the body slide to this or that
part upon extension made on both sides.

The fifth way seems more commodious, the fifth way
which is done by putting under a shoulder, (they call it Subhumeration or
under-shouldering) after this manner; let a strong servant and of ^al stature
put the pit of the Patients Arm over the sharp part of his shoulder, and let
him draw the luxated shoulder toward his Breast most quickly and strongly,
that the Patient may as it were hang on his shoulder, by which means both the
Arm will be extended and the head of the Shoulder moved to the fore part; in the
interim let another Servant standing at the back of the Patient press the top
of the shoulder that the shoulder blade follow not with it; let him shake it,
and so rule those violent motions with his hands that the luxated Shoulder be
reduced into its Cavity ingraved in the shoulder blade. If the Patient be
light, let a Boy or some other heavy weight be hanged at his back; lest upon
the extension of the Shoulder the whole body do follow, and all the operation of
the Surgeon be hindered.

The sixth way, which by Hippocrates is counted the most commodious, is
described by him, 1. the sixth way A new way of reducing the shoulder
de artic. tex. 19. which Ambrose Parry makes yet more commodious, l. 15. c 27.
which may be seen there: to which way yet some Art may be added, if the Patient
sit immovable on a bench, and there be two pieces of wood four or five fingers
broad, two fingers thick; one being erected perpendicular must be fastened to
its Basis, which must be fashioned to the form of a Cross, of that length that
if it be set on the bench on which he sits, it may almost reach under his
Arm-pit, which in the upper part must have a point according to its longitude,
into which the other may be put; but let the other be almost three Else long,
and at one end let it have another piece of wood prefixed across almost half an
Ell long. Let this wood be a little hollowed an Ell long from its end to which
the other wood is prefixed, that it may be inserted to the other piece of wood
that is erected, but with the other end touch the bench. Now let the Patient
sit unmoved on the Bench, and let that long piece of wood resting on the other
erected perpendicular, be so moved to him that that cross piece of wood may be
straightly set under the Arm-pit of the Patient, in which part the Luxation is;
let the Patient extend the Arm that is hurt, upon that cross piece of wood
toward the bench; then let a swathe or rope be cast about the affected Arm
about the Elbow (a long Towel is most commodiously used) and let the Arm be
wrapped with it til below the Elbow, so that the swathe end in two handles, on
each side of the Arm and cross piece of wood; now let the drawing Engine which
rests on the bench, such as are used to draw up cross bones, he applied to the
end of the cross piece of wood; for which cause let that cross piece of wood
with a wooden stake be driven in a cross not far from the end, and the two
books of that drawing instrument in its upper part be laid hold on with the two
handles of the rope or towel; which when' it is done that Engine must be brought
about, as is wont to be done in binding of a bone. For so the Arm is extended
by degrees, and is drawn downwards, and the joint fallen forth is promoted into
its place, into which it is drawn and slips either of its own accord by the
motion of its Muscles, or by help of the Surgeon it must be forced thither
with his hand.

Which way differs from the draft of the Ambi described by Parry, in this;
first of all that instead of the Pillar B. made with two pieces of wood, here is
a pillar of one piece, which in its upper part has a point, which is sent into
the bosom of the Spatha A. hollowed in the lower part; next of al in place of
that Spatha or Ambi there is a piece of wood which reaches from the Shoulder
even to the Bench, on which the Patient sits. Thirdly, because that Spatha,
which is put under the Shoulder has not a round head, but a cross piece of
wood prefixed, which is sent under the Arm-pit. Fourthly, because the Arm is not
bound to the Ambi or Spatha, but only lies upon it, but the swathe which is
cast upon the luxated Arm on both sides of the Arm is made fast beneath to that
drawing Engine.

For brevity sake we omit many more ways of reducing which present themselves
every where in Authors: and of these we have now reckoned up, and others, we
may sometimes use this, sometimes that, as they are ready and at hand; for it is
not safe to defer the reducing long, til more laborious Instruments are
acquired.

If the Shoulder be luxated to the fore part, The shoulder luxated to the fore
part
it is restored almost the same ways as when' it is fallen into the Arm-pit, to
wit, by extending the Shoulder, and drawing its head up and down, and forcing
it into its Cavity: It differs only in this, That in this kind of Luxation the
shoulder being drawn downwards must be driven to the hinder part; but the
Surgeon must have a diligent care, lest the head of the shoulder in the
action do fall down into the Arm-pit, which may be done if the Arm-pit be filled
up with a bal or some round thing of a just bigness; and this operation may be
facilitated by a servant standing at the back of the Patient, and with a rope
or strong and broad swathe drawing upwards the shoulder blade, lest that follow
upon the extension of the shoulder made by the Surgeon.

The shoulder being reduced, Medicines that do hinder Inflammation and
strengthen the relaxt and soft Ligaments must be applied; of which we made
mention in the precedent part concerning. Fractures, and above Chap. 1. of
Luxations in general: the most convenient way of swathing is if a bal made up
of Linen or course flax, and dipped in convenient Medicines be put under the
Arm-pit, that the head of the shoulder return not thither; let the first swathe
be here, afterward let it be rolled once or twice about the joint; hence let
it be brought to the shoulder blade, and again descend to the joint at last
that it may draw the Arm the more upwards, and keep it so, let it tend to the
neck on the other side, and there be bound, neither let it be loosened before
the third or fourth day, unless an Inflammation command otherwise. But the
swathe being taken off, or laid on, some Cerote must be applied, viz. Diapalma
if it be Summer, or if it be Winter, Barbarum or Oxycroceum.

Last of al we must not pass by here the Luxation of the top of the broad bone
of the shoulder blade, The loosening of the tops of the broad bone of the
shoulder blades
of which Hippocrates 2. de artic. tex. 62. has these words: But in those in
whom the top of the shoulder is pulled off, the bone which is pulled off is
seen to stick out. But the bone is that which joyn^ together the throat and
shoulder blade, whenas in this part the Nature of man is different from other
Creatures, Physicians therefore are wont to be most of al deceived in this
wound; for when the bone pulled off sticks forth, the upper part of the
shoulder appears low and hollow, that they use the means as if the shoulder
were fallen out: truly I have known many Physicians in other things good
enough, who whiles they endeavor to reduce such shoulders, thinking they were
fallen out, have caused much hurt by troubling them, and have not given over
til they have changed their opinion, or thinking they had reduced the joint
they knew not what they should do more; the Cure of these is this, as to others
of the like sort, a Cerote, Bolsters, Linen Clothes, and Swathing made after
this manner: the bone sticking out must be forced downwards, and on that part
many Bolsters must be laid, and they must be pressed down very well, and the Arm
must be fastened to the Ribs toward the upper part and kept so; for by no
means whatsoever can it be done, that the bone pulled off can come close and
grow together; yet we must well know, and foretell also that these things are
safe, if you would have it otherwise; because neither small nor great hurt
happens to the Shoulder by this Wound, only the place becomes more deformed.
For whenas neither this bone can be restored to its ancient seat, after the
same manner as it was by Nature, but it must needs be that it be comes little
or much strutting out at the upper part; neither does any thing else return
wholly into the same state, which communicating and cohering with another has
been pulled off from its ancient coherence. In a few days the pain at the top
of the Shoulder is assuaged, if it be bound down rightly. Thus much
Hippocrates; see Galen also in his Comment.

Chap 7. Of a Luxation of the Elbow and Radius.
THe Elbow and Radius are joined with the lower head of the Shoulder. Tthe
Elbow by a Gynglymus, that is, by that kind of Articulation, in which the bones
joined together do mutually receive and are received by one another; for the
Shoulder has in its lower part two bosoms, the former or lesser of which
receives the outer process of the Elbow; but the hindermost or greater is
devoted to the hinder process of the same; but for receiving of the Radius the
Shoulder has also a peculiar head, called the outer head.

The Differences.
From which we may easily collect, that the Elbow may not only be wholly and
perfectly luxated, but also may suffer a subluxation: next of all that it may
be luxated into all the four Differences of place, forwards, backwards,
outward, inwards; but the Radius as sometimes it follows the Elbow luxated
into any part, but sometimes states in its place; so sometimes it alone falls
from the Elbow, without any luxation of it.

The Causes.
As the Luxation of other parts proceeds from violent Causes, so this also; and
indeed the Luxation of the Elbow to the fore part (for the most part) is from a
violent and sudden extension of the Arm; to the hinder part, from a violent
bending of the Arm, and outwardly or inwardly, from a perversion of the Arm;
the Causes of a subluxiation are humors flowing to the Joint, which by degrees
do fill up the Cavities engraved both in the lower part of the Shoulder Bone,
and also in the Elbow and Radius, and do thrust forth the Elbow or Radius out
of their seat.

The Signs Diagnostick.
It is easily discovered by the Sight and Touch into what part the Elbow is
luxated; for if it be fallen to the fore part the Arm is extended and cannot be
bent; in the fore part there is seen an unusual Tumor, but in the hinder part
an unusual Cavity; things contrary to these do happen, if it be luxated in the
hinder part; to wit, the Arm is crooked, and can by no means be extended; the
Tumor appears in the hinder part, but the Cavity in the fore part. A Luxation
to the outward part makes also a bunching out in the outer part, but a bosom in
the inner part; but on the contrary, if the Elbow be fallen to the inward part,
there is an eminency less then should be in the inward part, and a Cavity in
the outer part.

If the Radius follow the Elbow, it is known by the same Signs; but if it only
depart from the Elbow without a Luxation, a gaping and disjoyning shows it, the
place is hollow, and it is easy to find a bosom with the Finger.

Prognostics.
1. The Elbow as it does not easily fall forth by reason of its firm and fast
coarticulation with the Shoulder, and its plenty and strength of Ligaments; so
being fallen forth it is hardly restored.

2. The Elbow luxated unless it be most speedily reduced, does not only bring
diverse and dangerous Symptoms, to wit, a most exceeding pain, Inflammation,
Fever, Convulsion, but sometimes also Death.

3. Of all Luxations which happen in the Gibbous part of the Elbow, the most
dangerous and painful is that which is to the hinder part. Paulus Aegineta, de
re medic. l. 6. c. 115.

4. When the Bone of the Elbow is divided from the other Bone, it is not easily
restored; for neither do two bones, which are joined together, when they once
gape, easily return to their ancient place; but it must needs be, that the
Bones being so divided, the part becomes swelled, and the bones are quickly
compast with a Callus.

The Cure.
The Elbow being imperfectly luxated or subluxated to the fore part is most
easily restored by moderate extension and only bending of the Arm, but a
perfect Luxation is harder to be reduced, and requires greater provision; for
first there must be extension made and that obliquely (lest the high brow of
the Elbow hurt the head of the Shoulder) by two Servants, one of which must
draw the top of the Shoulder upwards, but the other the Elbow downwards, either
with their Hands only, or if need be with Reins; then some round body must be
placed by the brawny part; over which afterward the Surgeon bending his
Arm, and suddenly forcing the Elbow to the hinder parts, may restore it into
its place.

Hippocrates 3. de fractu. affirms that he has sometimes cured the Elbow
luxated to the hinder part, only by a sudden and continued extension of the
Arm; which if it suffice not, convenient extension being made the Elbow must be
driven inwards.

The Elbow fallen forth to the outer or inner part is most easily reduced, if
extension being made, it be forced from that part into which it is fallen, into
the contrary.

The same manner of reducing is to be observed in replacing the Radius, if it
has followed the Luxation of the Elbow; but if it be only departted from it,
it must be pressed with the prominent parts of the Hands, and the Arm must be
reduced to the natural figure; it being reduced convenient Medicines must be
applied, and it must be bound up fitly, as was said in general before, c. 7.

Chap. 8. Of a Luxation of the Hand and its Fingers.
HEre by the name of Hand we understand the Wrist, and After-wrist; but the
Wrist is joined with the Elbow bone and Radius by a Diarthrosis, whenas there
is a manifest motion; but with the After-wrist, whenas there is no manifest
motion, by a Synarthrosis or doubtful articulation; the Metacarpium or
After-wrist is joined again with the bones of the Fingers by a Diarthrosis,
because the round heads of the four bones of the After-wrist do conspicuously
enter the superficies of the first bones of the Fingers, lightly hollowed; and
after this manner also, the bones of the Fingers themselves are joined one to
another.

The Differences.
Whence we may easily collect, that the Wrist may be luxated into all four
parts, to wit, the fore, the hinder, and to the sides: all the bones of the
After-wrist indeed are luxated inwards and outward, but the falling of the two
middle bones to the sides is hindered by the two extreme bones that have respect
to the little and Forefinger, the which two only may fall forth to that side
which is free from bordering bones. The bones of the Fingers again are luxated
four ways, to wit, inwardly, outwardly, and to the sides.

The Causes.
The Cause of the Luxation of the Wrist, After-wrist, and Fingers, as of other
luxations, is some violent Motion, Blow, Fall, Perversion, and Contorsion.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Signs of all parts of the Hands luxated are almost common; for whether the
bones of the Wrist, After-wrist, or Fingers be luxated to the fore part, a
Tumor appears as that place in the fore part, and the Fingers cannot be bent.

If they be fallen to the hinder part, a Tumor also is perceived in the hinder
part, and the Fingers by reason of the compression of the Tendous and Nerves
going to them cannot be extended.

But if a Luxation be made to the sides, a Tumor appears in that part into
which the fall is made; and a depression into that from which the Joint is
fallen.

The Prognostic
The Luxation of these parts is not dangerous, whenas they may easily be
restored into their place.

The Cure
The bones of the Wrist, into what part soever they be luxated, may be without
any extension at all reduced into their place, after this manner; let the Hand
of the Patient be placed upon a Board or Table, and that with the palm downward
if the luxation be to the hinder parts; but with the back downwards, if it be
to the fore parts; afterward let the Surgeon most strongly force the
luxated Joint to the contrary part, either with the palm of his Hand in more
tender bodies; or with his Heel, in bodies that are stronger.

The same rule is observed in replacing the bones of the After-wrist and
Fingers, except that some servant holding with one Hand the Fingers, with the
other Hand the Arm; does make a light extension; the bones being reduced,
Medicines that hinder an Inflammation and strengthen the Joints must be
applied, and the part must be conveniently bound up and placed.

Chap. 9. Of a Luxation of the Thigh.
THe Thigh Bone, the longest and greatest in the Body of Man, at its upper part
with its head sufficiently great, thick, and exactly half Globous, is not only
most exactly half joined by an Enarthrosis to the bosom of the Hip sufficiently
large and deep to receive this head, but also is most strongly united to it by
a most firm Ligament arising from the bosom of the Hip, and implanted into the
narrow bosom of the head of the Thigh, to the end that the Thigh might by so
much the easier and more readily be bowed, extended, moved to the sides, and
turned about, and not easily slip forth.

The Causes.
The Causes of a perfect Luxation of the Thigh are the same as of the Luxation
of the Shoulder, to wit, external and violent, a fall, a blow, or some other
violent and indecent extension and distorsion of the Thigh; but the causes of
an imperfect Luxation are the humors flowing to this joint, and by degrees
thrusting it out of its seat.

The Differences.
But this joint falls forth to four parts, the former, hinder, but seldom,
whenas the brow of the Cavity in this part is higher;) to the outer and inward
part most often, whenas at that place the brow is lower; and sometimes the Thigh
admits of a Subluxation from an internal cause; whence when Paulus Aegineta,
lib. 6. de remed. c. 118. writes that the Articulation of the Hip does only
suffer a Luxation and not a Subluxation, that is to be understood of that only
which is from an external and violent cause; for we see oftentimes that by a
flux of humors some have the Ligaments in the Thigh relaxt and mollefied, that
they cannot retain the head of the Thigh Bone firmly in its Cavity, whence
follows a certain Subluxation.

Signs Diagnostick
the Diagnostick signs of a thigh luxated to the fore part.
If the Thigh be luxated to the fore part, a Tumor appears about the Groins,
whenas the head of the Thigh leans to the Pubes; the Buttocks on the contrary,
by reason of the Muscles contracted with the Thigh to the Pubes, seem wrinkled;
the Urine is suppressed by reason of the compression of the bladder by the head
of the Thigh, the external Thigh can neither be bent nor brought to the Groin,
whenas the head of the Thigh is in the very bending place; the man is also in
pain if he be forced to bend his Knee, by reason of the former Muscle, which
arises from the bone which belongs to the Loins; for that is comprest, and
being retcht is lift up by the head of the Thigh, and whenas it can be no
further extended, it resists; otherwise it equals in length the whole sound
Thigh to the Heel; for the Thigh going forth of its Cavity comes to the fore
part and a little lower, by which it comes to pass that the Thigh hurt equals
the length of the sound one, which especially falls out so at the Heel; the Toes
of the Foot cannot easily be extended, nor turned to the ground, whence in
walking the Patient is compelled to tread only on the Heel. But in them who at
strong age have this joint fallen forth into this part, and not restored, they
when the pain cease, and the joint is accustomed to be contained in that
place into which it is fallen, can forthwith go upright without a staff, and
wholly upright; for by reason of the inflexibility of the Groyn they use the
whole Thigh more straight in going, than when it was sound; sometimes also they
draw their foot upon the ground, whenas they cannot easily bend the upper
iunctures which are at the Groyn and Knee, although they walk upon the whole
foot; but in those at whose render age this joint fallen forth is not restored,
their Thigh Bone is more diminished than that of the Leg or Foot, but the Thigh
is little diminished, only the flesh every where is abated, especially at the
hinder part.

to the hinder part.
If the Thigh Bone be luxated to the hinder part, there are contrary signs to
those mentioned, to wit, The Head of the Thigh being fallen to the Buttocks is
discovered by a Tumor about those parts, both by the sight and touch: the
Groyns on the contrary appear more loose; the affected Thigh by reason of the
compression and distension of the Muscles compassing the head of the Thigh
cannot be extended, and it is rendered shorter than the sound one; the heel does
not touch the ground, whence the Patients can neither stand nor go, but fall
headlong backwards, because the body slides to that part, and the head of the
Thigh being out of its proper place is not directly opposed to under-prop the
body; yet the man may bend his Thigh if he be not hindered by pain; for whenas
the head of the Thighs is by force with its whole neck expelled into the great
Muscle of the Buttocks, which extends this Articulation, this Muscle admitting
the head of the Thigh fallen forth is most of al tormented, whenas it is
distended and pressed under it, and of necessity must be seized on by an
Inflammation; but in process of time, when this Muscle is freed from an
Inflammation, and contracts a certain glutinous humor, that part of it which
touches the joint grows to a Callus, and the Knee is bent without any pain;
moreover the head of the Thigh being luxated to the hinder part, the Thigh and
Foot appear moderately straight, and do not incline much one way nor other.

But when in ripe age the Thigh Bone fallen forth is not restored, when the
pain is ceased, and the joint accustomed to be turned in the flesh, the man
indeed may walk, yet he is forced to bow very much toward the Groyn when he
walks, and that for two reasons, Because the Thigh is rendered much shorter,
and the heel is far off from touching the ground; for if he try never so much
to stand on that foot, leaning upon no other thing, he will every where fall
backwards; but if in tender age this joint luxated after this manner be not
reduced, the Thigh Bone is made short, and the whole Thigh is spoiled, and is
less increased, and made slenderer, being for no use.

To the outer
If the Thigh be luxated to the outer part, it is known by these signs; Between
the Anus and Cod there is seen a Cavity and leanness; on the contrary in the
buttocks a certain Tumor; the Thigh by how much the head of it is fallen forth
to a higher place, is rendered shorter; the Knee with the Leg looks inwards:
the Heel touches not the ground; whence when the Patient would walk he goes
only a tiptoes.

And if in those of ripe age this Joint be not restored, but the flesh into
which the Joint is fallen grows callous, and the pain therefore cease, they
may go without a Staff; and therefore when they use their Thigh, in these the
flesh is less offended; but they to whom in tender age this misfortune happens,
require a diligent care; for if they be neglected, the whole Thigh becomes
unprofitable, and is little increased; the flesh also of the whole Thigh is
more abated, then in the sound one.

Lastly a Luxation of the Thigh to the inner part is known this way; to the
inner.
the Thigh is longer if it be compared with the other, and that for two
reasons; for the head of the Thigh sticks to the bone which proceeds from the
Hip upwards to the Pecten, and the neck of the Joint is sustained in its
Cavity; again on the outer side the buttock appears hollow, because the head of
the Thigh is fallen to the inner part; and the Thigh toward the Knee is forced
to look outward to the outer part; in like manner the Leg and Foot, whenas in
all luxated bones one extremity always looks to the contrary part to that
which is fallen forth.

They whose joint is fallen forth after this manner, and not reduced, when they
go they wheel about their Thigh outwardly; for whenas the faulty Thigh is made
longer, and by reason of weakness they cannot readily bend the bone, and by
reason of pain they refuse to do it, it remains that they must bring it about.

See more of these things in Hippoc. 3. de artic. from t. 68. to t. 105. al
which for brevities sake I would not transcribe hither.

Prognostics.
1. There is great danger in the Thigh, lest that it be hardly reduced, or
being reduced that it fall out again. Celsus l. 8. c. 20.

2. An old Luxation of the Thigh, which has already contracted a callus, and
in which the bosom is filled up with humors, is judged incurable.

3. If by reason of the plenty of the humor collected in the Cavity that
Ligament be preternaturally extended, that it cause the Thigh to be moved out
of its seat, or if the same Ligament be so relaxt by the humor that it cannot
contain the bone in its seat, although the bone be reduced yet it stays not in
its place, but falls out again, viz. if the humor remain; but if the humor be
dried up the Joint may remain in its seat, of which Hippocrates 6. Aphor. 60.
They who being troubled with a long continued pain of the Hip have the head of
the Thigh fallen forth of the Hip, their Thigh wastes, and becomes lame unless
they be burnt.

4. The same comes to pass if that Ligament be broken.

5. If the luxated Thigh be not reduced, the neighboring parts are wasted by
degrees, for both the Arteries and Veins are streightened and comprest, that
there is not a free passage open for the blood and spirits to those parts; and
because the part is not moved after its due manner, the heat fades, whence the
nourishment of the part is not rightly accomplished, and the Thigh Bone is not
increased according to the proportion of the rest of the bones.

The Cure.
Whereas after the same manner almost as the Shoulder is joined with the
Shoulder Blade, so the Thigh is with the Hip-bone, so the way of reducing them
both is almost the same. The Patient must be placed upon a Bench or Table,
putting a Pillow or Bed under him, with his Face downward if the Luxation be
made outward or backward, with his face upwards if inwards, and upon his side
if forwards; and this reducing is done sometimes only with the Hands without any
extension; as first of all either let the head of the Thigh be so long wheeled
about the Loins till it come into its Cavity (which way notwithstanding is not
so safe) or secondly (to wit, in a Luxation made to the inner part) let the
Thigh most quickly and strongly be bent to the Groyns, and by this means let
the head of the Thigh fallen forth be forced outward into its place; but if no
good be done by these ways, the Patient must always be so placed, that the
part into which the head of the Thigh is fallen, be uppermost, but that from
which it is departed, lowermost; afterward convenient extension must be made,
and at length the Thigh must be forced into its Cavity always a way contrary
to its falling forth; but how a lawful and convenient extension is to be made,
either with the hands, to wit, in soft bodies a new luxation; or with Reins,
Ropes, and the like, to wi^, in strong bodies and an old luxation, does
sufficiently appear from those things which are said in the precedent patt, c.
11. of the Fracture of the Thigh; and truly the extension may be common to the
four species of a luxated Thigh; but the manner of forcing and restoring the
head of the Thigh into its place varies according to the variety of the parts
to which it is fallen: for that which is fallen inwards must be forced
outward, that outward, inwards, and so of the rest; when the bone is reduced,
which is known by the free motion of the Thigh and without any pain, the
Medicines of which we spoke formerly in general, c. 1. must be laid on the
Joint, and with rolling the Joint must be kep^ in its place; straw beds also as
in Fractures must be applied, and both Thighs be kept in its place; straw beds
also as in fractures must be applied, and both Thighs be bound that the luxated
Member may be kept in its place; and this provision must not be loosed before
the fourth day; and let the Patient keep himself long enough in bed, nor let
him walk, lest by unseasonable walking the bone fall forth again.

See more in Hippocrates, Paulus Aegineta, l. 6. c. 119. Ambrose Parry, l. 15.
from c. 39. to c. 48.

Chap. 10 Of a Luxation of the patel Bone
THe Thigh in its lower part has two eminent heads tending to the hinder part,
with which it is inserted into two bosoms of the leg-bone, only superficial
ones, and no ways deep, and pargetted over with a smooth cartilage; it has
moreover in its hinder part a certain bosom, into which the bunching forth of
the Leg-bone that stands forth betwixt its two bosoms is inserted: but lest
that by reason of this looser Articulation, which is by a Ginglymus, the Knee
should be subject to frequent Luxations; on the fore part the patel bone is set
over the bone of the Thigh and Leg, and firmly joined to them by benefit of
the thick Tendons of the Muscles extending the Leg; besides on the out side of
the greater bone stands the Bracer, which at its upper part in the inner side
has a bosom covered with a Cartilage, by which the little side head is
received, which subsists at the upper Appendix of the great Bone; but at its
lower part, with its acute angle it is inserted into the external and oblong
bosom of the lower Appendix of the great Bone, and makes the outward Ankle:
whenas therefore here concur many Articulations, also many Luxations may happen.

A Luxation of the Kneepan
And truly first of al, The Patel Bone whenas it has no obstacle on the sides
hindering its dislocation, may be most easily luxated, to the upper, lower,
outward, and inner part, but never to the hinder part, in regard that the bones
of the greater Focil and Thigh which it covers do hinder it.

The Causes.
The Causes of this Luxation are, a fall from on high, jumping, blows, and an
undecent distension of the Leg.

Signs Diagnostick.
The Luxation of the Patel Bone is easily known by the sight and touch, and the
Thigh cannot rightly be bent and moved.

Prognostics.
Whenas this Articulation is more loose, the Patel Bone may easily be restored
to its seat.

The Cure.
That the Patel bone may be reduced into its seat, let the Patient stand firmly
upright upon a place; but let the Surgeon with his hands force the Patel
Bone from that part into which it is fallen, to that from whence it is fallen;
when the Bone is restored to its place, fit Medicines must be laid upon it, and
the hollow of the Knee must be filled up with Bolsters that the Thigh cannot be
bent; then a hollow piece of the figure of the Patel Bone must be placed about
it, especially on the side to which it fell, that the Patient may not bend his
Knee. When there is no more danger lest the Parel Bone fall out again, let the
Patient by degrees accustom to bend his Knee again.

Chap. 11. Of the Knee Luxated.
THe Knee may not only be Subluxated, but it may suffer a perfect Luxation; and
truly oftentimes falls to the inward and outward part, seldom to the hinder
part, but seldomest of al to the fore part, and not unless from a most violent
cause, in regard that the opposition of the Patel Bone does hinder it.

The Causes
This Luxation also happens from blows, falls, jumping, vehement running, and an
uncomely extension or contraction, and distorsion of the Leg.

Signs Diagnostick.
To what part the Knee is Luxated is easily known; for in the side to which the
joint is broke forth a bunching out, but a Cavity in the side from which it is
departed is discoverable both by the sight and touch: its figure is depraved,
the Thigh is extended and cannot be bent, whence the motion is necessarily
depraved, or wholly lost.

Prognostics
1. The Knee if it be compared with the Elbow, the joint in the Knee, by reason
of its manner of juncture, oftener falls out, and is easier reduced. For the
structure of the Bones with which both joints are contained is more straight in
the Elbow, more loose in the Knee; besides, many processes and many bosoms
joined to one another do every where bind up the joynting of the Elbow, but in
the Knee the bunchings forth of the Thigh are cast into the small Bosoms of the
Leg.

2. For the same cause a Luxation of the knee is less dangerous, nor does an
Inflammation easily happen; for whenas an Inflammation arises from the force
with which the bones are expelled and reduced again, and the pain arising from
hence, because in the Knee the joint may fall forth and be reduced without any
great force, there is no fear of an Inflammation.

The Cure.
The Knee luxated to the inward and outward part is not hard to be restored by
moderate extension made, either with the hands in a new Luxation and child's
body, or with reins in a Luxation not so late, and stronger bodies; and with
forcing the bones with the hand into the contrary part from which they sell.

But a Luxation made backwards is commodiously restored, if the Patient be
placed with his Face on a Bench, and some servant put a Linen Globe into the
hollow of the Ham at what part the Bone sticks forth, and strongly force the
bone fallen forth toward the fore parts; but let the Surgeon take hold of
the lame Leg with both hands, and of a sudden so bend and bow it that his Heel
touch his Buttocks.

A Knee Subluxated by none or very little extension made, and forcing it to the
contrary part is reduced into its place.

When the Bone is reduced, which is known by the free exten sion of the Leg,
and comparing it with the other Knee, convenient Medicines must be laid upon
it, and binding up must be ordered, and the Patient must forbear going til
there be no more fear of a new Luxation.

Chap. 12 Of the Distraction of the Bracer.
THe Bracer adheres to the greater Bone of the Leg, and as it was said in the
former Chapter, above to the Knee, below the Ankle; but it is drawn from the
great Bone three ways, to wit, To the fore part, and both sides.

The Causes.
But this Divulsion comes from those Causes from which we said the Knee was
luxated, especially when walking in a slippery place the foot is not firm, but
dubiously is wrinched inwardly or outwardly; the same may be by a fall from on
high, or by a blow.

Signs Diagnostick.
A Tumor appears in the part to which the Bracer is distracted, and is
discovered by the sight and touch; and motion is hurt.

The Prognostic
The reducing of the Bracer is easy.

The Cure
For by the hands of the Surgeon it may easily be compelled and brought back
into its seat by forcing it into that part contrary to its fall: afterward
convenient binding up must be ordered, putting bolsters to that part to which
the Bracer is fallen; and rest for some weeks must be commanded the Patient,
til the Ligaments are confirmed again.

Chap. 13 Of a Luxation of the Foot and its Bones, and of the Toes.
BY the word Foot we understand all that part of Man's Body reaching out from the
lower part of the Leg to the very ends of the Toes, which contains diverse Bones
after diverse manners joynted together, and united by Membranous Ligaments, to
wit, The Ankle, the Heel, the Shiplike Bone, the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Bones
of the Toes; of the Luxations of al which we should now speak; but because the
Bones of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes, are here united almost after the
same manner as the Bones of the Wrist, after-Wrist, and Fingers are to one
another, they are subject also to the same Luxations, have the same causes, are
known by the same signs, and are reduced the same way; but the ship-like bone
may suffer the same things as the Bones of the Tarsus; it is not worth our
labor to add much of these, but those things which are said of the bones of the
Hand may also be applied to these. Luxation of the Ankle and Heel
Some things only we shall add of the Luxation of the Ankle and Heel, whenas no
Bones in the Hand do answer unto these.

The Differences.
The Ankle joined with the greater and lesser focil by a Ginglymus may be
luxated perfectly and imperfectly to every part, to wit, The outward, inward,
fore, and back part.

But the Heel lying under the Ankle is often moved indeed more forward and
backward, but seldom to the sides.

The Causes.
The Luxation of these parts is from a violent fall, a blow, or some other
inconvenient distorsion of the Foor. But in particular the Heel is luxated, and
pulled from the Ankle, if one leaping from on high do fall and stick heavily
upon the Heel, or in dancing does insist much upon the Heel.

The Signs Diagnostick.
The Ankle if it be fallen to the outward part, the lower part of the Foot is
turned inwardly; if to the inward part, there are contrary signs; if it be
luxated to the fore part, the broad Tendon stretched under the Heel is hard and
retcht, and the Foot is less and shorter; if to the hinder part, on the
contrary the Heel is almost hid, the Soal seems to become greater, and the Foot
longer.

A Luxation of the Heel is easily known by the pain, the figure of the part
depraved, and its action hurt.

Prognostics.
1. The Ankle as it is easily luxated, so it is easily also reduced; but by
reason of the multitude of Bones making up the joints it is hardly confirmed.

2. A Luxation of the Heel is most dangerous, because the Veins, Arteries, and
greater Nerves which it receives, and also the Tendon which is joined to it,
are easily drawn into consent; whence may be raised, Ravings, Tremblings,
Convulsions, Fevers, and many other evils.

The Cure.
Let a Commodious extension go before the reducing of the Ankle; whether it be
done by the hands of Servants, one of which must hold the Foot, the other the
Leg; or with reins or other engines that draw downwards; afterward let the
Surgeon force the joint to the contrary part from which it is fallen, and
order a convenient binding up. The Patient in this Luxation must be kept longer
in his bed, that the distended Muscles and the Ligaments which are rendered
more loose may acquire their just strength, and may be fit to bear the whole
body, which scarce happens before the fortieth day.

The Heel also upon light extension made is reduced to its ancient place; being
reduced it must be so bound up that the humors abounding may be driven from it
to other parts; the Patient also must be so long kept quiet, til this joint
restored be well confirmed.

See more concerning Luxations in Hippocrates in l. de artic. et fractur. and
Galen in his Comment. Oribasius de machinamentis. Celsus l. 8. c. 11. to the
end of the Book. Gabriel Fallopius, tract. de Luxation. Ambrose Parry, l. 15.
and others.

FINIS.
Books Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of LONDON, at the
Exchange.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper and A. Cole, etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books,

2 Sennerius thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy.

3 Sennerius two Treatises. 1 Of the Pox. 2 Of the Gout.

4 Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius.

5 Riolanus Anatomy.

6 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man.

7 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galens Method of Physic.

8 The English Physician Enlarged.

9 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women.

10 Galens Art of Physic.

11 New Method both of studying and Practicing Physic.

12 A Treatise of the Rickets.

13 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People.

14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin,

Mr. Buroughs WORKS. viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest.

2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

3 Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to him.

4 The only Easy way to Heaven.

5 The excellency of holy Courage.

6 Gospel Reconcillation.

7 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment.

8 Gospel Worship.

9 Gospel-Conversation.

10 A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness.

11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea.

12. The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin.

13 Precious Faith.

14 Of Hope.

15 Of Walking by Faith.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light.

2 Christ in Travel.

3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down.

4 Sin against the Holy Ghost.

5 Sins of Infirmity.

6 The false Apostle tried and discovered.

7 The good and means of Establishment.

8 The great things Faith can do.

9 The great things Faith can suffer.

10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation.

12 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

13 Grace for Grace.

14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

15 Evangelical Repentance

16 The Spiritual Life, and in being of Christ in all Believers.

17 The Woman of Canaan.

18 The Saints Hiding place, etc.

19 Christ Coming, etc.

20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief; or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ.

2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great Sin, yet
Pardonable.

3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And receiving Christ is
Believing.

4 Of Covetousness

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto,
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England. Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the sevententh of John.

Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God.

Dr. Hills WORKS.
The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice.

Wise Virgin, Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England.

Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Cure: Discovering the
Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Ep^stle of Peter. (...) John
Rogers, Minister of (...) of God at Dedham in Essex.

Mr. Rogers his Treatise of (...) age.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there.

Mr. Brightman on the Revelation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortallity of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech Woodwards Sacred Balance.

Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.

Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord
Major of London.

Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance

Englands Deliverance. By Peter Sterry.

The Way of God with his People in these Nations. By Peter Sterry.

Mr. Sympson's sermon at Westminster

Mr. Feaks sermon before the Lord Major.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A sermon.

A Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen Marshal. A sermon.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen of
Dedham. A sermon.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity.

2 The high Privilege of believers, They are the Sons of God.

3 Faith the Means to feed on Christ

4 Self-Denial.

5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc.

6 The Mystery of spi^^^ual Life.


