HENRICUS Dom. CARRY Baro. de Loppington Com de. MONMOUTH



The USE of PASSIONS Written in French by J. F. Senault. And put into English
by Henry Earl of Monmouth^ 167^

Passions araing'd by Reason here you see,
As she is Advised therein by Grace Divine:
But this (yowll say)'s but in Effigy!
Peruse this Book, and you in every line
Thereof will find this truth so proved, that you
W.M. sculp:
Must Reason contradict, or grant it True.


THE USE OF PASSIONS.

Written in FRENCH By I. F. Senault. AND Put into ENGLISH BY HENRY EARL of
MONMOUTH.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for John Sims at the King's Head at Sweetings-Alley
end, next House to the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1671.

THE AUTHORS Dedication of his Work To our Savior Jesus Christ.
IT is not without reason (adored JESUS) that I offer up unto thee this Work,
wherein I endevor to teach thy Servants how to use their Passions: For to boot,
that all our thoughts are due unto thee, because thou art the Eternal Thought
of the Father, and that whatsoever our Soul produces, are as so many Images of
thine; This belongs to thee by a double Title, and cannot without some sort of
Injustice, be Dedicated to any other than thee. Passions, in that state
whereunto they are brought by sin, are Monsters which ought to be immolated
upon thy Altars; this Sacrifice succeeds those of the Old Testament. As thou
delightest in receiving a heart struck through with sorrow, and consumed with
love, so do thou with joy receive such Passions as Grace and Reason do
consecrate unto thee; neither do thou despise the Motions of our soul, when
they are enlightened by Faith, and inanimated by Charity; thou art well pleased,
that being Priests and Victimes for thy Glory, as thou have been for our
salvation, we find some feelings in ourselves, which we may immolate unto thee;
that in obedience to thy just Laws, we sacrifice unto thee our love, and our
desires; and that courageously suffocating our anger, and our hatred, we
appease thy Justice by the death of a part of our selves.

Thou likewise do permit, that without shedding the blood of these savage
Beasts, we tame them, to make them serviceable to thy designs; and that we
employ our hopes and fears to overcome Vice, and acquire Virtue. But assuredly,
we cannot undertake this Combat, nor hope for Victory therein, without thy
assistance; for passions hold of thy Empire: and since these slaves are become
Rebels, they are only to be reduced by thy Grace.

Thou, by thy eternal Birth, art the primitive Reason; and the same term which
we make use of in all Languages, to express thy Personal proprieties, teaches
us, that thou art as well the Reason, as the Word of thy Father: To thee it
belongs to regulate all the Passions; and if wise men have any command over
theirs, it is for that their Reason flows from thine: They are only wise, in
that they are reasonable; and they are reasonable only, in that they have the
honor to be thy Images: Grace it self, whence the strength and light of thy
Saints do derive, flows from thy divine Person: those great ones are not only
Gods, but Sons of God, they bear thy Character in their Souls; and the Father,
who looks upon them as thy Brethren, loves them as his Children. This Divine
Quality makes them triumph over their Passions; they owe all their victories to
thy Alliance; and if they tame the motions of their souls, it is because they
have the honor to unite, as thou do, Reason and Grace in their personages,
and to be by privilege, that which thou art by Nature.

Thy Actions, since thou have vouchsafed to become Man, serve us for
Instructions; and we find examples in thy life, which we may securely imitate.
Before thy temporal Birth, we had no model which was not imperfect: Virtue and
Vice were intermingled in all men; and the greatest Saints did no good works,
which were not accompanied with some defects. Their Passions out-ran their
Wisdom; the first motions of them were so sudden and so violent, that they
could neither foresee them, nor hinder them: When they were once up, and that
Reason gathering her forces together, gave them battle; these Rebels joined
Insolence to Fury, and argued Authority with their Sovereign. Thus thy
faithfullest Servants needed forgiveness in the war, which they made against
their passions; and it behoved thy goodness to give light to illuminate these
blind men, Wisdom to conduct these giddy-headed People, and Fortitude to
overcome these Rebels. But in thy sacred Person, passions have no defect: These
wild Beasts are tamed, these troublesome Seas are always calm, these revolted
Subjects are always Obedient, and by a Miracle, as Rare as Illustrious, these
Enemies of our Reason, do always agree with thine: They raised themselves when
thou ordainedst them so to do, their first motions were in thy power, they
waited thy leave to be troubled: Sorrow seized not on thy Heart, Tears
distilled not from thine Eyes; and red-hu'd Anger, or pale Fear appeared not in
thy Face, before thy Will, which ruled all their motions, had given them
Permission. They were so well instructed in all thy Designs, as they seemed to
be endued with Reason; and Reason found such Obedience in the Inferior part of
thy Soul, that no Clouds were gathered together there, which she her self had
not there formed. In the world Tempests are raised from the lower Elements:
Thunderclaps, which make so hideous a noise in the Clouds, take their original
from the Valleys or the Rivers; and all those Storms that trouble the clearness
of the Air, proceed from Vapors of the Sea, or Exhalations of the Earth: In men
that are composed of Mud and Dirt, their passions arise from their bodies;
their Revolts proceed from the senses; and all these Tempests which molest
their quiet, take their vigor from Flesh and Blood; but in thy divine soul it
fares clean otherwise; thy Passions sprung from thy Reason; it was the Soul
that wrought upon the Body; it was the Superior part that inanimated the
Inferior; and it was the primum Mobile that gave motion to all the other
Spheres, which did depend thereon.

Hence came it that thou did enjoy a profound peace, that thy Victories were
without Combat, or thy Triumphs without Victories: Thou feltest no Disorders in
thy Person, all was calm in thy soul, and even when sadness was grown to such a
height, as it was able to cause thee to die, it was so submiss to Reason, that
to obey her, it agreed with Joy its Enemy. Thou were the most content, and the
most afflicted of all men: Thou were able to cause Envy in the most happy,
Compassion in the most miserarable, and Astonishment in them both. Love and
Hatred were never at odds in thy heart: These two contraries bear respect to
each other. Thy Reason had such absolute power, over them, that they preserved
their opposition, without losing their good Intelligence; and men were
astonished to see, that thy Soul, which was the Theater, where two so violent
motions were formed, should enjoy Peace amidst War. In fine, Fear and Audacity
ended their differences in thy Person; thou did suffer these two affections
to possess thy Heart without dividing it; whilst thou were in thine Agony in
the Garden, thou gave confidence to thine Apostles; and when the thought of
death made such havoc in thy Soul, thou did encourage Martyrs to the Combat;
thou preparest Crowns for their Victories; and procuring them strength by thy
weaknesses, thou ordainest them to be the Champions of thy Church Militant.

But whatever help they received from thy Grace, their Victories were never
like thine; they found more obedience in the World, than in themselves; and
have confessed, it cost them less to overcome wild Beasts, than to vanquish
their own Passions. Famous Martyrs have been known, who having overcome Lions,
could not quell their own choler; and have suffered themselves to be born away
with Impatience, after they had endured Tortures: Their Combats were not always
followed with good Success; they were oft-times in one and the same day, both
Conquered and Conquerors: They gave way to Voluptuousness, after they had
triumphed over Grief; and having had courage enough to be Martyrs, they wanted
resolution to be continent. How often have they wished for Death, that they
might be freed from these domestic enemies? and to that end, sighed and made
vows? When thy Providence gave them over to their own weakness, they despaired
of their Salvation; finding no support save in thy Goodness, they begun all
their wrestlings by Prayer, and professed, that to overcome their Passions,
they must be animated by thy Spirit, and assisted by thy Power. Thou art the
sole Conqueror, that were never worsted in this War; thy Affections never
betrayed thy Reason; and thy power has been as absolute in thy Person, as in
thy Kingdom: These Passions of our Soul changed nature in thine; by the use
thou made of them, they became Virtues: Thou conceivedst no love which did
not turn it self into Charity; thou did excite no Choler that was not just
indignation; and thou feltest no pity, but it was transformed into Mercy. All
that in our Nature is Humane, was Divine in thine; and the unconfused Mixture
of two Natures, whereof thou art composed, made thy passions to be rather
Miracles than Virtues: Thy Anger served as an Officer to thy Fathers Justice;
thy Compassion was the Interpreter of His Mercy; and thy Love an earnest of His
Good will. How happy was that distressed man that drew tears from thine eyes?
how rich was that poor one, whose wants thou did bewail? how puissant was the
oppressed, whose interests thou maintainedst? how innocent was that Offender,
whose Conversion was wrought by thy Tears? and how glorious was the infamous
Sinner, to whom thou witnessedst thy Love by thy Complaints and Sighs? Heaven
had a regard to all the motions of thy Soul; the eternal Father never denied
any thing to thy Tears; and his Thunderbolts never failed to fall upon their
heads, on whom thy just Anger called for punishment. Thy Passions were the
Organs of thy Divinity; thy Sighs were no less powerful, than thy Words; and
without using either Prayers or Vows, the Desires were sufficient to make known
thy Will. What Admiration did these Motions of thy Soul cause in the Seraphim?
with what astonishment were those pure Intelligences stricken, when they
considered that God taking our nature upon him, took part of her feelings, and
no part of her weaknesses? That he wept with the wretched, without interessing
his happiness? That he was Angry at those that were injured without troubling
his Quiet? That with the needy he formed desires without loss of his Abundance?
And that with Lovers, he felt the flames of Love, without enduring their
Disturbances? What a miracle was it, to see that Anger should be kindled in thy
Soul, without trouble thereunto? That Pity should wound thy Heart, without
weakening it? That it should be enflamed with Love, yet not consumed? That it
should be eaten up with Sorrow, yet not disquieted? What can I do less in
honor of so many Wonders, than to consecrate our Passions unto thee? What less
submission can I make to thy adored Power, than loudly to avouch that there is
none but thou, who can teach us the use of these Motions? And that it
appertains only to thy Wisdom, to change our Anger into Indignation, our Pity
into Mercy, and our Love into Charity?

Indeed, it is thou alone who can rule our passions; thou art he only who
workest our good out of our Evil, and of Poisons composest Antidotes. Thou
know men by their Inclinations; thou see, without studying them, the
motions of their hearts; and making benefit thereof, do wisely conduct them
to thy end. Thou employest Fear, to take off a covetous man from those
perishable Riches which possess him, thou make a holy use of Despair, to
withdraw from the World a Courtier; whose youth had been mis-imployed in the
service of some Prince; thou make an admirable use of Disdain, to extinguish
there with a lovers flames, who is enslave by a proud beauty; thou employest
Choler, to disabuse a Soldier, whom a dissembling General feeds with vain
hopes; thou make excellent use of Grief to cure a sick man, who sought for
his Souls happiness in his Bodies health, and lost the remembrance of Heaven by
being to strongly fastened to the Earth. In fine, thou make Chains of all our
Passions, to unite our Wills to thine thou minglest Grace with Nature; and
make Angels by the same disorders, as they would have been made Devils. Sin
is the Theater of thy Power, as well as Nothing; thou make thy greatest Works
issue out of two Subjects, whereof the one is Barren, the other Rebellious: Out
of Nothing thou drawest Existence, and out of Sin thou extractest Grace; thou
find every thing in its contrary, and by an effectual violence, which can
proceed only from an infinite Power, thou compellest Nothing to produce men,
and sin to make Saints: But after these two Miracles, which are thy
Masterpieces; we see not any thing more wonderful, than the use which thou art
able to make of our Passions, for the changing of our Wills; thou make that
serve thy designs, which did serve thine enemies; thou savest men by those
Weaknesses which would have been their undoing; and bestowing on them a little
Divine Love, thou turnest all their Passions into Virtues. For, when once
Charity begins to reign in their souls, they fear nothing but sin, they wish
for nothing but Grace. Thou art the end of their Desires, as thou art the
object of their Love: They change Condition, without changing Nature; though
they have Passions, they commit no more Offenses; and losing neither Hope, nor
Despair; neither Audacity nor Fear; neither Love nor Hatred; they are free from
all the mischiefs which accompany these Passions, when they are Faulty.

But certainly, if thy Mercy appear in well husbanding the inclinations of thy
Friends, to their salvation; thy Justice shines forth no less, in making good
use of those of thine Enemies, to their Destruction: For they become chains in
thy hands, to bind these Malefactors with; thou forgest out of them Irons to
punish these slaves; and thou changest their Desires into Aversions, and their
pleasures into pain. Thou abandonest every sinner to the passion which
possesses him; thou command this domestic fury to revenge thee, and correct
him; thou turnest his sin into his punishment, without employing either Hell or
Devils; thou ordainest every sinner to be his own executioner; and make him
taste as many torments, as he nourishes passions in his Soul: Thus we see by
experience, that the irregular desire of honor, is the punishment of the
ambitious; that the shamful love of voluptuousness, is the torment of the
Incontinent; and that the insatiable thirst after riches, is the penalty of the
covetous. Those chastisements which astonish us with their outward appearance,
are not the most rigorous: those plagues which sweep away whole Kingdoms, those
wars that unpeople the world, those thunders which grumble over our heads, and
those Abysses which gape under our feet, are but the flourishes of thy anger;
thou make thy Children feel those scourges, when thou will correct them; and
these disorders of Nature, are oftentimes rather favors from thy Mercy, than
chastisements of thy Justice. But when thou will punish the guilty who have
long offended thee, and that thou desire to continue them in their sins; that
thou may satisfy thy just fury, thou give them over to their own Lusts:
thou command their Passions to be their executioners, thou permittest all
the inclinations of their souls to be turned into so many sins; and that
delighting in their offense, they no longer think of appeasing thee, or of
their own Conversion.

Since then thou do so justly employ the passions, both of thy friends and
enemies, vouchsafe to let me offer up these unto thee; and that to do homage
unto thine, I may sacrifice to thee mine: Suffer me to propound thy life for an
example to thy faithful ones; that not abusing them with false Virtues, whereof
Vainglory was the Soul, and honor the reward; I represent to them, those which
thou did practice, during those happy years, thou were pleased to converse
with men. Give me Grace to explain to them the Morality which is learnt in thy
school: And since the passions are the Seeds of Virtues and Vices, favor me so
far, that I may so well express their Nature and their Motions, as that I may
make all the readers of this my Book, virtuous: dissipate the darkness of my
understanding, that in handling this matter, I may penetrat the depths of men's
hearts, I may discover the extent of their jurisdiction; and that I may bring
all men to observe, how passions are raised in them, how they rebel against
Reason, how they seduce the Understanding, and what sleights they use to
enslave the will: After I have known the Malady, teach me the Remedy, that I
may cure it; teach me how a passion is to be stifled in its birth; what means I
must use to subdue a passion, which finds her strength in her old age; and
which, (O the wonder!) is never more vigorous, than when most ancient. Teach me
the dexterity we are to use, for conquering those Passions that flatter us with
their promises; those which corrupt us with their subtilties; those which daunt
us with their threats; and those which enchaunt us with their allurements: That
being illuminated by thy Light, and assisted by thy Grace, I may by one and the
same Work, inspire men's souls with the Love of Virtue, and Hatred of Sin.

THE TRANSLATOR, Upon the BOOK.
I.
IF to command and rule over others be
The thing desired above all worldly pelf,
How great a Prince, how great a Monarch's he,
Who govern can, who can command Himself?
If you unto so great a Power aspire,
This Book will teach how you may it acquire.
II.
Love turned to Sacred Friendship here you will find,
And Hatred into a Just Indignation:
Desires (when moderated and not blind)
To have to all the Virtues ^ear relation:
Flight or Eschewing, you will find to be,
The chiefest Friend to spotless Chastity.
III.
You Will find how Hope incites to Noble Acts,
And how Despair diverts Rash Enterprises,
How Fear from Wisdom naught at all detracts;
But is of use to her through just Surmises:
How Boldness may in hand with Valor ride,
How hair-brained Choler may with Justice side.
IV.
How harmless Joy we may Forerunner make
Of that Eternal never-ending Bliss,
Whereof the Saints in Heaven do partake;
And how our earthly Sorrow nothing is,
But a sharp Corrosive, which, handled well,
Will prove an Antidote to the pains in Hell.
Thus, Rebels unto Loyalty are brought,
And Traitors true Allegiance are taught.
THE Translator to the Reader.
I Had once in my thoughts to have dedicated this my Product of some
Leisure-hours, to an exactly accomplished Lady of Honor; but considering that
my Author has chosen our Savior JESUS CHRIST for his Patron, I thought I
should do less, should I choose any other for my Patroness, than the Kings
Daughter, his Spouse the Church, who is all glorious within. (For though these
be days wherein the Church may be compared to a Coppice, in which the
Under-wood grows much thicker and faster, than do the Oaks; and though she may
be thought to suffer much in Dilapidations; yet (as Mr. Fuller says) has she
some Inner-more Chapel well in repair.) And truly when I considered the like
coherence, which is between a Wife and her Husband, as between a Translation
and its Original; (for if the one be Bone of the same Bone, and flesh of the
same flesh, the other are composed of the same matter; and as the woman is
acknowledged to be the weaker vessel, a Translation will never vie for worth or
precedence with its Original;) I was somewhat confirmed in my Opinion; yet when
upon second thoughts (which are, or ought to be the best) I called to mind the
many Rivals she has in these days, which might peradventure cause both me and
her to suffer, should I say any thing of her, or undertake her quarrel, me, by
doing it; her, by my so ill doing it:) I resolved to pass over all Dedications
(yet could not forbear the Englishing of my Authors; being thereunto invited
both by the Piety and Elegancy of it, as also by the like Dedications of
Alstedius in his Encyclopaedia, and other Protestant Writers, though I find it
left out of some French Copies) to content my self with thinking, and to
address my self in words only to thee, my Reader, and to tell thee, that the
Conde de Gondamor (a Spanish Minister of State, with whose name and fame this
our Nation has been well acquainted) had wont to say; If you will make a small
inconsiderable Present, to any great Man of the Court, or to your Mistress, you
may do well to usher it in with some Preamble, whereby to excuse the Meanness,
and make the fancy or workmanship thereof plead Acceptance; Marry, if you will
present him or her with a thing of Real value, as (for that was it he instanced
in) with a Bag of Gold, amounting to some three or four thousand pound, you
need not use any Circumlocutions, but bring it in, lay it down; and say, Take
it, there it is: The thing it self will purchase its welcome. So I, were I to
present thee with some ordinary Work, I should according to Custom, and his
Counsel, trouble both my self and thee, with making some excuses to beg thy
approbation and acceptance; but since I offer to thy perusal a piece of such
extraordinary worth, as is this, the like whereof I have seldom or never met
withal, be it either for the merit of the Subject, or for the Authors handsome
handling of it; wherein such quaint Philosophy, and such strong Divinity are so
dexterously interwoven; and no Syllable of the Divinity therein (though written
by a Romish Priest) which contradicts the Religion I have been brought up in
(and hope, through Gods mercy, to die in) I will not injure it, by fawning on
thee for thy approbation, but build with confidence upon thy acceptance.

Yet let me not be mistaken, when I mention any thing of worth in this
Treatise, it is in relation to the Original, I am not ignorant how great an
allay it suffers by my Translation; yet you will find the Matter the same,
though not the Clothing; the difference being no more than what is in the same
man, when in his Holy Day, and when in his working-day Apparel: and you know,
Cucullus non facit Monachum. When I have made this acknowledgment, I know not,
notwithstanding, why it may not hold between a Translation and an Original, as
it does between the two great Luminaries; whereof, though the Moon borrow all
her light from the Sun, yet is not the Sun any whit prejudiced thereby; nor
does he thereby lose any of his luster: Neither know I why an Original Author
should be thought to suffer, though peradventure he be not too much righted by
his Translator. For my part, I have done my self so much right, as to do the
like (according to my Talent) to my Author; who appears throughout all this
Work to be too ingenuous, not to pardon such a Delinquent. As for thee, my
Reader, if what I have done shall please thee, I shall think this a Labor well
bestowed by

Thy Hearty Well-wisher, H. Monmouth.

The AUTHORS PREFACE.
THough all Philosophy be beautiful, and that this great Body has no parts in
it which are not noble; yet I confess, that that part thereof which treats of
Morality, is one of the least illustrious; and did not the Vtility thereof
heighten its valuation, it would meet with no Disciples. Quamdiu cum affectibus
colluctamur, quid magni facimus? etiamsi superiores sumus, portenta vicimus.
Sen. Quaest. Not. l. 1. praefat.
Indeed, there goes no great glory to the fighting with Passions, and the
vanquishing of them, since they are but Monsters: There needs be no great
boasting in the acquisition of some Virtues, and in being more Innocent than
the Faulty; since a man is not accounted the more Vigorous for being sounder
than one that is sick. It Is no great advantage to overcome Avarice, since she
exercises her fury against her self, and deprives her self of that Wealth
which she has deprived others of: It Is no very glorious action to have
triumphed over Luxury, since it repairs its own profusions by unjust acts, and
gathers riches more unjustly than it scatters them. In fine, it is no great
wonder to despise Ambition, since if it raise us up to Honors, it is by
Affronts; and that it is by Servitude, that she makes us rise to Greatness. Yet
this part of Philosophy has its advantages; and if it make less show, it
brings more profit than do the rest: For it is she that makes Philosophers, and
which purifying their understanding, makes them capable of considering the
wonders of Nature: It Is she that instructs Politicians, and teaches them by
governing their Passions to govern Kingdoms: Ethica in universum componit
hominem, and suadet marito, quomodo se gerat adversus uxorem; patri, quomodo
educet liberos; Domino, quomodo, servos regat. Sen. Ep. 95.
it is she that makes Fathers of families, and who managing their inclinations,
teaches them to bring up their children and to command their servants; so that
she is to Philosophy, the same as foundations are to Buildings; and she may
boast that in laboring to make an honest man, she makes at once a good Father
of a Family, a wise Politician and an understanding Philosopher.

But as she has several ways to lead to one and the same end, I have always
thought that the most humble was the most certain; and that taking that way,
which teaches us to regulate the motions of our soul, I should withstand all
Vices, and defend all Virtues. For although our Passions be out of order, and
that sin has brought them to a condition, wherein they are rather Faulty than
Innocent; yet Reason joined with Grace, may make good use of them; and without
flattery, I dare say in their behalf, that there is none of them so despicable,
but it may be changed into a glorious Virtue: That may be taken from them which
they have contracted from corrupt Nature; and they may be restored to that
purity which they had in the state of Innocence: No occasion can present it
self, where they may not fight, and bear away the victory in behalf of Virtue;
and, provided a man can tame them, he may with them easily overcome all Vices;
for Vice proceeds from their Disorders; and we commit no sin, which owes not
his birth to their Revolt: I can therefore affirm, that all Moral Philosophy is
comprised in this part, and that by teaching how to use Passions, I show all
the ways of making a man virtuous.

But to lead on successfully so glorious an enterprise, we must take a clean
differing path from that of the Philosophers, and follow other manner of
Maxims, Natura duce utendum est: hanc Ratio observat, hanc con^uli^^: idem est
ergo beat vivere, and secundum Naturam. Sen. De vita beata. cap. 8.
than those which they have left in their writings: For these blind men would
have no other rule than Nature, no other help than Reason; they thought there
was no Vice which they might not expel, no Virtue which they might not acquire,
by the means of these two guides: They were encouraged by their vainglory,
they endeavored things exceeding their Abilities; and out of a vain Confidence,
imagined that they could submit the Body to the Soul, and re-establish this
Sovereign in her ancient authority; it being more easy to know what is good,
than to follow it; they wrote worthily of Virtue they filled all their
Discourses with the praises thereof; and had there needed no more than Reasons
or Words to persuade us, they might have made us virtuous by their Writings: In
hoc morum studio multa delectant, pauca vincunt. Sen. 7. Benef. cap. 7.
But our malady was grown 100 great to be cured by such weak remedies; and it
behoved, that Grace should be mingled with Nature, to make Virtue meritorious.

Man had freedom enough to undo him self, by his own proper motion; but he had
not enough thereof to save himself by his own strength: his ruin came from his
will and his welfare could proceed from nothing but from Grace: All the actions
he did without her assistance were faulty; and, if we will believe Saint
Austin, all his good Works were sins; for he failed both in the beginning, and
in the end: not working by Grace, he must needs work by Concupiscence; and
being possessed with self-love, he could propose no other end to himself, but
himself: he labored either after Glory, or Pleasure; and in all his actions
raised himself no higher than his own interests. The Philosophers, though they
had a little more Light than others, had no more Righteousness; and whatsoever
names they gave unto their virtues, one might easily find, that they were
animated only by the desire of Honor or Voluptuousness: All their Opinions
likewise, might be reduced to those of the Epicureans and of the Stoics, both
which do infinitely differ from the belief of Christians: Interrogemus
singulos, Dic Epicure, quae res faciat beatum? respondet, voluptas corporis.
Dic Stoice, respondet, virtus animi, Dic Christian, respondet, Donum Dei. Aug.
in Tract. De Sect. Philos. c. 7.
For as says Saint Augustine, the Epicureans acknowledged no other Pleasure,
than Sensuality: The Stoics thought Virtue the only happiness; and Christians
allow of no felicity but Grace: The first submit the soul to the body, and
reduce men to the life of beasts; the second fill the soul with arrogance, and
in the misery of their condition, they imitate the pride of Devils; the last,
acknowledge their weakness, and finding by experience, that Nature and Reason
cannot deliver them, they implore aid from Grace, and undertake not to
withstand Vices, nor to acquire Virtues without Heavens assistances. Therefore
is it that in this Work, I presuppose, that Charity is absolutely necessary for
the governments of our Passions; and I acknowledge Christianity to be the only
Moral Philosophy: I very well know, Philosophers have helped us to some
maxims, which may further our design; but I likewise know very well, that we
cannot make use thereof, to our advantage, without the Grace of the Holy Ghost.
The goodliest truths are unuseful to us, if he who is the eternal Light, do not
scatter them abroad in our souls; and the best Reasons cannot prevail with us,
if he that holds our hearts in his hand, do not touch them with his
inspirations: The very helps of Nature, which we may call the ruins of
Innocence, cannot produce Virtue, unless enlivened by Charity: All those good
inclinations which remained in us, after the loss of original Righteousness,
are out of order; and man is become so wholly corrupt, that his very advantages
make against him: The Beauty of the Understanding, the Goodness of the
Judgment, and the Faithfulness of the Memory, are favors which have undone the
Philosophers; and if we now reap any profit thereby, we owe it to Grace, and
not to Nature: It fares with our soul, as with the Earth; the one, and the
other, are accursed since sin; and as the latter bears nothing but Thorns,
unless it be cultivated; the other produces nothing but sin, unless she be
illuminated by some supernatural Light.

To understand this Truth, Sane habuit Gratiam Adamus, in qua si permanere
vellet, nunquam malus esset: Et sine qua etiam cu libero arbitrio bonus esse
non posset. Au. ^. de Correp. and Great. c. 11.
which is the pure Doctrine of the Gospel; we must know that Grace, be it in
the state of Innocence, or in that of Christianity, makes up one part of man;
he is not accomplished when he is robed thereof; and though he have Reason, he
is imperfect if he want Righteousness: In both these estates, he must be
Righteous to be perfected, and Innocent if he will please God: Reason is not
his chief advantage; and (if I may be permitted to say it) she is not his final
Difference; he was never created to be only Reasonable; and he cannot be saved
unless, together with Reason, he possess Righteousness. From so rare a
Privilege an extreme Misfortune has ensued: For as Nature and Grace were
united in the first man, they could not be divided but by sin; and he could not
lose Righteousness but by Concupiscence; being no longer under the Empire of
God, he fell under the Devils Tyranny; and forsaking his lawful Sovereign, he
threw himself into the arms of an Usurper: As he acted heretofore by the
motions of the former, he works now by the motions of the second; and as he did
nothing then, which was not Innocent and Rational, he does nothing now that is
not Irrational and Sinful: Reason is become a slave to sin; and Nature losing
Grace, has lost her Primitive Purity. To deliver us from this shameful and
cruel Servitude, Jesus Christ must quicken us with his Spirit, he must unite us
to his Body, and must restore those advantages to Reason, which sin has berest
her of. Whosoever works not by this principle, is faulty; and who has not put
off the old man, cannot put on the new: Therefore does Saint Augustine condemn
all the Virtues of the Pagans; Omnis infidelium vita peccatum est, and nihil
est bonum nisi Summo Bono: ubi enim deest agnitio aeternae and incommutabilis
veritatis, falsa virtus est, etiam in optimis moribus. Sentent. 106 August.
he confounds their good works with their sins; and knowing that a man cannot
be Righteous without Grace, he assures us that their best actions were sinful:
All his Books are full of these Truths; and his Doctrine which is drawn from
the Gospel, obliges us to confess, That to withstand Vice, and govern our
Passions, we must of necessity have Charity. Who acts by the motions of this
Virtue, cannot, do amiss; and who follows those of Concupiscence, cannot be
saved: Charity raises us up to Heaven, Concupiscence fastens us to the Earth;
Charity joins us to God, Concupiscence unites us to our selves; Charity
restores us our Innocence, Concupiscence detains us still in sin.

Morality then, if it will be Profitable, must be Christian; and the Virtues
which ought to govern our Passions, must be inanimated by Charity, if they will
discharge their duty; yet may they have their particular employments; and
conducted by their Sovereign, they may do their utmost to quell these Rebels,
and to teach them obedience: They sweeten them by their dexterity; they make
use of cunning when force fails; they take them by their interests, or win
them by their inclinations: When they cannot make them capable of the pure
Mysteries of Religion, they deal with them as with Infidels, and persuade them
by interessed Reasons; if they be not touched with the Glory of Heaven, they
propose to them earthly Glory; and if they are not to be wrought upon by
Rewards, they endeavor to frighten them with Punishments. For these motions of
our Soul are too much fastened to the Earth, to be heightened to the purity of
Divine love; they feel not the beat thereof, but by reflection; and this
Monarch is contented to reduce them to their duties, by the interposition of
Virtues, that hold of his Empire: Temperantia est moderatio cupiditatum Rationi
obediens. Cic. l. 2. De finib.
He employes Temperance and Continence, to overcome these Rebels; he teaches
them how to reclaim these Slaves, and gives them forces to tame these savage
Monsters: So that you must not wonder, if I have sometimes followed the example
of profane Philosophers, and made use of the Reason of Infidels, to make the
Passions obedient; they are so engaged in their Senses, as they can conceive
nothing that is not sensible; and they have so little commerce with Reason,
that they understand not her Commandments, unless Imagination serve them for
Interpreter: It Is this Faculty that governs them; if you will reduce them, you
must win her; and it is in vain to endeavor to make them docible, if you have
not made their Guide reasonable: therefore, it is that whilst I treat with them,
I am bound to accommodate my self to their weakness, and to lessen my self
beneath the Majesty of Religion: I forgo the severity of our Faith; and not
being able to make them comprehend Christian verity, I persuade them by humane
considerations: I incite them, either with honor or shame; as the Fathers of
the Church, when they disputed with Infidels, beat them with their own Weapons,
Hic prudentia profit, hic robore evidentem quoque metum respue. Si minus, viti
vitium repelle, spe metum tempera. Sen. Ep. 13.
and convinced them by Philosophers Reasons; so do I take the Passions by their
own proper Interests, and make use of their Inclinations, to allay their fury.
I cousen them to cure them, and make use of their weakness to submit them to
Virtue: But in these harmless stratagems, I mean not to injure Charity; I leave
to her the sincerity of her Intentions; I suffer her to seek out God for his
own sake; and I oblige Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, which are capable of
Reason, to follow as much as they can, the purity of her motions.

After all these Advertisements, nothing remains, but that I inform the Reader
of the Method of this Work; which is so apparent, as the very Titles of the
Book may serve to instruct him therein; and to conceive my design, it will
suffice if he read the Table that follows this Discourse.

I treat of Passions, in General and in Particular: In the General, I represent
their Nature, their Disorders, their Guidance, their Affinity with Vices and
Virtues, and the power they have over man's Liberty: In the Particular, I oppose
one of them to another, that they may be the more clearly seen; and after I
have explained their Nature, their Proprieties, and their Effects, I discover
the bad use of them, that it may be shunned; and their good use, that it may be
followed. He that will reap Profit by these Advices, shall find by experience,
that in governing his Passions, he shall combat with all Vices, and exercise
all Virtues.

A TABLE Of the Several Treatises and Discourses.
The first Part of the Use of Passions. Of Passions in General.
The First TREATISE. Of the Nature of Passions. Discourse I.
AN Apology for Passions against the Stoics. Page 1. 2. What the Nature of
Passions is, and in what Faculty of the Soul they reside. 9 3. Of the number of
Passions in man. 21 4. Which is the most violent of all the Passions of man. 30
5. Whether there were any Passions in the State of Innocence, or no; and
whether they were of the same Nature as are Ours. 39 6. Whether there were any
Passions in Jesus Christ, and wherein they differed from Ours. 46
The Second TREATISE. Of the Disorder of Passions.
1. Discourse. Of the Corruption of Nature by Sin. p. 54 2. That Nature alone
is not sufficient to rule the Passions of man. 60 3. That the Disorders of
Passions being considered, Grace is requisite to the Government thereof. 66 4.
That Opinion and the Senses cause the Disorder of our Passions. 73 5. That
there is more Disorder in the Passions of man than in those of Beasts. 79
The Third TREATISE. Of the Government of Passions.
1. Discourse. That there is nothing more glorious, nor more hard to come by,
than the Government of the Passions. 87 2. That there is no more miserable
slave, than he that suffers himself to be governed by his Passions. 94 3. That
to govern Passions, they must be moderated. 102 4. That in whatsoever condition
our Passions be, they may be governed by Reason. 109 5. What Means a man must
use to moderate his Passions. 116
The Fourth TREATISE. Of the Commerce of Passions with Virtue and Vice.
1. Discourse. That Passions are the Seeds of Virtue. p. 123 2. That Passions
are the Seeds of Vice. 132 3. That there are no Passions which may not be
changed into Virtues. 140 4. That the Government of Passions is Virtues chief
employment. 149
The Fifth TREATISE. Of the power that Passions have upon the Will of Man.
1. Discourse. That to know and win upon men, we must study their Passions. 157
2. That Arts seduce men by the means of Passions. 165 3. That Princes win upon
their Subjects either by Love or Fear. 4. What Passions ought to predominate in
the Person of a Prince. 184
The Second Part of the Use of Passions. Of Passions in Particular.
The First TREATISE. Of Love and Hatred. Discourse I.
OF the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of Love. p. 193 2. Of the bad use of
Love, by being too much tied to Creatures, and by unlawful Friendships. 213 3
Of the good use of Love, by Charity and Friendship. 223 4. Of the Nature,
Proprieties and Effects of Hatred. 242 5. Of the bad use of Hatred. 251 6. Of
the good use of Hatred 259
The Second TREATISE. Of Desire and Eschewing.
1. Discourse. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Desire. p. 269 2. Of
the bad use of Desire by Ambition and Avarice. 281 3. Of the good use of
Desire, and of the need we have of God. 290 4. Of the Nature, Proprieties and
Effects, and of the good and bad use of Eschewing. 299
The Third TREATISE. Of Hope and Despair.
1. Discourse. Of the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of Hope. p. 309 2. Of
the bad use of Hope, and her engagement to Earthly things. 321 3. Of the good
use of Hope, by Fortitude and Patience. 330 4. Of the Nature, Proprieties and
Effects, and of the good and bad use of Despair. 338
The Fourth TREATISE. Of Audacity and Fear.
1. Discourse. Of the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of Audacity. p. 349 2.
Of the bad use of Audacity. 359 3. Of the good use of Audacity. 365 4. Of the
Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Fear. 373 5. Of the bad use of Fear. 383 6.
Of the good use of Fear. 391
The Fifth TREATISE. Of Choler or Anger.
1. Discourse. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Choler or Anger. p.
403 2. Of the bad use of Choler or Anger. 417 3. Of the good use of Choler or
Anger, and of just Severity. 419
The Sixth TREATISE. Of Delight and Sorrow.
1. Discourse. Of the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of Pleasure. p 440 2. Of
the bad use of Pleasure. 452 3. Of the good use of Pleasure. 462 4. Of the
Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Grief or Sorrow. 474 5. Of the bad use of
Grief or Sorrow. 486 6. Of the good use of Grief or Sorrow. 498
The Use of PASSIONS.
The First Part; Of Passions in General.
The First Treatise. Of the Nature of Passions.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. An Apology for Passions against the Stoics.
AS there is no man so temperate, but that he sometimes experienceth the
violence of Passions, and that the disorder thereof is a fate from which very
few can ^ence themselves; so it is the Subject whereupon upon Philosophers have
most exercised their brains, and is the part of Moral Philosophy which has
oftest been examined; But if I may speak my sense with freedom, and if I may be
permitted to censure my Masters, I am of opinion, that there is no point in the
whole body of Philosophy, that has been treated of with more ostentation, and
less of profit; for some of them have satisfied themselves with having
described passions unto us, and in discovering unto us their causes, and their
effects, not teaching us how to govern them; so as they may be said to have
been more careful in making us know our malady, than in applying remedies
thereunto; Others more blind, but more zealous, have confounded them with
vices, and have put no difference between the motions of the sensitive
appetite, and the misgovernment of the will, so as according to them, a man
cannot be passionate without being criminal.

Their discourses which ought to be instructions unto virtue, have only been
invectives against passions. They have made the malady greater than it was; and
their desire of healing it, has only served to make it incurable.

Others little differing from the last, have endeavored to stifle Passion, and
not considering that man is endued with a body, from the material part, whereof
the soul is not disingaged, they will heighten him to the condition of Angels.
These last being the Noblest Enemies that Passion ever met withal, and who have
made use of reason to grapple with her; It is fit we lend them an ear, that we
may answer them, and confute their Error before we establish the Truth.

No man is ignorant, how that Pride has always accompanied the Sect of the
Stoics, who that they might raise up man, have labored to abase God, and who
oft-times have made their Wiseman somewhat more happy than their Jupiter. They
have given him the upper hand of Fortune and Destiny, and will have his
happiness to depend wholly upon his Will. Virtue is too modest to allow of so
unjust praises; and Piety will not suffer her to agrandise her self to the
prejudice of that Divinity which she adores; but the vanity of these insolent
Philosophers never appeared more, than in the defiance they have given to
Passion; For as she is the motion of the most inconsiderate part of our Soul.
Pride has made them eloquent in their Invectives, and Ambition has furnished
them with Reasons, which are fairly entertained by such men, who are offended
that they have a Body, and afflicted that they are not Angels. They say, that
rest cannot consist with Passions, that it is easier to destroy than to
regulate them; that such Soldiers must never be made use of as spurn at the
Orders of their Commanders; and that such are readier to justle reason out of
doors, than to fight in her behalf; That Passions are the sickness of the Soul.
Quatiator necesse est fluctuetorque ^ui suis malis tutus est, qui fortis este
nisi irascitur, non potest; industrius, nisi cupit; quietus, nisi timet; In
tyrannidi illi vivendum est in alicujus affectus veni^nti servitutem, Sen. l.
1. de ira, c. 1.
That the very weakest is not without danger, and that health is not wholly
recovered, when any spice of the Fever does remain, that that man is in a very
sad condition, who cannot find his safety, save in the loss thereof, who cannot
be courageous, unless choleric; who cannot be advised, without some sort of
fear; and who dares undertake nothing, unless egged on thereunto by his desire.
Briefly, they conclude, that to be a slave to Passion, is to live under
tyranny, and that a man must renounce his liberty, if he obey such insolent
Masters.

These Reasons so eloquently expressed by the Stoics, have as yet framed a
wise man only in Idaea. Their Admirers have reaped nothing but Confusion; after
having courted so Proud and so Austere a Virtue, they are become ridiculous to
all Ages. And the wisest amongst them have found, that whilst they would go
about to make so many Gods, the Product has been so many Idols.

Sene^a himself, whom I look upon as the most eloquent and haughtiest Disciple
of that proud Sect, forced thereunto by the weakness of Nature, and the
efficacy of Reason, has betrayed his Party, and forgoing his own Maxims,
confesses that the wise man Sentiet it aque Sapiens suspitiones quasdam, etc
Umbras affectu (...), i^sis quidem corebit. Sen. l. 1. de Ira. c. 16.
sometimes feels some Commotions, and that though there be in him no true
Passions, yet has he the shadows and appearances of them. He who is acquainted
with the humor of this Philosopher, will be satisfied with this Attestate, and
he who shall well examine the Sense of his Words, will find that Saint
Augustine had reason to say, the Stoics distered from other Philosophers only
in their manner of Speech, and that though their Words were more lofty, their
Conceptions were not so. For they blame not all Passions, but only their
Excess, and though they have had a mind to stifle them, they never could hope
to do it.

To part the Soul from the Body, so to exempt it from these agitations, were to
overthrow the Fabric of man; As long as this illustrious Prisoner shall be
obliged to the same functions, as are the souls of irrational Creatures, she
shall be constrained to entertain Passions; And as long as she shall make use
of sense, in her operations, she shall use hope. and fear, in the practical
part of virtue. It is no more dishonorable for the soul to fear a danger, to
hope for good, or to strengthen it self against evil, than it is to see by the
Organs of the Eyes, or to hear by those of the Ears; the one and the other
shares of servitude, but both are necessary. It is also more easy to rule
Passion than the Senses; Fear, Choler and Love are more capable of Reason, than
is Hunger, Thirst, or Sleep. Therefore if we shall make the Senses subject to
the Empire of Reason, we may well submit our Passions thereunto, and make our
Fear and our Hope praiseworthy, as well as our Fasting and Watching
meritorious.

Reason is the proper Utensil of man; all other things are bun as strangers to
him, he may lose them without impoverishing himself, and as long as he is
master of Reason, he may still vaunt himself to be Man.

Since this is the chief of all that is good, we must disperse it through all
the parts of man, and make even the meanest faculties of our Soul capable
thereof; doubtlesly it may make for our security, if it be well husbanded.
Hope, if well governed, does encourage us to generous and difficult
enterprises; Audacity, if well guided, makes Soldiers invincible. In fine, our
most insolent Passions may be subject to Reason, and not to employ them in the
course of our life, is to render useless one of the most beautiful parts of our
Soul. Virtue her self would become idle, had she no passions, either to subdue
or regulate. And he who shall consider their chief employment, will find they
have a relation to the managing of our actions. Fortitude is made use of to
subjugate Fear, and this courageous virtue would cease to operate, if man did
cease to fear. We measure our desires and hopes by Moderation, and were there
no ambitious Passions, no man would be moderate in his good successes.
Temperance and Continency bridle Sensuality, and had not Nature ordained
pleasure in all actions, these two Virtues which go to the composure of a
chaste and continent man, would be likewise of no use. Clemency sweetens
Choler, and did not this Passion animate Princes to revenge, the virtue whereby
it is moderated would not deserve praise.

But if Passions be so much befriended by so many several virtues, they are not
-- thereof unthankful, for when instructed in their whole, they repay them with
use, and serve them faithfully; The best part of Circumspection is composed of
Fear, which though it be accused to seek out the evil before it happen, it
prepares us either quietly to undergo it, or happily to evade it. Hope is
serviceable to Fortitude, and it is she that by her Promises does encourage us
to the undertaking of gallant Actions. Boldness is Valor's faithful Companion,
and all great Conquerors owe the glory of their Generosity to this Passion.
Choler maintains Justice, and animates Judges to punish the Guilty. Briefly,
there is no Passion which is not serviceable to Virtue, when they are governed
by Reason, and those who have so cried them down, make us see they never knew
their use nor worth.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. What the Nature of Passions is, and in what Faculty of
the Soul they reside.
GODS Greatness is so elevated, as Man cannot attain to the Knowledge thereof
without abasing it, and his Unity is so simple, as it is not to be conceived,
unless divided. Philosophers gave him different Names, to express the diversity
of his Perfections; and by calling him sometimes Destiny, sometimes Nature,
sometimes Providence, they introduced a plurality of Gods, and made all men
Idolaters. The Soul being the Image of God, the same Philosophers did likewise
divide it, and not being able to comprehend the simplicity of its Essence, they
believed it was corporeal. They imagined it had parts as well ^s the Body, and
though they were more subtle, they were not less veritable. They multiplied the
Cause with its Effects, and ^aking her diverse Faculties for different Na^ures,
they contrary to the Law of Reason, gave diverse forms to the same composure.
But Truth, which together with Faith, came down upon earth, teaches us that
the Soul is but one in its Essence, and that it has undergone several Names
only, to express the variety of its operations; for when it gives life unto the
body, and when by natural heat, which proceeds from the heart, as from its
Center, it preserves all the ^arts thereof, it is called Form; Anima Secundum
operis sui officium diversis nuncupatur nominibus; dicitur namque anima, dum
vegetat; spiritus, dum contemplatur; sensus, dum sentit; ratio, dum discernit;
memoria, dum recordatur; voluntas, dum consentit: istae non differunt in
substantia, quemadmodum in nominibus, quoniam omnia ista Una anima est,
proprietatates quidem diversae, sed essentia una. Aug. lib. De Spiritu and
A^ima.
when it discerns colors by the Eye, and distinguishes of sound by the Ear,
Sense. When she rai^eth her self a little higher, and by discoursing infers one
Truth by another, she is called Understanding. When she preserves her thoughts,
to employ them about her own affairs, or that she draws from forth her
treasury, the Riches which ^she had locked therein, men style her Memory; when
she loves that which pleases her, or hates that which nauseates her, she is
termed Will, but all her several Faculties, which differing in their
employments, do notwithstanding agree in their substance, make but one Soul,
and are like so many Rivulets, derived from the same Springhead.

Profane Philosophy arriving at length to the knowledge of this truth, makes
use of diverse comparisons to express her. Now she represents the Soul in the
Body, as an Intelligence in the Heavens, the virtue whereof is displayed
through all the Spheres thereof. Anon they figure her out unto us as a Pilot,
who guides his Vessel; sometimes as a King, who governs his State: But
Christian Philosophy has been more fortunate, when coming even to the original
of the soul, it has made us know, what effects she produces in the Body, by
the very same which God produces in the world. For though this infinite
essence depends not upon the world which he has created, and that without
interessing his might, he may undo his own workmanship, yet is he shed abroad
in all the parts thereof; there is no intermedium which he fills not up. He
applies himself to all Creatures, in their operations, and without dividing his
unity, or weakening his power; he gives light with the Sun, he burns with the
fire, he he refreshes with the water, and he brings forth fruit with the
trees. He is as great on earth as he is in Heaven, though his effects do
differ; his power is always equal, and the stars which shine above our heads
cost him no more than the grass which we tread under our feet. So is the soul
dispersed in the body, and penetrates all the parts thereof; It is as noble in
the hand as in the heart; and though applying her self to the disposition of
the Organs, she speaks by the Mouth, sees by the Eyes, and hears by the
Ears, yet is she but one Spirit in her Essence; and in her differing Functions,
her Unity is not divided, nor her Power weakened. It Is true, that not finding
the same dispositions, in every part of the Body, she produces not the same
Effects; and in this point this Illustrious Captive is infinitely inferior to
God; for as he is infinite, and was able to make all things out of nothing, he
can likewise make all things out of every Creature, and without any respect to
their Inclinations make them serve his Voluntas tanti utique Conditoris rei
cujusque natura est; Aug. l. 21. De Civ. Dei. c. 8.
Will. So we see he has used the Fire to sweeten the pains of his Servants;
that he has used the Light to blind his Enemies; that he has made the Floods
turn back to give passage to his Friends; and that he has made the Earth open
to swallow those that rebel against him. But the Soul, whose power is limited,
cannot operate without dependence upon the Organs; and though she be spiritual
in her Nature, yet is she corporeal in her Operations.

This is that which has made the Philosophers consider her in three several
estates, which are so different the one from the other, that if in the first,
she approach near the Dignity of the Angels, in the second she is in no better
condition than the Beast of the Field; and in the last, she differs not much
from the Nature of Plants; for in this acceptance she has no other
employment, than to nourish the Body she is in, to digest Food, to convert it
into Blood, and by a strange Metamorphosis to make one and the same Matter
thicken into Flesh, stiffen into Nerves, harden into Bones, extend into
Branches, and lengthen into Grisles; she augments her Parts by nourishing them,
she in time perfects her Workmanship, and by her pains brings it to its just
Greatness. Solicited by Providence, she takes care to maintain the World; she
thinks how to restore what she has received, and to preserve her species
produces the like. In this acception her workmanship is not more noble than
that of Plants, Alba lilia iisdem omnibus modis seruntur quibus rosa and hoc
ampliu^ lachryma sua. Plin. c. 5. l. 21. Hist. Not.
which nourish themselves by the Influences of Heaven, grow up by the heat of
the Sun, and get root downward by their Succors and Moisture.

In the second estate, she becomes sensible, and begins to have inclinations
and notions, she sees Objects by the Sense which their reports make unto the
Imagination, this trusts them or commits them to memory, which obliges her
self carefully to keep them, and faithfully to represent them. From the Lights
of the Soul arise her desires, and from her knowledge, her love or hatred, she
betakes her self to that which is agreeable unto her, shuns that which likes
her not; and according to the diverse qualities of good or evil which present
themselves, she excites differing motions, which are called Passions: In this
degree she has nothing of more lofty than the Beasts, which discover Objects
by Sense, which receive the sorts thereof in their Imagination, and preserve
them in their Memory.

In the third estate, she quits the Body, and coming to her self, she
entertains her self with more Truths, she treats with Angels, and mounting by
degrees even to Divinity it self, she knows perfections, and admireth
greatness; she reasons upon such subjects as present themselves, she examines
their qualities, that she may conceive their essence, she confers the present
with what is past, and from the one and the other of them draws Conjectures for
what is to come.

The Faculty which does all these wonders is termed Understanding; Imagination
and Sense acknowledge her for their Mistress, but she is not so absolute, but
that ^he depends upon a Sovereign, and takes ^he Law from one, that is blind,
whom she serves for a guide. This which is called Will, and which has no other
Object than good, to follow it; and evil, to shun it; ^s so absolute as Heaven
it self, bears a respect unto her freedom; for it never uses violence when it
has to do therewithal, ^it husbandeth the consentment thereof with address.
And its efficacious graces, which never fail in producing their Effects, may
well undertake to convert, but not to force Will. Heavens Orders are always
observed within its Empire; the Subjects thereof may well be froward, never
rebellious; and when it commands absolutely, it is always obeyed.

True it is that motions or agitations are formed in the second acception of
the soul which exercise her power; for though they hold of her, they forbear
not to pretend to some sort of Liberty; they are rather her Citizens than her
Slaves, and she is rather their Judge than their Sovereign. These Passions
arising from the Senses side always with them; whenever Imagination presents
them to the Understanding, he pleads in their behalf, by means of so good an
Advocate they corrupt their Master, and win all their Causes. The Understanding
listens unto them, weighs their Reasons, considers their Inclinations, and
lest he may grieve them, oft-times gives Sentence to their Advantage; he
betrays the Will, whereof he is the Chief Officer; he couzens his Blind Queen,
and disguising the Truth, makes unfaithful Reports unto her, that he may draw
unjust Commandments from her; when she has declared her self, Passions become
Crimes, their Sedition begins to make head, and man who before was but unruly,
becomes wholly Criminal; for as the Motions of this inferior part of the Soul
are not free, they never begin to be vicious but when they become voluntary. As
long as they are awakened by Objects, solicited by the Senses, and protected by
Imaginations self, they have no other Craft than what they draw from corrupted
Nature; But when the Understanding overshadowed by their obscurity, or won by
their solicitations, perverts the Will, and obliges this Sovereign to take upon
her the interest of her Slaves, she makes them guilty of her sin, she changes
their motions into rebellion, and of the insurrection of a Beast, makes the
fault of a man. It is true, that when the understanding keeps within the bounds
of duty, and is faithful to the Will, he suppresses their seditions, and
reduces these Mutineers to obedience; she husbandeth their humors so well, as
taking from them all their unruliness, he makes rare and excellent virtues of
them. In this estate they are subservient to Reason, and defend the party which
they were resolved to fight against. The good or the evil that may be drawn
from them binds us to consider their nature, to observe their proprieties, and
to discover their original, to the end that arriving at the exact knowledge of
them, we may make use of them in our affairs.

Passion then is nothing else, but a mo^ion of the Sensitive Appetite, caused
by the Imagination of an appearing or veritable good, or evil, which changes
the Body against the Laws of Nature. I term it motion, because it has a
respect to good or evil as the Objects thereof, and suffers it self to be born
away by the qualities which she observes therein; this motion is caused by the
Imagination, which being filled with sorts of things, which she has received
from all the senses, sollicits passions, to discover unto her the beauties or
deformities of such Objects as may move her. The sensitive appetite is so
partial to her as it sooths her in all her inclinations, let her be never so
little agitated, she draws after her all other passions, she raises tempests
as winds do waves, and the Soul would be at quiet in her interior part, were
she not moved by this power; but she bears so great a sway in this Empire, as
she there does what she pleases. Nor is it requisite that the good or evil
which she represents to the appetite be true, which relyeth on her fidelity,
and believes her councils without examining them, having no other light but
what is borrowed from her, he follows hoodwinked all the Objects which she
proposes, and let them be but clothed with any appearance of good or evil, he
impetuously either rejects or embraces them. He behaves himself so vigorously,
as he always causes alteration in the Body; for besides that his motions are
violent, and that they do hardly deserve the name of Passions, when they are
moderated, they have such access unto the Senses, and the Senses have so much
of communication with the Body, as it is impossible but that their Disorders
should cause an alteration therein. In brief, Passion is against the Law of
Nature, because she sets upon the heart; which cannot be hurt, without
resentment of all the parts of the Body; for they are Looking-glasses, wherein
one sees all the Motions of him that animates them; And as Physicians judge of
his Constitution by the beating of his Pulse, and Arteries, one may judge of
the Passions wherewith ^e is transported by the color of his face, by the
flame which sparkles in his eyes, by the shaking of his Joints, and by all such
other signs as appear in the Body, when the Heart is agitated.

Now these are the Passions which we ^ndertake to reclaim and bring under the
Empire of Reason, and by the assistance of ^race, to change them into Virtues.
^ome have been satisfied with describing them unto us, not showing how to
regulate them, and have employed their eloquence ^nly in making us know our
Miseries. (...) may be they believed that the knowledge ^f our evils was
sufficient to cure them, and that the desire of health obliged us to seek ^ut
remedies; but they should do well to ^member that there be pleasing evils, of
which these that are sick covet not to be cured.

Others have fought with passions as with so many Monsters. They have given
(...) reason to destroy them, not considering that to execute the Design a man
must destroy himself: Others knew very well that Passions making up a part of
our Soul, they were not to be extirpated but by death; but they knew not that
good use might be made of them, and tacitly blaming him who has endowed us
with them, they have labored to sweeten them, not seeking out to manage them;
they imagined Passions were not otherwise requisite to virtue, save only to
exercise her courage, they thought they were no otherwise useful for men, save
only for trial; and that man could reap no other advantage by them, save only
patiently to bear with them, or to oppose them with resolution; but I pretend
to defend their cause by defending Gods cause, and to make it appear in the
pursuit of this work, that the same Providence, which has drawn our safety
from our detriment or loss, will have us to work out our res^ from out of the
disorders of our Passions; that by his grace we may tame these will Monsters,
that we may reduce these Rebel^ under obedience, and that we make such
Soldiers march under the Banners of Virtue, as have oftest fought in the
behalf of Vice.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the Number of Passions in Men.
It Is a strange thing that the Soul knows all things, yet knows not her self;
there is nothing so hidden in Nature, which she discovers not, she is
acquainted with all its secrets, and all that passes through the bowels of
this common Mother is apparent to her; she knows how Metals are formed, how the
Elements do court, and wage war one with other, how Vapors ascend in the Air,
how they thicken in the Clouds, melt into Rain, and break forth in* Thunder;
finally, she knows of what parts her body is composed, and by a cruel piece of
Art she dissects it, she takes it in pieces, that she may know the properties
thereof; yet notwithstanding she is ignorant of what passes within her self;
she cannot attain to the knowledge of her essence, which is altogether
spiritual; and she has weak conjectures of her most excellent qualities,
because she fetches her light from the senses, and depends in her noblest
operations upon the species, which the Imagination represents unto her: She
doubts of her immortality, and to be the more secure thereof, she is bound to
call in Faith to the succor of Reason, and to be^ieve through a blind (...),
what she cannot with certain evidence comprehend: But of all things that are in
her, there is nothing more concealed from her than (...) passions; for though
by their (...) they make an Impression upon the sen^es, yet do not the
Philosophers agree upon their Subject, nor their Number. Some (...) they are
framed in the Body: Some (...) they reside in the nethermost part of the Soul;
others divide the Soul into two faculties, which they term Concupiscible and
Irascible, and place the softer passions in the former, and the more rigid in
the second. For they will have love and hatred, desire and eschewing, joy and
sorrow, to be comprehended in the concupiscible appetite, and that fear and
boldness, hope and despair, choler and remisness reside in the irascible
appetite. To make good this difference, they say, that the passions of the
concupiscible appetite have a regard to good and to evil, as absent, or as
present; and that those of the irascible consider them as hard and difficult;
that the one makes but onsets, and retreats; that the others give battle, and
either win or lose the victory; that the one takes part with the Body, the
other with the Understanding; that the one are remiss, and the other generous;
and that considering the opposition of so many contrary qualities, Ego enim
delibe^abam ut servirem domino meo, Ego etiam qui vol^bam, Ego eram qui
nolebam: Ego eram nec plene volebam nec p^ene nolebam, ideo contendebam, and
dissipabar a me ipso, and ipsa dissipatio me invito quidem fiebat, nec tamen
offendebat naturam mentis aliena, sed poena mea. Aug. Confess. l. 8. c. 10.
it must be concluded that they cannot r^^de in one and the same part of the
Soul.

Were it not a error in morality to dispute this Maxim, and were it not
rashness to contradict an opinion generally received for so many ages; I should
be much inclined to believe that all these passions are lodged in one and the
same appetite, which is divided by the motions thereof, as the understanding is
divided by its opinions, or as the will is parted by love and hatred. And I
would say with Saint Augustine, that these differing conceits, do not presuppose
differing faculties, since one and the same man does oftentimes desire contrary
things, and preserves the unity of his person in the variety of his desires.
He experienced this combat in himself, when he would become a Convert; he saw
his soul divided by differing opinions, and wondered that having but one Will,
it could form out so contrary resolutions. But not to engage my self in a War
wherein a man purchases more Enemies than he reconcileth, and where both
Parties think always to have had the better; I will content my self to have
insinuated my opinion, instead of staying upon the defense thereof, and not
concluding any thing of the Subject where the Passions do reside, I wiil speak
of their Number; and will tell you what the Philosophers have written thereof.

The Academicks thought there were but four principal Passions, Desire and
Fear, Joy and Sorrow; and Hine metuunt, cupiunt, gaudentque, dolentque. V^rg.
Virgil who in all his works appears to be of this ancient Sect, when he
describes the motions of the Soul, mentions none but these; in effect it seems
these comprehend all the rest; that Despair and Aversion are ranked under Fear;
that Hope, Audacity, and Choler are ranked under Desire; and that all of them
together do terminate in Joy or Sorrow. But let them endeavor to color over
this division, by what reasons they please, it will still be defective since it
comprehends not Love and Hatred, which are the two first originals of our
Passions; for this reason the Peripateticks did multiply them, and grounded
their Number upon the diverse motions of the Soul; for the Soul has (say they)
either an inclination, or an aversion to the Objects wherewith she is either
pleased or displeased; and this is Love or hatred; or else she shuns them, and
this is Eschewing; or she draws near unto them, and this is Desire; or she
promises unto her self the fruition of what she wishes; and this is Hope; or
she cannot defend her self from the evil which she apprehends, and this is
Despair; or she endeavors to withstand it, and this is Audacity; or she chears
her self up to overcome them, and this is Choler. Finally, she either
possesses the good, and this is Joy; or suffers the evil, and this is
sorrow: some others that are of the like opinion, prove the diversity of
Passions another way, and affirm that good and evil may be considered in
themselves, without any Circumstances; and that from hence arise Love and
Hatred; or that a man may look upon them as absent; and that then they produce
either Fear or Desire; or as difficult, and that then they cause Hope,
Audacity, and Choler; or as impossible, and that then they raise despair; or in
fine, as present, and that then they pour into the soul either delight or pain.

Though these reasons may content the understanding, yet do they not vanquish
her; and without offense to Philosophy, a man may differ from the opinions of
Plato, or Aristotle, for as it appears to me, they give several names to one
and the same thing, they divide the unity of Love, and take her different
effects for different Passions. So after having well examined this business, I
am enforced to embrace the opinion of Saint Augustine, and to maintain with
him, that love is the only passion which does agitate us, or has operation in
us. For all the motions which molest our soul are but so many disguised loves;
our Fears and Desires, our Hopes and Despaires, our Delights and Sorrows, are
Countenances which Love puts on according to the events of good or bad success:
and as the Sea carries diverse names according to the different parts of the
Earth which are thereby watered, so does Love change her name according to the
different estates wherein she finds her self. But as amongst the Infidels every
perfection of God has past for a several Deity; so amongst Philosophers the
different qualities of love have been taken for different Passions. And these
great Masters have opinioned that as often as Love has changed guidance, or
employment, she ought also to change nature and name; but if this their
reasoning were good, the soul must lose its unity as often as it produces
different effects: and the Soul which digests Meat, and distributes the Blood
into the Veins, must not be the same which speaks by the tongue, and lissens by
the Ear.

Reason therefore will have us to believe, that (...) but one Passion; and that
hope and (...) and joy are the motions or proper^ of love; and that to paint
her in all her colors, we must term her, when longing after what is loved,
Desire Amor ergo inhians habere quod amatur, cupiditas est; idem habens, eoque
fruens, laetitia est; fugiens quod ei adversatur, timor est; idque cum
acciderit, sentiens tristitia est. Aug. l. 4. De Civ. Dei, c. 7.
; when possessing what is desired, Pleasure or Delight* when shunning what is
abhorred, fear; And when after a long and bootless withstanding, enforced to
suffer, grief or sorrow. Or to express the same thing more clearly, Amor est
delectatio cordis per desiderium currens, and requiescens per gaudium. Aug. De
substantia dilectionis, c. 1. ct 2.
desire and eschewing, hope and fear, are the motions of Love, by which that
which is agreeable is endeavored, and the contrary shunned. Boldness and
Choler, are the Combatants which are made use of to defend that which is loved,
Joy is Loves triumph, despair her weakness, and sadness her defeat. Or to make
use of Saint Augustines words, desire is the course of Love, fear is her
flight, sorrow is her torment, and joy her rest; Love draws near to good by
desiring it, flies from evil by fearing it, is sad by resenting sorrow,
rejoiceth in tasting pleasure, but in all her different estates or acceptions
she is always her self, and in the variety of her effects, preserves the unity
of her essence.

But if it be trne that Love causes all our Passion, it follows that she must
sometimes transform her self into her contrary; and that by a Metamorphosis
more incredible than that of the Poets, she converts her self into Hatred, and
produces effects which will give the Lie to her Humor. For Love delights in
obliging, Hate in the contrary; Love is generous, and takes pleasure in
pardoning, Hate not so, and studies nothing but revenge; Love gives life unto
her enemies, Hatred endeavors the death of her most faithful friends; and it
seems more easy to reconcile Vice with Virtue, than Love with Hatred. This
Objection has much of apperance, but little of solidity; and those who frame
it, do not remember that often times one and the same cause does produce contrary
effects. That heat which makes Wax melt, dries mud and dirt; that the motion
which draws us nearer Heaven, draws us the further from earth; that the
inclination we have to preserve our selves, is an aversion from any thing that
may destroy us. So the love of good is the hatred of evil; and the same Passion
which uses sweetness to those who oblige it, uses severity to those who
offend it. It imitateth Justice, which by the same motion punishes sin, and
recompenseth virtue. It resembles the Sun, which by the same Light makes the
Eagles see, and blinds the Owls. And if it be lawful to mount up into the
Heavens, it has an influence upon God himself, which only hates a sinner, out
of love unto himself: If so many good reasons cannot persuade to so manifest a
truth, they ought at least prevail thus much with our adversaries, that if
there be diverse Passions, Love is the Sovereign thereof, and that she is so
absolute in her Kingdom, as that her Subjects undertake nothing but by her
directions. She is the primum Mobile which carries them about; and as she gives
them motion, so she gives them rest; she by her aspect does irritate and
appease them: and her examples do prevail so much over all the Amor caeteros se
traducit affectus. Bern.
affections of our soul, that her goodness, or her malice renders them either
good or evil.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Which is the most violent of all the Passions of Man?
IF the knowledge of a disease be requisite to the cure, it is no less
necessary to know the Passions, that we may the better govern them, and to know
which of them does assail us with most fury. Philosophers who have treated
hereupon, agree not in their opinions, but are so divided upon this Subject,
that reason has not been able to reconcile their difference.

Plato has left us in doubt, and sounding the Question to the bottom, he
contents himself with saying, there are four passions which seem to surpass the
rest in violence. The first is Voluptuousness, which belies its name, and which
breathing forth nothing but sweetness, cease not to be extreme furious; and
to fight against reason with more violence than does grief or anguish. The
second is Choler, which being nothing else according to its definition, but a
boiling of the Blood about the heart Fervor sanguguinis circa cor. Aristo^.
, cannot be but excessively violent; and did not nature, which is careful of
our preservation, make it die as soon as it is born, there were no mischief
whereof it were not capable; nor do I know whether the world were capable to
defend it self against the fury thereof, or no. But let us attribute what
violence we please unto it, I esteem it more reasonable than Voluptuousness;
for as Lions are sooner tamed than Fish, an angry man is sooner appeased, than
a voluptuous man converted; and experience teaches us, that of these two
Passions the more mild is the less tractable, and the more furious the less
opinionated. The third is the desire of honor, which is so powerfully
imprinted in the heart of man, as there is no difficulty which it overcomes
not. It Is this that makes conquerors, which inspires cou^age into soldiers,
which makes Orators eloquent, and Philosophers knowing. For ^ll these
different conditions are enlivened ^y the same desire; and though they take
^everal ways, they aim at the same end. The fourth is the fear of death, which
by its ^requent Alarmes troubles all the quiet of our life. It produces such
strange effects, as the nature thereof is not to be discovered though it be
timorous, and that the shadow of an evil is sufficient to astonish it; yet does
it render men courageous, and make them seek out a certain death, to shun an
uncertain one; it gives strength to the vanquished, and assisted by despair,
it regains Battles which it had lost. It Is hard to judge which of these two
Passions is the stronger, for they have often times triumphed over one another,
and as the fear of death has made the desire of honor be forgotten, sometimes
the desire of honor has despised the fear of Death.

Though I have a noble esteem of Plato, and that his very ravings seem more
noble, and more heightened to me than Aristotle's Discourses, yet cannot I side
with him in this; and notwithstanding all the good reasons he alleges to
defend his opinion, I cannot approve thereof. For Voluptuousness is not so much
a particular Passion, as it is the Springhead of all those that give us any
contentment, nor is it so violent, but that it may easily be repressed by grief
and anguish. Its only advantage lies in the absence of its enemy, nor does it
corrupt men but when it finds nothing to oppug^ it, as soon as any opposition
is made, it yields the victory; and experience teaches us, that a small hurt
makes us forget an extreme pleasure. Choler is indeed the more ardent, but it
is not of durance: If ^it turn not into hatred, the effects thereof are not to
be dreaded; it is more sudden violence, and to express its nature, we must say,
that it may well do an ill action, but it cannot conceive a mischievous design.
Novissima omnium cupido gloriae exuitur. Tacit. in Agrie.
The desire of glory is an eternal Passion; Age which weakneth all other,
makes this the stronger; and this malady seems to have no cure but death; yet
ill success will ^ure it; and the loss of two or three bat^els will turn it
into Melancholy. Hannibal after his defeat, fed no more upon honor. ^f he went
from Kingdom to Kingdom to ^olicit Princes to form a party against ^he Romans,
he was led thereunto rather ^y despair, than by ambition; and this un^ortunate
Commander sought not so much ^he increase of Glory, as the preservation ^f his
Life. I know that Marius was haugh^y after his Defeat, and that being Prisoner,
^e aspired to be Consul; his humor chan^ed not with his condition; whilst in
I^ons, he dreamed of Diadems, and when ^e had lost his liberty, he yet
continued his design of oppressing the liberty of the Republic, but this
Passion was sustained by another; when he rallied his Troops to bring them
again unto the Battle; he was not so much edged on by Glory, as by despite,
and who could have seen too within his heart, would have found there more of
choler than of courage, more of hatred, than of ambition.

This Passion subsists only of Hope, and when Fortune turns her back, it
becomes fearful. Alexander would have been contented with Greece, if he had
found any resistance in Persia; one bad success would have taught him to have
bounded his desires. That great heart to which the world seemed too little,
would have confined it^ self within his Fathers dominions, had not so many
happy victories, which did even outdo hope, blown up his Ambition, and
promised him the Conquest of the whole Earth.

The fear of death is a Passion only belonging to the Vulgar; more generous
people set it at naught; the more effeminat^ sort defend themselves from it
only out of hope, which is the faithful Companion of the unfortunate. And when
the face of mischief enforces her to abandon them, ^he is succeeded by
Despair, which in its effects exceeds the firmest Constancy of Philosophers.
All these reasons oblige me to quit Plato's Opinion, that I may examine those
with which Aristotle defends his. For he seems in some of his Writings, to
maintain, that hatred is the most violent Passion wherewith we are transported.
In effect Choler which but now seemed so ^readful unto us, is but a disposition
to ^atred, and she cannot arrive at her malice ^nless nourished by suspicions,
fomented ^y evil speeches, and entertained by pro^ess of time; but when she is
once changed unto hatred, there is no evil which she is ^ot capable of. Her
residence is in the ^eart, as well as is that of Love, and seated ^ a Throne
belongs to Love, she gives out ^er Orders as a Sovereign, and employeth ^ other
Passions to satisfy her fury; choler ^urnisheth her with Weapons, Boldness
^ghts in her behalf, Hope promises her ^ood success, and Despair gives her
often ^imes the Victory; but that which passes ^ belief is, she gathers
strength from Love, ^ough it be her Enemy, and by an effect which does
sufficiently witness her power, ^e enforces the mildest of all Passions, ^ be
subservient to her detestable designs. she imitateth her motions, she marches
in her steps, Si quaeris odio misera quem statuas modum imitare amorem Seneca
in Medea.
and misinterpreting her maxims, she will do as much harm, as the other has
done good, and leave as many marks of her Fury, as the other has left of its
goodness. But if it be true that Copies never equal the Original, let hatred do
what she can, she shall never come near the power of Love; and since she is
ruled by Love, Love will always have the advantage over her.

There have also been some Philosophers, who have not been of Aristotle's
Opinion, and who attributing more to Reason than to his Authority, have
persuaded themselves that Jelousie is the most violent of all Passions; and
certainly it is to be granted, that if this Opinion be not the truest, it is at
least the most specious; for Jealousy is composed of Love and Hatred. And as
contraries cannot lodge or habit together, without fighting, it must
necessarily follow, that these two enemy-Passions make wa^ one upon another,
and that all other that are subject unto them take up arms to defend their
interests, in so much as a jealous man finds himself seized on by Fear, and
Audacity, by Hope and Despair, by Joy and Sadness, because he is struck with
Love and hatred; likewise the Holy Scripture, the very 'simplicity whereof is
eloquent, not finding any thing that can express the fury of Jealousy, Fortis
ut mors dilectio, dura sicut infernus aemulatio. Caur. Cant.
goes to seek out Death amongst the Sepulchers, and Hell in the Bowels of the
earth, to give us a Picture thereof; according to this maxim we must conclude
that the jealous are the damned of this world, and that the Passion which
torments them is a punishment which equals that of the Devils. After the
authority of Scripture, a man must be very rash to oppose this opinion, which
it seems all things conspire to make veritable; yet may it be replied upon; and
the very self same reasons which it produces for its defense, may serve to
condemn it; for though Jealousy be a mixture of Love and Hatred, it follows
not that she must be most violent of all our Passions; the very same whereof
she is composed, would not agree together were they not sweetened. And as the
Elements cannot make one and the same Body, unless their qualities be
moderated, so cannot all these Passions form our jealousy unless they be
tempered; and it must necessarily ensue that Love weakens hatred, that joy
moderates Sorrow, and that Hope sweetens Despair. It has been observed that
two Passions taken together, lose their force, and that serving as an Antidote
one against another, they do no mischief; or if they do any, they cure it
again. So in Jealousy Love is the Antidote to Hatred; the jealous man suffers
little harm, because he has many Passions, and he may boast, that by a strange
destiny, he owes his welfare to the number of his Enemies.

But since after having worsted a Falsehood a Truth must be established, let us
say that according to our principles this question is not hard to resolve; for
as we acknowledge but one passion, which is Love, and that all the rest are but
effects of her producing, we are bound to confess, that they borrow all their
efficacy from their Cause; and that they have no other violence than what is
hers. Love is a Sovereign which imprints his qualities in his Subjects; a
Captain which imparts part of his Courage to his Soldiers; and it is a Primum
Mobile which bears about all the other heavens by its Impetuosity; insomuch as
Morality ought only endeavor how to govern Love; for when this Passion shall
be handsomely ruled, all other will imitate her. And he knows well how to love,
or how to love well, shall have no evil desires, nor vain hopes to moderate.

The FIFTH DISCOURSE. Whether there were any Passions in the state of
Innocence, and whether they were of the same nature as are ours?
It Is so long since we lost our Innocence, as there remains nothing unto us but
a weak Idaea thereof; and did not Divine Justice punish the Fathers fault in
the Children, we should likewise have lost the Sorrow for it. Every one
describes the felicity of that state according to his Imagination; methinks a
man may say that as many as speak thereof, guide themselves according to their
inclinations; and that they place there, such pleasures as they are acquainted
with, and do most desire. Some say the whole earth was one Paradise; that of
the Seasons, whereof our years are composed, there was only Autumn, and the
Spring: that all Trees had the property of Orange trees, and that they were at
all times loaded with leaves, flowers, and fruit; others persuade themselves
that no wind blew there, but the South-west; and that the ground uncultivated
prevented our need, and brought forth all things. I think that without
maintaining these Opinions a man may say, that in this happy condition bad was
not mingled with good, and that the qualities of the Elements were so well
tempered, as that man did thereby receive all contentment; and felt no
Displeasure. He had no disorders to reform; no enemies to fight withal, nor
mischiefs to eschew; all creatures conspired toward his felicity; the beasts
bare respect unto his person; and it may be that even those which remained in
the Forests were not wild; as the Earth bare no Thorns, and all the parts
thereof were fruitful and pleasing, so had not the Heavens any malign
influences, and that Constellation which dispenses Life and Death in nature,
had no aspect which was not innocent, and favorable. If there be so little
certainty touching the state of man, there is no more assurance for what
regards his person; we argue according to our understandings, and as in the
first ages Idols were made of all particulars; every one shapes out a felicity
for Adam, and gives him all the advantages that may be imagined.

Amongst so many Opinions or Errors, I see nothing more consonant to reason
then that which Saint Augustine writes concerning this; Absit enim ut illa
beatitudo ut possit aut in loco illo non habere quod vellet, aut in suo corpore
vel animo sentire quod nollet. August.
for though he determine nothing in particular, he resolves so well for the
general, as there is none that appeals from his Opinion.

Though we cannot describe (says he) neither the beauty of the place, where
man made his residence, nor the advantages of his mind and body, we are bound
^o believe he found in his habitation, whatsoever he could wish; and that he
felt nothing in his body which could incommodiate him. His constitution was
excellent, his health was unalterable, and if time could weaken it, he
prevented that mischief, by making use of the tree of life, which repairing his
forces, furnished him with new vigor. He was immortal, not by Nature, but by
Grace; and he knew that ^in could not bereave him of Life, without making him
lose his Innocence. His Soul was no less happily constituted than was his Body;
for besides that he was infused with all Sciences, that he knew all the Secrets
of Nature, and that he was not ignorant of any thing which could contribute to
his Felicity; his Memory was happy, his will had always good Inclinations, his
Affections were regulated; and though he were not insensible, he was of so
equal a temper, as nothing could trouble his repose. The Passions, which by
their violence, do anticipate Reason, waited his Directions, and never showed
themselves till they had received Commandment from him. In fine, his Passions
were no less natural than are ours, but they were more tractable; and as his
Constitution made him capable of all our motions, original Justice exempted him
from all our Disorders. I know not whether I fall foul on the opinion of
Divines, but forasmuch as a man may see in this darkness, I think I injure not
the Truth; for if man as being composed of a Body was Mortal, and as being
honored with original Grace, Immortal, methinks one may consequently infer,
that not being a pure Spirit, he had Passions, but that being sanctified in all
the faculties of his Soul, all his Passions were innocent. To give all the
force that is requisite to this Assertion, we must enlarge its Principle, and
prove with Saint Augustine, that man might die, losing Original Justice; and
that Immortality was rather a Grace from Heaven than a property of his Nature;
for if he had been truly immortal, he had needed no sustenance, and if death
had not been natural unto him, he had needed no privilege to have secured him
from it; since he did eat to preserve Life, it follows he might lose it; and
since he was obliged to defend himself against old age, by the means of a
miraculous fruit, it follows necessarily, he might die, and that his Life as
well as ours needed remedies against Death. I confess that they being better
than are ours, he repaired his strength more advantageously, and that by
prolonging the course of his Life, they kept the hour of his Death farther off;
I affirm likewise that they kept away corruption from his Body, and that they
kept him in so perfect a health, as that it could not be altered; but then they
must likewise grant me, that if man had not used these remedies, his natural
heat had consumed his Humidum Radicale; and that old age succeeding this
Disorder, he must inevitably have died. All these Maxims are to serve, as
Saint Augustine is obliged to confess, that if the use of the tree of life were
permitted unto us in the condition wherein we are, Nec enim corpus ejus tale
erat quod dissolvi impossible videretur, sed gustus arboris vitae corruptionem
corporis prohibebat. Denique etiam post peccatum potuit indissolubilis manner,
si modo permissum esset ei edere de arbore vitae, Aug. l. 1 quaest. novi and
veteris testam. quaest. 19.
death would no longer domineer in the world, and that man, sinful as he is,
would not cease to be immortal. If then Adam were capable of death, because he
had a Body, and if he were incapable thereof because he had Grace, methinks by
like proportion one may say, he had Passions; since his Soul was engaged in a
material Subject, but that they were tractable, for original Justice did
repress their motions, and that in this innocent condition, he had only just
fears and rational desires.

I verily conceive there may be some Passions, the use whereof were interdicted
him, and that though he were capable thereof, he was not therewithal agitated;
because they would have troubled his quiet. I am easily persuaded that all evil
being banished from off the earth, sadness and despair were likewise exempted
from hi^ heart; and that during so high a pitch o^ felicity, reason was not
bound to excit^ such Passions as only belong unto the miserable; but assuredly
I am confident h^ made use of all others, and that thinkin^ upon the Laws that
were imposed upon hi^ by his Sovereign Lord, he was sometimes flattered by
hopes, sometimes astonished by fear, and by them both joined together kept
within his duty. I doubt not likewise but that in the unhappy conference which
our unwise Mother had with the Devil in the shape of a Serpent she was seized
upon by as many Passions as usually People are, who consult upon any important
affairs; that the Devils promises did stir up her hope, that God Almighties
Threats did cause fear in her, and that the loveliness of the forbidden fruit
did irritate her desire. I know not whether some other may imagine this
Dialogue could pass without some dispute, but I know very well that Saint
Augustine (with whom I believe a man cannot be mistaken) does argue thus upon
this subject (...) and that he believes so great a bickering was not made in
the earthly Paradise, without the Woman's making use of all her Passions either
to defend her self, or to suffer her self to be overcome. It Is true, this
authentical man seems to be of another opinion in his Ninth Chapter of the City
of God, but he who shall well examine his Reasons, will find that he endeavors
not so much to exclude Passions from out the soul of Adam, as their disorder,
judging aright that their disorder could not accord with original Justice.
Therefore I am persuaded that man had our agitations in the state of innocence,
and he feared punishment, and hoped for reward; that as he made use of his
Senses, inasmuch as they made up a part of his Body, he also used his Passions,
inasmuch as they were a part of his Soul, and that in brief they did not differ
from ours in nature, but in obedience.

The SIXTH DISCOURSE. Whether there were any Passions in our Savior Christ,
and wherein they differed from ours?
NOt to know that the Son of God was pleased to take upon him our nature, with
all the weakness thereof; and that, set aside ignorance, and sin; (which could
not correspond with the sanctity of his person; In similitudinem carnis
peccati, Paulus.
) he has vouchsafed to bear our miseries, conversing with men in the
likelihood of a sinner, were to be ignorant of all the principles of Christian
Religion. Hence it came that during his term of mortal Life, it behoved him to
preserve himself by nourishment; to repair his strength by rest, to suffer his
Body to sleep; and to use all means which Providence has ordained for these
natural maladies. He was subject to the injuries of time, to the
unseasonableness of seasons. Men have seen him benumbed with Cold, during the
violence of winter, and bedewed with Sweat, during the heat of Summer: the
Elements spared him not, and if they reverenced him as God, they persecuted him
as man. The same Creatures which obeyed his Word, warred against his Body; the
Waves which grew calm at his awaking, had assaulted the ship wherein he was;
Hunger which he had overcome in the De^arts, assailed him in Towns. And upon
the Cross he tasted the Terrors of Death, from which he had delivered Lazarus.
Then as ^assions are the most natural Weaknesses ^f man, he would not exempt
himself from them, and he would have them to be ^s well witnesses of his love
unto us, as as^rances of the truth of his Incarnation. He ^ingled his tears
with those of Magdalen; ^ough by his power he might have remedied her evils, he
would out of compassion resent them. Before the doing of a miracle he would
undergo a weakness, and weep over a dead man, whom he went about to revive; He
suffered sadness, often to seize upon his heart, and by a strange wonder, he
accorded joy with sorrow in his all-blessed soul. In fine, according to the
incounters of his life, he made use of Passions. He taught us that there was
nothing in man which he contemned since he had taken his infirmities upon him,
Ipse dominus in forma servi, vitam agere dignatus humanam adhibuit passiones
ubi adhibendas esse judicavit: neque enim in quo verum erat hominis corpus, and
verus hominis animus, falsus erat hominis affectus, August. Lib. 14. de
civitate dei c. 9.
and that he loved well the nature of man, since he did cherish even the
defects thereof. For to believe that his resentments were but imaginary, is in
my opinion to clash against the mystery of the Incarnation, to give the lie to
truth it self, and (to give Jesus Christ a bootless honor) make us doubt all
the assurances of his love. Since he had a true body he could have no false
Passions; and since he was veritably man, he ought to be veretably afflicted. A
man gannot gainsay this truth without weakening our belief. If it be permitted
to suffer the tears of the Son of God to pass for illusions, one may make his
sorrow pass for Imposturism, and under the pretense of reverency a man may
overthrow the groundwork of our souls welfare. But we must have a care left
whilst we establish the love of the Son of God, we commit no outrage upon his
Greatness, or Omnipotency, and that whilst we allow him Passions, we free them
from their Disorders; for we must not believe that they were unruly, as are
ours, nor that they required all those virtues to tame them as are necessary
for us. He was their absolute Master, and they in their Birth, Progress and
Continuance depended upon his Will. In their Birth, because they never raised
themselves, but by order from him, but always waited that Reason might make
them serve his Designs.

Ours for the most part do surprise us, and are so ready to be moving, that the
wisest men cannot keep back their first motions; they are so given to disorder,
as the ^east occasion sets them on fire; their sleep is so unquiet, as the
least matter will awaken them; they are so given to war, that upon the least
provocation they take up Arms, and make more spoil upon their own Territories,
then would an enemies army do. Their disorder proceeds not so much from their
Objects as from their humor; and it fares with their storms as it does with
those, who being at the bottom of the Sea, mount up again by their proper
motion. But they caused no tempests in Jesus Christ, or if sometimes their
waves went high, they were led on by Reason, which always kept the power to
appease the trouble she had caused. Turbavit semetipsum. Joan. 11.
As their birth depended upon his Will, so made they no Progress or
advancement, but by his permission, and their moving proceeded always from
some reasonable cause.

Men betake themselves to things which merit not their Love, and have often times
strong Passions, for weak and woeful Subjects. Imprudency seeks them in Choler;
and not weighing the difference of faults, they punish a word as rigorously as
they do a Murderer: their ambition is blind, their desires unruly, their
sadness ridiculous; and who shall compare all their Passions with the causes
which produce them, will find them all to be unjust. A Consul made a slave be
eaten by Lampreys for having broken a Glass: A Princes anger caused a Town to
be drowned in the blood of its Inhabitants; and to revenge an injury done to an
Image of Brass or Marble made 7000 men, the lively Image of God, lose their
lives. Sorrow has made Idols to comfort her; Fathers not able to raise again
their dead Children, have deified them; and through an excess of love and
sorrow have built Temples unto them, after they had taken them out of their
Graves. In fine, all the motions of our souls are irrational; we cannot measure
or bound our joy, nor our displeasures; our hatred exceeds our injuries; our
love is more ardent than the subject which sets it on fire, and we ground ^irm
hopes upon perishable things. But the Passions of the Son of God were so
regu^ated, as in their motions a man might observ^ the worth of the subject
which caused them to arise; he was not angry save only ^o revenge the injuries
done unto his father, ^r punish the impieties of those who pro^haned his
Temple; he had no affection ^^ve for those that did deserve it; if he saw ^o
perfection in his friends, he loved such ^s he would place there, and loving
them he ^ade them worthy of his love: he never ^^rrowed save upon great
occasion; and though the cross was a sufficient object of ^rief, I verily
believe his soul was more ^arrowly touched with the horror of our ^s, than with
the shame or cruelty of his ^unishment. Such regulated Passions cea^d when he
pleased, and their continu^ce, was no less subject to his Empire, than was
their Progress.

We are not masters of our Passions; as in their birth they set at naught our
advice, they laugh at our Counsels during their course; they never stay till
they be weary, and we owe not our quiet so much to their Obedience, as to their
Weakness. When they are violent, our care cannot overcome them, and there are
some of them so stif^necked as they will not die, but together with us,
therefore we ought to suppress them in their birth, and to advise with Reason,
whether it be to any purpose to draw Soldiers into the field, who when they
have their Weapons in their hands despise the Authority of their chief
Commander. The beginning of War depends often times upon two Parties, but the end
thereof depends always upon the victory; and he is not easily brought to a
peace, when he finds his Advantage lies in the continuance of War. Tristis est
anima mea usque ad mortem.
All these rules prove false in the Passions of Jesus Christ. He did even
exceed therein when the Subject did deserve it, and though they were chafed,
they becam^ calm, as soon as he would have them so t^ be. Their heat as it was
reasonable, so wa^ it as soon extinguished as kindled, so as joy did
immediately succeed sadness, and on^ might at the same time see pleasingness
take the same place in his countenance, which Choler had possessed.

It is peradventure for this reason that Saint Jerome could not resolve to call
the agitations of the soul of our Savior Jesus Christ, Passions; believing
that to name them as Criminals, was to injure their innocence, and that there
was injustice, in giving the same name to things, the conditions whereof were
so different. But every one knows that qualities change not nature; and that
the Passions of the Son of God were not less natural for being more obedient
than are ours. In my opinion it is a new obligation which we have to his
goodness, that he has not despised our weakness; he will eternally reproach us
if we desire not his glory, since he coveted our welfare; if we fight not
against his enemies, since he has overcome ours; if we shed not tears for
injuries done unto him, since he has shed his blood for our sins. And he will
have just occasion to complain upon our Ingratitude, if our Passions serve not
^o witness our Love to him, since he has ^mployed all his to assure us of his
Charity.

The Second Treatise. Of the disorder of Passions in Man.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the corruption of Nature by Sin.
THough there be many wonderful things in man, which deserve consideration, and
that his qualities witness unto us, Homo Medium quoddam est inter pecora and
Angelos, inferior Angelis, superior pecoribus, habens cum pecoribus
mortalitatem, rationem vero cum Angelis.
the greatness and power of his Creator; there is nothing more remarkable in
him, than his constitution; for he is composed of a body and soul; he in his
person unites Heaven and Earth; and being more monstrous than are the Centaures
in the Fable, he is both Angel and Beast, as the power of God appears in the
uniting of these two, so different parties; his wisdom is no less evidently
seen in the good intelligence they hold; Animal rationale, mortale, August lib
9. de Civitate Dei. cap. 13.
for though they had contrary inclinations, that the one should bow downward
toward the earth whereof it was formed, and that the other should raise it
self up toward heaven from whence it had its original, yet God did so well
temper their desires, and in the diversity of their conditions so straightly
united their wills by original justice, as the soul shared in all contentments
of the body, without any injury to her self, and the body served to all the
designs of the soul, without doing any violence to its self. In this happy
estate, the soul commanded with mildness, the body obeyed with delight, and
whatsoever object presented it self, these two parties did always agree. But
this happiness continued no longer than our first father was obedient to God;
as soon as he listened to the devil, and that enticed by his promises he had
took part with him, his punishment was answerable to his fault, and his
disobedience was punished by a general rebellion; for to boot that his
creatures revolted against him, and that his subjects, that they might serve
Gods justice, became his enemies, the revolt passed from his condition to his
person; the elements divided themselves in his body, and his Body mutinied
against his Soul. This intestine war was the sooner kindled, between these two
parties, for that their peace was not so much an effect of Nature as of Grace;
the hatred which succeeded their love was so much the more violent, for that it
was animated by sin, which being but a mere disorder, causes divisions every
where, and satisfies its own fury in executing the decrees of divine Justice;
so as we must not wonder if the rebellion which man suffers, be so great, since
it takes its rise from two so puissant principles, and that the parties which
compose it are encouraged to the combat by the contrariety of their
inclinations, and by the malice of sin, which does possess them. This mischief
has caused the greatest Saints to sigh. The Apostle of the Gentiles, finding
no remedy for this malady, but death, wished for it as a favor, and as such a
one, made suit for the most rigorous of our punishments; he in his Writings,
Caro enim concupiscit adversus spiritum, spiritus autem adversus carnem. Gal. 5.
has prepared all Christians to this War, and has made them know that a man
cannot hope for peace in this life, since the body made enterprises upon the
soul, and that the soul was obliged evilly to entreat her Body.

From this great disorder the like of our Passions have ensued; for though they
be the offspring of the soul and body, and that being equally produced by
these two parties, they should endeavor their agreement, yet these unnatural
children, augment their division, and according as they hold more of the soul
or the body, take part with the one, or with the other of them, and perform no
act of Obedience wherein there is not somewhat of Rebellion. The concupiscible
appetite does almost always hold intelligence with the body, and the irascible
appetite sides always with the soul. The first engages us in delights, and
keeps us in a shameful Idleness; the second arms us against sorrow, and
encourages us to generous actions; in this continual bickering the soul of man
is never at quiet, and man is constrained to nourish Vipers which do devour him.

Philosophers have indeed found this mischief, but they thought it lay only in
the Will, and not in the Nature of man. They were persuaded, that opinion and
ill breeding caused these disorders, and that as one evil is cured by its
contrary, this might be remedied by wholesome doctrine, and good education. They
founded Academies, wherein they disputed about the Summum bonum. They made
Panegyricks in the behalf of virtue, and Invectives against vice. They
declaimed against the unruliness of Passions; and measuring their abilities by
their desires, they promised victory and triumph to themselves. But not finding
the original of the malady, by consequence they could never light upon the
remedy; amidst the weakness they underwent, and their vain indevours, they were
enforced to accuse nature, and to complain even of that sovereign Power which
has composed man of pieces, which could not be made agree. A glimpse of light
would certainly have rectified them, and a Chapter of Saint Paul's would have
made them know the truth; for since they agreed with us that God cannot be
defective in his workmanship, and that he is too just to require things at our
hands which exceed our power, they must have concluded that our disorder was
the punishment of our sin, and that the infirmity which we lament was not an
effect of our nature, but the correction of Gods Justice; by thinking thus they
would have endeavored to appease him whom they had injured, and confessing
their infirmity, they would have implored his assistance; but pride blinded
them, and to make use of Seneca's words against himself, they would rather
accuse providence, than acknowledge their own misery; and rather impute their
disorder to Gods rigor, than to their own offenses. They either could not, or
would not comprehend, what reason taught them before, Quod caro concupiscit
adversus spiritum, non est praeceders naturae hominis institu^i, sed consequens
paena damnati. August lib. de vera Innocentia. cap. 260.
that faith had published by the mouth of Saint Paul and of Saint Augustine,
that the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit is not a condition of
nature, but the punishment of sin. From what has been said it is easy to
infer, that since man is sinful, since his Passions have revolted, since the
soul, which ought to govern them, is darkened, and that the will, which ought to
moderate them, is depraved, he must of necessity have recourse to grace, and
beg that of mercy, which justice has bereaved him of. The same power which
formerly accorded our soul with our body, must now end these differences. If
the condition of this miserable life be such as will not suffer us to enjoy a
perfect peace, we must seek for forces wherewithal to fight; so if we cannot
shun the misfortunes of war, we may hope for the advantages of the victory.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. The Nature alone is not sufficient to rule the Passions
of Man.
THough the Stoics be declared enemies unto Passions, and that they cannot be
judged in a cause wherein they are a party, yet methinks their judgments have
some color of Justice, and that it is with reason that they do mix our
Passions with our Vices. For in the condition whereinto Sin has reduced us,
our apprehensions are no more pure, our nature being corrupted, all the
inclinations thereof must needs be out of order, and the rivers which run from
a polluted Spring must needs be troubled.

I know Philosophers will not agree of this truth, and they never permit us to
accuse Nature of an error, since they take her for their guide, nor that we
dishonor her, all whose motions they esteem so regular. They profess to follow
her in all things, and hold that to live happily, a man must live according to
Nature. The Libertines plead this Maxim, and will excuse their disorders by a
Doctrine which they understand not; for had they studied in the Stoics
Schools, they would find that those Philosophers presuppose that Nature was in
her first purity, and that they took her not for their guide, but for that they
imagined she had preserved her innocence. So banished they from their Sages,
and even from their Disciples all those Affections, which they would have pass
for natural, and by a generous, but a useless endeavor, they would have us to
be as well governed in the state of sin, as in that of Original Justice.

But Christians who have learned by the Holy Scripture, that nature is fallen
from her first purity, are bound to confess, that the Passions have revolted,
and that to bring them again into subjection Reason must be assisted by Grace;
for there is no man, but sees that the understanding is engaged in the Error,
and that it confusedly receives falsehoods and truths: that the will applies it
self more to appearing, than to real good; that her interests are the rules of
her inclinations, and that she loves not that which is good, save that she is
therewithal delighted; that by experience she finds, she has lost much of her
liberty; and that if sin has not taken from her all the love she had to good,
it has left her but weak helps, and useless desires to come by it. As her
forces are but small, to atchieve what is good, she has yet smaller power to
rule her Passions; and though she approve not of their disorders, she knows not
how to remedy them. Often times by a strange misfortune, she foments their
sedition, which she ought to hinder, and that she may not afflict her Subjects,
she becomes guilty of their crimes. The Christian Philosopher is therefore
bound to employ aid from Heaven to overcome these Rebels, and confessing that
his Reason is weakened, he must look for help from without himself, and beg
favor from him who has permitted the unruliness of Nature for the punishment
of Sin.

But that we may not be said to be enemies to the greatness of man, and that we
make his disaster greater than it is, we confess that nature is good in her
foundation, and that very sin is an excellent proof thereof; for as it is but a
Non Ens, it cannot subsist by it self, for its preservation it must needs
fasten it self to some subject that may uphold it, and which may impart unto it
part of its essence. So evil is ingraffed upon good, and sin is upholden by
nature; which is much endamaged by so evil a guest, but does not therefore lose
all the advantages thereof. For since she conserves her own being, she must
likewise conserve unto her self some goodness, since she is not annihilated for
being become criminal, she must amidst her misery enjoy some good fortune, and
amidst her faultiness some tincture of innocence must remain. And this is it
which Saint Augustine affirms in as learned as eloquent terms. Cujus recte
vituperatur vitium procul dubio Natura laudatur: nam recte vitii vituperatio
est, quod illo de honestatur natura laudabilis. August. lib. 12. de Civitate
Dei. cap. 1.
The being of man is certainly praised, though the sin thereof be blamed, and
no better reason can be given, for the blaming of sin, than by making it appear
that by the contagion thereof, it dishonors what was honorable by nature.
If we consider her then in her groundwork or foundation, she has lost nothing
of her goodness; but if we look upon her, under the tyranny of sin, she has
almost lost her use, and she can make no more use of her faculties, unless
freed from the enemy which possesses her; methinks she may be compared to the
birds that are taken in nets; they have wings but cannot fly, they love liberty
but cannot regain it. So men in the state of sin, have good inclinations, but
they cannot pursue them, they have good designs but cannot put them in
execution; and more unfortunate than the aforenamed Birds they love their
prison, and agree with the Tyrant that does persecute them. In this sad
condition, they have need of Grace to comfort them, and to strengthen them, if
not totally to free them from the enemy which pursues them, at least to give
them liberty of operating, and to put them into a capacity of practicing
virtue, of contesting with vice, and of ruling their Passions.

Natura humana etiamsi in illa integritate in qua condita est permaneret, nullo
modo seipsam creatote suo non adjuvant servaret. Cum ergo sine Dei gratia
salutem non posset custodire guam accepit, quomodo sine Dei gratia posset
reparare quam perdidit? Aug. lib. De vera Innocentia, c. 337.
This necessity which we impose upon man of receiving Grace, ought not to appear
so harsh, since even before his disorder he stood in need of a foreign
succor; and that in his natural purity, he could not avoid sin without a
supernatural aid. For he is so composed, that in all his motions he is forced
to have recourse unto God; and since he is his Image, he cannot operate but by
his Spirit. Though humane Nature (says Saint Augustine) had continued in the
integrity wherein God created it, yet could it not have preserved it self
against Sin without Grace; and drawing a consequence from this first truth, he
with a great deal of reason adds; since man without Grace, could not preserve
the purity which he had received; how can he without the same recover the
purity which he has lost? he must then resolve to submit himself to his
Creator, if he will assubject his Passions; and he must become pious if he will
be reasonable. For ought there to be any relation between our welfare and our
loss? Passions did not revolt against the understanding till that had revolted
against God: there is reason to believe they will never obey the underdanding,
till that be obedient to God; and as our mischief has taken ^ts rise from our
rebellion, our good must take its beginning from our assubjection.

If profane Philosophers object unto us, that Reason was in vain allowed us to
moderate our Passions, if she have no power ^ver them; and that nature is a
useless guide ^f she her self have need of a Conductor, ^e must satisfy them
by experience, and ^each them without the holy Scripture, that ^here are
disorders in man which Reason a^one cannot regulate, and that we are subject
unto maladies, which Nature without ^race cannot cure.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. That the disorder of our Passions considered, Grace is
requisite to the Government thereof.
THose who are instructed in the mysteries of Christian Religion, confess that
the grace which Jesus Christ has merited for us, does infinitely surpass that
grace which Adam by his fall deprived us of. The advantages thereof are such,
as do exceed all our desires; and the most ambitious of mankind, could never
have wished for the good which we hope for thereby. For to boot that we are
thereby raised to a pitch far above our condition, and that we are thereby
promised an happiness equal to that of the Angels, we have Jesus Christ thereby
given us for our Head* and we are thereby so straightly joined unto him, as
that his Father is bound to admit us for his children. But all these
priviledge^ regard rather the future than the present. And though we have the
pledges of these gracious promises, we do not as yet enjoy all the effects
thereof. The grace which purchases this right for us, resides in the depth of
our soul, the which she sanctifies, leaving the body engaged in sin. She
begins the work of our salvation, but does not finish it; she divides the two
parts whereof man is composed, and giving strength unto the Spirit, she leaves
the flesh in its weakness. But by a stranger miracle she parts the soul from
the Spirit, and works a division in their unity, for to take her aright; it is
only the superior part of the soul which does fully resent the effects of
Grace, and which in Baptism receives the virtue of that divine character which
gives us right to Heaven, as to our inheritance. Hence it is that one Apostle
terms us but imperfect workmanship, and the beginning of a new creature. We
belong unto Jesus Christ, only for what belongs unto the Soul. Ut simus initium
aliquod Creaturae ejus* Iac. 1.
He is the Father only of this no^le part which he has enriched with his
Merits; but the other part, which is engaged in the Body, and which by an
unfortunate necessity, sees it self bound to ani^ate the disorders, and to
foment the ^assions thereof, is not altogether delivered from the tyranny of
sin; she groaneth under the weight of her Iron; and this glorious Captive, is
constrained to be wail the rigor of her servitude, whilst her Sister enjoys
the sweets of liberty. Concupiscentia carnis in baptismo dimittitur, non ut non
sit, sed ut in peccatum, nonimputetur non autem ei substantialiter manet, sicut
aliquod corpus aut spiritus, sed affectio quaedam est malae qualitatis, sicut
languor. Aug. l. 1. De Nupt. and concupiscent. c. 25.
For as Saint Augustine teaches us, Baptism takes not away Concupiscence, but
does moderate it; and notwithstanding any strength that it gives unto our
soul, it leaves a kind of languishment, whereof the soul cannot be cured till
in glory. It Is true that this weakness or defection is not a sin; and though it
be the Springhead from whence all the rest do derive, it cannot make us
blameable, unless when by reason of our remissness we follow the motions
thereof. And it cannot be said with honor to our Soul, that this disorder is
in our Body, and that the Soul is not affected therewithal, save only out of
pity, Non enim caro sine anima concupiscit, quamvis caro concupiscere dicatur,
quia carnaliter anima concupiscit. Aug lib. De perfectione bominis, c. 17.
or infected but by contagion: for besides that original sin, (whereof this
misgovernment is an effect) abides in her substance, all the world knows
that the body is capable of operating by its self, and that necessarily the
soul which animates it, must be that which makes it revolt; and that that which
gives it life, must give it irregular motions and desires. It Is she that
raises the flesh against the Spirit, and which, as not being entirely possessed
by grace, does obey sin. It Is she that awakens Passions; it is she who through a
strange infatuation, or blindness, affords them weapons wherewithal to hurt her
self, and who excites the sedition wherewithal to trouble her tranquillity. This
is Saint Augustines Doctrine; and if we had not so great a Doctor for our
warranty, all Philosophy would serve us for caution, since according to the
principles thereof we must believe, that the body does nothing without the
soul, and that even then when the body seems to undertake any thing maugre the
soul, it is effected by the succor which the body receives from the soul.
Insomuch as she is the rise of the evil, and without reason she complains of
the bodies revolt, since she is the chief therein, and that of all the faults
which she imputes to the body, the body is not the Author, but only the
Confederate.

Now as the Passions reside in that part of the soul which is infected by sin,
we must not wonder if they rebel, since their Mother is disobedient. And we
must not once think they should be stifled by Grace, since she suffers the very
power which produces them, to remain in rebellion. All that a man can wish for
in her guidance, is that she may moderate their aptness to rage, that she
suppress their violence, and that she prevent their first motions. This is one
of her chief employments; for when she has obliged the Understanding to know
God, and the Will to love him, she enlarges her care to the inferior part of
the Soul, and endeavors to calm the Passions thereof. She goes not about to
destroy them, because she very well knows, it is a work reserved for glory; but
she employeth all her forces to regulate them; as she makes good use of sin, to
humble her she wisely makes use of their revolt to exercise us. She propounds
unto them Objects of Innocence to make them be serviceable to her virtue: and
makes them (as Saint Paul says) Ministers of Justice; for Christian Humility
is an enemy to the vanity of the Stoics; and knowing very well that we are not
Angels, but men, she does not in vain endeavor to destroy one part of us, but
she obliges us to make advantage of our defaults, and to manage our Passions
so dexterously, a^ that they may obey Reason, or that they wage not war against
her, save only so far a^ she may obtain the victory. I should injur^ this
Imagination, if I should render it i^ other words, than does Saint Augustine.
We consider not in a pious man whether he be offended or not, In disciplina
nostra non tam quaeritur utrum pius animus irascatur sed quare irascatur, ^ec
utrum sit triftis sed unde sit tristis; nec utrum timeat, sed quid timeat;
irasci enim peccanti ut corrigatur, contristari pro afflicto^ liberetur, ti^ere
periclitanti n^ pereat, nescio utrum q^^qu^m sana considera ^o^e reprehenda^.
Aug l. 9. De Civ. Dei. c. 5.
we weigh not the measure of his sorrow, but the Subject. And we labor not so
much to know whether he be afraid, as to know why. For if we be angry with a
Sinner, intending so to correct him; if we afflict our selves with one that is
in misery, out of an intention of comforting him, and if through fear we divert
a man from the mischief he was about to do unto himself, I do not believe there
is any so severe Judge as will condemn so useful Passions; and he must
necessarily want judgment, did he not defend so harmless Affections.

Their excess is then only blameable, and Reason assisted by Grace ought to
employ all her industry to moderate them. But because concupiscence is the
Springhead from whence they derive, Reason must endeavor to dry it up, and use
her uttermost means to obviate the wicked effects thereof, by stifling the
cause which produces them. The Enemy, which we undertake, is born with us, he
draws his forces from ours, he grows greater as we do, and weakens as we grow
old* We have this of obligation to old age, that it takes from the vigor of
concupiscence, by diminishing our bodily strength, and that by leading us to
death, it likewise leads this Rebel insensibly thither. We must
notwithstanding leave all for age to do; in a business which so much imports
our salvation, we ought sooner to begin a war, which ends not but with our
life, and diminish our own forces, thereby to weaken those of the enemy. You
are born (says Saint Augustine) with concupiscence; take heed lest by giving
him seconds through your negligence, Cum concupiscentia natus es ut eam vincas,
nolo tibi hosts adero, vincere cum quo natus es, ad studium vitae hujus cum
illo venisti, congredere cum eo qui tecum processit. Aug. in Psalm. 57.
you raise not new enemies against you; remember you have entered the course of
this life accompanied with her, and that your honor is concerned in making her
die before you, who was born with you.

This victory is rather to be wished for, than hoped for; you will not find a
Saint who has destroyed this Monster, but at the cost of their life; for
though they withstand concupiscence, that they oppose the desires thereof, and
that they mind not her motions, save how to hinder her, yet in this combat,
they are sometimes conquered; their advantages are not pure, and their best
successes are mingled with some disgraces. To kill this enemy, they must die,
and they are necessitated to wish their own death that they may hasten the like
of this their enemy. Non concupiscere omnino perfecti est, post concupiscentias
suas non ire pugnantis est, luctan is est, laborantis est, ub^ fervet pugna,
qua^e desperetur victoria, quando erit victoria, quando absorbebitur mors. Aug.
De verb. Apost. sermon. 5.
Perfection (as Saint Augustine observes) consists in having no concupiscence;
not to follow her is to fight against her. Nevertheless by continuance of
courage one may hope for victory, but certainly it cannot be obtained, but when
death is happily consummated by life in the Kingdom of Glory. Hence I infer,
that since Grace cannot extinguish Concupiscence, she cannot ruin Passions,
and that all the assistance that man can hope for from Grace, is so handsomely
to manage Passions, as that they may defend virtue and oppugn vice.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. That opinions, and the senses do cause the disorder of
our Passions.
THough sin be the original of all our mischief, and that all the miseries we
undergo are the punishments for our faults; we seem to take pleasure in
increasing them by our evil guidance, and that we invent every day new
penalties, to which divine Justice had not condemned us; we are not contented
to know our Passions are revolted, and that without the assistance of Grace,
Reason cannot regulate them; we nourish their disorder, and to make them the
more insolent, we admit of Opinions which raise them up at their pleasure. For
of a thousand Passions which are raised in our soul, there are not any two that
take truth for their guide; and the evil which they apprehend, or the good
which they desire, appear rather so to be, than that they are so indeed. To
mend this disorder, we must take cognizance of opinion, mark her birth and
progress. Opinion is not so much a judgment of the understanding, as of the
Imaginations, whereby she does either approve of, or condemn things which the
senses represent unto her. This is the most usual evil of our Life, and if it
were as constant as it is common, our condition would be very sad; but it
changes at every moment, that which is the cause of its birth, causes
likewise the death thereof. And Imagination forsakes it with as much ease as
she gave it entertainment. It takes its rise from our senses, and from the
reports of the world, so as it is no marvel if the best grounded opinion cannot
subsist long, since the foundations thereof are so bad; for our senses are
liars, and like enchanted glasses, they present disguised Objects unto us.
Their Reports are seldom uninteressed; and as they fasten themselves to
objects, they endeavor to engage Imagination.

When I consider the soul as a Prisoner in the body, I bewail her condition,
and I wonder not if she so often takes falsehood for truth, because it enters by
the gate of the senses; this divine Spirit is enclosed in the body, not having
any other cognizance save what she borrows either from the Eyes or the Ears
thereof; and these two senses which by nature seem so particularly appropriated
to knowledge are such deceivers, as their devices are for the most part but
impostures; blindness is to be preferred before their false Lights, and they
had better leave us in our ignorance than help us to such malignant and so
doubtful knowledge. They consider only the appearances of things; they stop at
accidents, their weakness cannot penetrate into substances; they are like the
Sun, and as they take all their light from him, they endeavor to imitate him
in their actions. Every one thinks that this goodly Planet is extremely useful
to us when it comes about our Horizon; and that it affords those beauties to
nature which darkness had bereft it of. But the Platonicks have found that the
advantage we receive thereby, equals not the prejudice it brings along with
it; for when it discovers the earth unto us, it hides the Heavens from us; when
it exposes Lilies and Roses to our sight, it hinders us from seeing the Stars,
and takes from us the sight of the most beautiful part of the world. So the
senses take from us the cognizance of divine things to furnish us with the like
of what is humane. They make us only see the appearances of objects, and hide
their truth from us. We remain ignorant under these bad Masters, and our
Imagination being informed but by their reports, we can only conceive false
opinions.

I find therefore that Nature is more severe unto us than is Religion, and that
it is much more difficult to be rational than to believe aright; for though the
truths which Religion proposes unto us, are of so high a nature as our
understanding cannot comprehend them, though she demand of us a blind
obedience, and that to believe her mysteries, we must subdue our Reason, and
give the Lie to all our Senses; yet this commandment is not injurious; If she
take from us our liberty, she preserves our honor, she frees our understanding
from the tyranny of our senses, she submits it to the legitimate Empire of the
supreme Intelligence, which she illustrates unto us by her light; she takes us
from earth, that she may raise us up to Heaven, and takes not from us the use
of Reason, save only to make us acquire the merit of Faith. But Nature engaging
our soul in our body, makes her a slave to our senses, and obliges her in her
noblest operations, to consult with those that are blind; and to draw her light
from out their darkness. Hence it is that all our knowledge is full of error,
and that truth is never without falsehood, that opinions are uncertain, and that
our Passions which obey them, are always out of order.

The worlds report is no surer a Guide; and those who listen thereunto, are
likely never to enjoy true rest; for this rumor is nothing else but the
opinion of the people, which is not the truer for being the more common. That
which seems to authorize it does condemn it; and nothing ought to make it
more suspected than the great number of its partakers. The nature of man is not
so well regulated, as that the best things be those that please most people;
ill opinions, as well as good ones, ground themselves upon the number of their
approvers; and when we would side with any opinions, we ought not to number,
but to weigh the Votes. The common people who gape after liberty, delight to
live in servitude, never make use of Judgment, and in worldly affairs, which of
all others ought to be the most free, they are rather led by Example than by
Reason; they follow those who go before, and not examining their Opinions, they
embrace, they defend them; for after having recived them, they desire to
divulge them; as in factions, they endeavor to engage others on their Party,
and to make their malady prove contagious. In so much as Seneca's Maxim proves
true, That man is not only failing to himself, Nemo sibi tantum errat, sed
aliis erroris causa and author est. De vita beata, c. 1.
but unto others, and that he communicates his errors to all those that come
nigh him. When our Imagination is filled with ill Opinions, she exciteth a
thousand disorders in the inferior part of our soul, and raises up Passions
according to her pleasure; for being blind, they cannot discern whether the
good or bad which is proposed to them, be only likely or true; and abused by
the Imagination, whose Empire they reverence, they either draw nearer unto, or
fly further from objects; their blindness serves them for excuse, and they lay
their faults upon that has deceived them. But to prevent this disorder, the
understanding must keep it self in its authority, it must assubject Imagination
to its Laws; it must take heed lest opinion endeavor to establish her self,
and must consult with Reason to defend it self against Error and Falsehood;
thus will Passions always be peaceable, and their motions being regulated, they
will be serviceable unto virtue.

The FIFTH DISCOURSE. That there is more disorder in the passions of man, than
in those of Beasts.
BEfore we resolve this question, we must discuss another, and examine whether
beasts be capable of these motions which we call Passions. For as our
Adversaries confound them with vices, and as they will have all the affections
of the inferior part of our soul to be criminal; they hold that beasts are
exempt from them, and that having no freedom or liberty, one cannot impute unto
them either Virtue, or Sin. That they are led on by an Instinct which cannot
err, and if sometimes they seem to do amiss, we must attribute it to
providence, which disordereth them for our punishment, or which suffers their
unruliness, to put us in mind of our wickedness; it is therefore that their
motions serve for plagues to all people, and that the Infidels took counsel by
the flying of Birds, and the Entrails of Victims, that they might know what was
to come, or what Heaven had decreed. But though Beasts be exempt from sin, and
that they owe their innocence to their servitude, they are not notwithstanding
insensible. All Philosophers acknowledge they have inclinations, and aversions,
and that according as objects give against their eyes or ears, they excite
desire or fear in their Imaginations. In effect, the nethermost part of our
soul has such correspondency with our senses, as that she borrows her name
from them, and is called sensitive; insomuch, as it is almost impossible, but
that any thing that enters by those passages, with any contentment or
detestation, should cause either pleasure, or pain in the soul. As beasts have
these two faculties, which give them feeling and life; we must necessarily
conclude, That they have Passions, that they approach to what is good, out of
desire, and shun what is evil, out of dislike; that they taste the one with
joy, and suffer the other with sorrow. This reason is confirmed by examples;
for we see every day how Horses are brought to manage through the fear of
punishment, that the Spur quickens their memory, that the noise of Trumpets
puts them in good humor, and that very hurts do animate their courage; Bulls
fight for glory, and joining craft with strenth, dispute as hotly for the
^eading of an Herd, as Princes do for the ^onquest of a Kingdom: Lions in their
^ighting covet not so much revenge as honor; when they see their enemy on the
^round, their choler is appeased, and having taken up Arms only for glories
sake, they ^ontent themselves with this advantage, and gives life to what
yields the victory. ^n fine, they are netled as well by jealousy, as by love,
they love faithfulness, punish Adultery, and wash this fault in the blood of
the guilty. It cannot then be doubted, but that beasts have Passions, and that
they are agitated with those furious motions which trouble our quiet; but the
difficulty is to know, whether theirs or ours be more violent, and whether they
or we be less regulated in our motions.

Truth it self obliges us to confess, that our advantages are prejudicial to
us, and that when very Reason becomes a slave unto our senses, it serves only
to make our affections more unreasonable. Beasts apprehend not evil, but when
it is nigh at hand; they discern not what is to come, and do not much remember
what is past; the present only can make them unhappy. But men go about to find
out casualties before they happen, they seem to have a design to hasten their
misadvantages, and that to enlarge Fortunes Empire, they will prevent the evils
to which she has not yet given birth. Nemo tantum praesentibus miser est. Sen.
Epist. 5.
Their fear is employed both in wha^ is pas^, and in what is to come; and as
they tremble at a missfortune which has ceased to be, so they grow pale at a
disaster, which has yet no being.

There are but few objects wherein beas^ are concerned, set aside those things
which are necessary for the maintenance of their life, and you shall find they
consider all other things as indifferent. But men cannot bound their desires,
either ^y reason, or necessity; they extend them too beyond what is useful, and
seek out superfluities to increase their punishments: all their Passions are so
out of order, as that nothing can content them. Quidquid illis congesseris, non
finis cupiditatis erit, sed gradus. Senec^
That which ought to appease them, incenseth them; and that which is given them
to satisfy their hunger, serves often times only to provoke it; so as one may
not be said to lie, if he affirm, That man is only ingenuous to his own loss,
and that he employs the goodness of his wit, only to make himself more
unfortunate, or more faulty: Beasts are stupid, their temperature, which holds
of the Earth, makes them insensible, and happily exempts them from all those
evils, which hurt not the body, save in as much as they have hurt the
Imagination. Bulls must be goaded on, to make them furious; and these heavy
lumps, whose soul is but a body, do little unirritated. Elephants endure all
things at their Masters hands; they think not themselves hurt unless they see
their blood; when the pain is over, their choler is appeased, and they become
as tractable as they were before; but man is of so delicate a constitution, as
the slightest pain offends him; his blood which is of the the nature of fire,
is easily moved, and being once moved, it hurries fury throughout all his
parts. This fury does its greatest outrages about the heart; for she furnishes
it with such Spirits, as oftentimes she causes that to die which gives life to
the whole body, and to revenge her self of a particular injury, she hazzards
the public welfare. To complete this mischief, this Passion is so shy in man,
as the least matter is sufficient to provoke it. A word troubles it, a motion
of the head offends it, silence sets it going; not finding any thing to
entertain it, it devours her own Entrails, and by an excess of despair, turns
all her rage against her self.

In fine, The life of Beasts being uniform, and nature having given them bounds
narrow enough, they have but a few Passions; almost all their motions are
caused out of a fear which possesses them, or a desire wherewith they are
affected. But as the life of man is more mingled, and that in the course
thereof it is subject to a thousand different inconveniences, his Passions rise
up in a crowd; and wheresoever he goes he finds subjects of Choler, and of
Fear, of Pleasure, and of Sorrow. Therefore it is, that the Poets have feigned,
That his soul passes into the body of diverse Creatures, and that taking all
their evil qualities, he uniteth in his person the guile of Serpents, the fury
of Tigers, Choler of Lions; teaching us by this Fiction, That man alone has as
many Passions as have all Beasts put together.

It Is therefore that Philosophers propound them unto us for examples, and that
the Stoics after having raised our nature to such a height of greatness, are
obliged to reduce us to the condition of Beasts, and to place the happiness and
rest of their wiseman in a strange kind of stupidity. Daemon^s autem ro^abant
eum, dicen^es, si ejicis nos hinc, mitte no^ in gre^em porcorum. Mat. 8.
This sense differs not much from that of the proud Spirits, which being
desirous to sit on the Throne of God, demanded leave of Jesus Christ to
withdraw themselves into the bodies of Swine; and that not being able to reign
with the persons of the Deity, they were contented to live with infamous
Beasts. So our proud Stoics, after having raised their wiseman, even unto
Heaven, and given him Titles, unto which the accursed Angels in their rebellion
durst never pretend, they brought him down to the condition of Beasts, and not
able to make him insensible, they endeavored to make him stupid. They accuse
Reason to be the cause of all disorders, they complain of the disadvantages we
have by Nature, and would lose both Memory and Wisdom, that they might neither
foresee the evils that are to come, nor muse of those that are past. This folly
is the punishment of their vanity: Divine Justice has permitted that
understanding which had been their Idol, should become their torment; and that
they should every where divulge, That since they could not live like Gods, they
were resolved to live like Beasts. But not immediating their despair, we are
only to implore aid from Heaven; and acknowledging the weakness of Reason, seek
out another light to conduct us, and borrow new forces to vanquish our
Passions. This is that which Christian Religion has taught us, and that which
we shall examine in the pursuit of this work.

The Third Treatise. Of the Government of Passions.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. That there is nothing more glorious nor more hard to come
by, than the Government of Passions.
NAture by a wise providence has united Difficulty with Glory, and lest
Glorious things might become too common, her pleasure is, they should be hardly
come by. There is nothing of greater luster amongst men than the valor of
Conquerors, all Orators would have been mute, had not battles bin fought, and
victories bin had. But to acquire this title of honor, a man must despise
death, forgo pleasures, overcome troubles; and oftentimes purchase Glory by the
loss of his own life. After the valor of Conquerors, there is nothing more
illustrious than the eloquence of Orators; she rules States without violence,
she governs people without weapons, she works upon their wills with sweetness,
she fights, and obtains Victories without bloodshed; but to arrive at this
great height, one must overcome a thousand difficulties, accord Art and Nature
together, conceive strong thoughts, express them in good words, study the
humor of the People, learn the secret of forcing their liberties, and of
winning their affections. This truth appears evidently in the Subject we
treat of, and every one confesses, there is nothing harder nor yet more
honorable, than for a man to overcome his Passions. For to boot that we are
not assisted by any others in this conflict; that fortune which rules as chief
in all other combats, cannot favor us in this; that men partake not of glory
with us, and that we do at once the office of a common Soldier, and of a
Commander: there is this of anger and some difficulty in it, that we fight
against a part of our selves, that our forces are divided, and that nothing
encourages us in this war, but duty and integrity. Upon other occasions men
are spurred on by honor and envy. Often times choler, when it has to do with
virtue makes up the greatest part of our valor; hope and boldness assist us;
and their forces being united, it is almost impossible to be overcome. But when
we assail our Passions, our Troops are weakened by division; we operate but by
one part of our selves: let virtue or worth animate our Courage with the best
reason she can, our love to our enemies makes us faint-hearted, and we are
afraid of a victory, which must cost us the loss of our delights. For though
our Passions be irregular, and that they trouble our quiet, these cease not to
make up a part of our soul; though their insolency dislike us, we cannot
resolve to tear out our bowels, unless we be assisted by Grace; self-love does
betray us, and we spare rebels because they are our Allies. But that which
augments the difficulty, and which makes the victory more uncertain, is the
power of our enemies; for though they held no intelligence with our soul,
though they should not by their cunning, divide her forces, and though she
should set upon them with all her might, they are of such a nature as they may
be weakened, and yet not overcome; they may be worsted, yet not routed; for they
are so straightly joined with us, as they cannot be parted from us. Their life
is bound up with ours, and by a strange fate, they cannot die unless we die
with them. So as this victory is never entire, and these Rebels are never so
much quelled, but that upon the first occasion they will frame a new Army, and
give us battle again. They are Hydra's, which thrust up as many heads as are
cut off, they are so many Antaeusses who gather strength from their weakness,
and who rise up the stronger, after they have been beaten down; all the
advantage which one can expect upon such unruly subjects, is to clap irons upon
their hands and feet, and leave them no more power than what is requisite for
the service of Reason. We must treat them as we do Gally-slaves, who draw
always their iron Chains after them, and who have only the use of their arms
to row; or if you will deal with them more favorably, you must be well assured
of their fidelity, and remember a Maxim which ^ approve not of save in this
case, that reconciled enemies ought always to be had in suspicion.

If the difficulty which accompanies this combat astonish us, the glory which
ensues thereupon ought to encourage us; for the Heavens behold nothing of more
Illustrious, nor does the Earth bear any thing of more glorious, than a man who
commands his Passions; No Crown is sufficient to adorn his head, all praises
come short of his merit, nothing but Eternity can recompense so exalted a
Virtue; the very shadows thereof are pleasing, and the truth thereof is so
beautiful, that men adore the semblance. We do not revernce Socrates nor Cato,
but for that they had some tincture thereof, nor do we place them in the number
of the Sages, save for that they have triumphed over our weakest Passions. The
glory of these great men is purer than that of Alexander or Pompey; their
Victory never made Widow or Orphan, their Conquests have not laid Kingdoms
waste, their Combats have neither caused the shedding of blood, nor of tears;
and in the gaining of their liberty, they haveneither taken Prisoner, nor made
slave; a man reads all their actions with delight, and in all the course of
their harmless life, one meets not with any objects of horror. They are born
for the worlds good, they have labored for the quiet of all men; there is not
any Nation that malignes their happiness, nor which rejoices at their death.
What honor can a Conqueror hope for, who owes all his greatness to his
Injustice? who is only famous for being criminal; and of whom no mention would
have been made in History, had he not slain Men, burnt Towns, ruined Provinces,
and dispeopled whole Kingdoms.

Those who have only warred with their Passions, enjoy a much more real good,
and these innocent Conquerors receive more glorious Praises from us. We raise
them above all Monarchs; and if they have lived in the Church, we place them in
Heaven when they are dead; we take their actions for examples to our selves, we
borrow their weapons to fight with the enemies which they have vanquished, we
read their lives, as Conquerors do those of the Caesar's, we conform our selves
to their virtue, and we observe the good Maxims which they have held, the
innocent Wiles that they have practiced, and the high designs which they have
undertaken, that we may obtain like famous Victories. Their most-assured
Maxims were, not to trust their own strength, to implore aid from Heaven, and
to hope for more from Grace, than from Nature. If thou will overcome (says
Saint Augustine) presume not upon thy self, Si vis vincere, noli de te
praesumere, sed illi assigna victoriae gloriam qui tibi donat, ut victoriae
referas palmam. Aug. Sermon. 2. De Catechismo.
but give the honor of the victory to him from whom thou expectest the Crown.
Their more ordinary wills were to prevent their Passions, to take from them
their strength, that they might take their courage from them, to set upon them
in their birth, and not to expect till age had made them stronger. Their most
memorable enterprises were to overrun their Enemies grounds, to consider their
countenance, to mark their designs, and to cut off all Objects that could make
them move. These means would succeed happily unto us, if we would make use of
them, and we shall not want assistance; since all the Moral Virtues are so many
faithful Allies; who fight for our liberty, and which furnish us with Weapons
to subdue our Passions.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. That there is no more miserable Slave than he who suffers
himself to be guided by his Passions.
LIberty is so pleasing, and servitude so irksom, as a man may say without fear
of exaggeration, that as the one is the chiefest of all that is good, the other
is the chiefest of all that is bad; the people have fought for the preservation
of the one, and to defend themselves from the other; nature seems to have
persuaded them, it is better to die in liberty, than live in servitude. Our
Ancestors were so tender in this point, as they could not endure the Roman
Authority. They were the last that subjected themselves thereunto, and the
first that freed themselves from it. Had not the Heavens made Julius Caesar of
purpose to conquer them, they had never been slaves to Rome; but yet they had
this of consolation in their missfortune, that under the conduct of that great
Prince, 'they revenged themselves of the Republique that had opposed them, and
made her suffer servitude, which had made them lose their liberty. Though this
evil be so tedious, and the good it deprives us of so pleasing, it is not
comparable to that which the tyranny of Passions causes in us. And it must be
granted, that of as many slaves as are in the world, there is none more
unhappy, than those who obey such cruel Masters.

For the rest are free in their noblest part, Corpus est quod dominio fortuna
tradidit, hoc emit, hoc vendit, interior illa pars mancipio dari non potest.
Sen. Benefic, l. 3. c. 20.
it is only their bodies which groan under the irons, and which feels the rigor
of slavery; their wills are not constrained; when they are commanded any thing
that contradicts their honor, or which offends their Conscience, they may
defend themselves from it by a noble refusal, and buy their liberty with the
loss of their life. But these are slaves even in the bottom of their souls,
they cannot dispose either of their thoughts or their desires; they lose in
this infamous servitude, that which Captives preserve in Prisons, and that
which Tyrants cannot rob their enemies of.

The others may quit their Masters, and leaving their Houses, or their
Territories, go into places of freedom, where they may breath the air of
liberty: But these, though they change Countries, change not condition; they
are slaves under Crowns, they serve their Passions, whilst they command their
Subjects; and whithersoever they go, they drag their chains after them, and
carry their Masters with them. The others long after liberty, and employ their
credit to obtain it: If this fail them, misery opens their understanding, and
necessity, which is the mother of Invention, furnishes them with means to free
themselves; but these wretches have so far lost theirs, as they have not so
much as retained the desire thereof. They love their servitude, they kiss their
Irons, and being strangely blinded, they fear the end of their imprisonment,
and dread their deliverance.

The others have but one Master, and amongst so many mischiefs which afflict
them, they hope to sweeten their captivity, by gaining the favor of him who
commands them; they promise unto themselves, that by their assiduous service,
they may regain their liberty; they flatter themselves in the thought thereof,
and think that a slave who has but one man to content, cannot be always
unhappy: But these have as many masters to serve as Passions to satisfy; Malus
etiamsi regnet, servus est, nec unius hominis, fed quod gravius est, tot
dominorum, quot vitiorum. Aug. l. 4. De Civii Dei, c. 3.
the end of one servitude, is the beginning of another; and when they think
they have escaped a surly government, they fall under an insolent tyranny; for
their change is never advantageous to them: the last Master is always more
cruel than the former: Often times they command all together, and as their
designs do not agree, they divide these unhappy slaves, and force them to
serve their wills, and to tear out their bowels, to obey rather contrary, than
differing Orders. Sometimes ambition and Love unite their flames to devour
them, fear and hope set jointly upon them, sorrow and delight are reconciled
together to afflict them, and one may say, that every Master is a Hangman which
torments them, and that every order they receive, is a new punishment unto
them. They have not one quiet hour, their Passions persecute them day and
night: And these revengeful furies change all the delights of these miserable
men into cruel torments.

What more deplorable thing can there be than to see Alexander possessed by his
ambition, and see him lose his judgment, to satisfy this irregular Passion.
For can one think he was endued with Reason, who began his exploits, Antu putas
sanum qui a Graecia primum cladibus in qua eruditus est, incepit, qui
Lacedaemoniam servire iubet, Athenas tacere. Sen Epist. 94.
by the ruin of Greece, and who more unjust than the Persians, silenced the
Town of Athens, made that of Lacedemon serve, and ruinated the Country, which
(to no purpose) had taught him Philosophy?

This very fury made him overrun the world, commit spoils throughout all
Asia, penetrate the Indies, pass the Seas, be angry with Nature, which by the
limits thereof did bound his conquests, and force him to end his designs,
where the Sun finisheth his course. Who is not affected with pity, to see
Pompey, who drunk with love of a false greatness, undertakes civil and foreign
Wars? Sometimes he passes into Spain to oppress Sertorius, sometimes scoures
the Seas to free them from Pirates, sometimes he flies into Asia, to fight with
Mithridates. He ransacks all the Provinces of that great part of the world;
makes himself Enemies, where he finds none: After so many Fights and Victories,
it is he alone that thinks himself not great enough; and though men give him
that name, he thinks he deserves it not, unless Julius Caesar confess it. Who
has not compassion for this man, who was not so much the Slave, as Martyr of
Ambition? For he prostituted his honor, to get power; he became slave to his
Army, that he might be Master of the Senate; he vowed the destruction of his
Country, to revenge himself of his Son in Law: Seeing no other State, against
which he could exercise his cruelty, he employed it against the Republic, and
would merit the name of Patricide, that he might obtain that of Sovereign. He
never had any motions, save those that Ambition gave him. If he pardoned his
Enemies, 'twas but only out of vainglory; and if he bewailed the death of Cato
and Pompey, it was perhaps for that the honor of his Victory was lessened. All
his thoughts were ambitious. When he saw the Image of Alexander, he wept not,
save only for that he had not yet shed blood enough. Whatsoever offered it self
to his Eyes, awakened his Passions, and Objects which would have taught others
modesty, inspired him with Pride and Insolency. Briefly, Caesar commanded over
his Army, and ambition commanded over Caesar, she had such ^ower over him, as
the foretelling of his death did not make him change his De^ign; and
doubtlesly, he would have an^wered for himself to the Soothsayers, as Agrippina
answered for her Son to the Astrologers, Let him kill me, provided he may reign.

If servitude be so irksom in ambition, it is much more shameful in obscenity.
It must be confessed, That a man who is possessed by this infamous Passion, has
neither Reason nor Liberty, and that being inslaved to Love, he is no more
Master of himself. Did not Cleopatra govern Mark Anthony? might not this
Princess boast her self to have revenged Egypt upon Italy, and to have
subjected the Roman Empire, by putting him under her Laws, who governed it?
This unfortunate man lived only at the pleasure of this stranger, he did
nothing but by her motions; and never did slave labor so much to win the good
will of his Master, as this effeminate Prince, to win the like of his proud
Mistress. He gave all his Charges by her directions, and the best part of the
Roman Empire, groaned under the government of a woman. He durst not overcome in
the batel of Actium, and rather chose to forgo his Army than his Love. He was
the first Commander that abandoned his Soldiers, and who would not make use of
their courage to defeat his Enemy; but what could one expect from a man who had
no more any heart, and who far enough from fighting, could not so much as live,
if parted from Cleopatra. In brief, read the story of all the great ones, and
you will find their Passions have enflamed them, and that in the height of
their fortune they have made use of all the punishments that tyranny could
invent, to afflict those that she oppresses. Therefore ought all men to make
use of Reason and Grace to shun the fury of these insolent Masters, every one
ought to resolve in his particular, rather to lose his life, than his liberty,
and to prefer a glorious death before a shameful servitude. But without coming
to these extremes in this Combat, a will to overcome is sufficient to be
victorious; for God has permitted, that our good fortune depend upon our Will
together with his Grace; and that our Passions should have no further power
over us, than we shall give them, since in effect experience teaches us that
they beat us not but by our own weapons, and that they make us not their
slaves, but by our own consent.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. That to govern Passions, a man must moderate them.
THough Passions be ordained for the service of virtue, and that there is not
any one of them, the use whereof may not be advantageous to us, we must
notwithstanding confess, that we need dexterity to govern them, and that in the
state whereinto sin has reduced our Nature, they cannot be useful to us,
unless moderated; that unhappy Forefather o^ ours, who made us to inherit his
fault, has not left us so pure a being as he had when he received it from God.
The body and soul suffer pain, and as they were both guilty, so are they both
punished. The understanding has its errors, the will her irregular
inclinations, the memory her weakness. The body, which is the Channe^ through
which Original sin passes into the soul, has its misery, and though it be the
less faulty, yet is it the more unfortunate; all that is in it is out of order;
the senses are seduced by Objects, these help to abuse Imagination, which
excites disorders in the inferior part of the soul, and raises Passions, so as
they are no longer in that obedience, wherein Original Justice kept them; and
though they be subject to the Empire of Reason, yet they so mutiny, as they
are not to be brought within the compass of their duty, but by force or
cunning. They are born to obey the understanding, but they easily forget their
condition; and the commerce which they hold with the senses, is the cause why
they oft-times prefer their advises at the commandments of the will. They raise
themselves up with such might, as their natural motions are for the most part
violent They are horses which have more of fury than of force: They are seas
which are oftener troubled than calm. In fine, they are parts of our selves,
which cannot serve the understanding till it has allaied or tamed them.

This ought not to seem strange (...) that know what spoil sin has (...)
nature; and the very Philosopher (...) fess that virtue is an art which (...)
learned, will not find it unjust that the Passions be not obedient, unless
governed by Reason.

To execute so great a design, a man must imitate nature and art, and consider
what means they use to finish their work. Nature which does all by the
Elements, and who of these four bodies composeth all others, never employs them
till she has tempered their qualities. As they cannot suffer together, and
that their natural antipathy engages them to fight: this wise Mother, by
allaing their aversions, appeaseth their differences, and never unites them,
'till she has weakened them. Art, which is not invented so much to perfect
nature, as to imitate her, observes the same Rules, and imploys nothing in her
workmanship, till it be tempered by her industry. Painting would not be so
cried up, had it not found out the secret of reconciling black with white, and
so pacify the natural discord of these two colors, to compose all others
thereof. The riders of the great horse have no service from their horses, till
they have broke them; and that they may be useful, they must be taught to
answer the Bridle and the Spur. Lions were never made use of to draw triumphant
Chariots, till they were tamed; and Elephants bore not Towers upon their backs
in fight, till they were rid of the savage humor which they brought from the
Woods.

All these examples are documents forth government of our Passions, and Reason
ought to imitate nature if she will be advantaged thereby. They mus^ (...) be
employed till moderated; and he who shall think to make them serviceable to
virtue, before he has subjugated them by grace, will engage himself in a
perilous design. In the state of innocence, when they had nothing of unruly in
them, one might make use of them as they were born; they never surprised the
will: As original Justice was as well shed throughout the body, as throughout
the soul: The senses made no false reports and their advices being
uninteressed, they were always conformable to the judgment of Reason. But now,
that all things in man are faulty, that the Body and the Soul are equally
corrupted, that the senses are subject to a thousand illusions, and that
Imagination favors their Disorders; we must have great precaution in the use
of Passions.

The first is to consider, what troubles their revolt has caused in our soul,
and in how many mischiefs these mutiniers have engaged us, when they have only
been led on by our eyes or ears: It Is a piece of wisdom to reap advantage by
our losses, and to become wise at our own cost. The justest choler flies out
sometimes, if not withheld by Reason^ though her motion was lawful in its
bir^^, it becomes criminal in the progress thereof. It turns a good cause into
a bad one; for not having consulted with the superior part of the soul; and
thinking to punish assight fault, it commits a great one. Fear has oft-times
astonished us, for having only listened to the Senses, she makes us look pale
upon a thousand occasions, without any just cause; and sometimes she has
engaged us in real dangers, to make us shun those that were but imaginary. As
then our Passions have deceived us, for our not having asked counsel of our
Reason, we must resolve never to believe them any more, till we have examined,
whether that which they desire, or that which they fear, be reasonable, and
whether the understanding, which sees further than our eyes, cannot discover
the vanity of our hopes or fears.

The second precaution, is, to oblige Reason, to watch always over such
subjects as may excite our Passions, and to consider their nature, and motions,
to the end that she may never be surprised. Harms foreseen hurt but a little,
and we are but seldom astonished at such accidents, against which we are
prepared. A Pilot who sees a storm coming, withdraws into the Haven; or if he
be too far from it, he lanch^th into the deep, and keeps aloof from Coasts, or
Rocks. A Father who knows that his Children are mortal, and that life has no
longer term than what it has pleased God to give, will never take on too much
at their loss. A Prince who considers, that victory depends more upon Fortune
than his Wisdom, and more on Chances than on the Valor of his Soldiers, will
easily be comforted though he has been beaten: But we make not use of our
understanding, and methinks, if our Passions be out of order, Reason ought to
be accused thereof, for not having foreseen the danger, and for not having
prepared our senses against their surprizals.

The third precaution is, to study the nature of such Passions, as we take in
hand to moderate or govern. For some must be rudely dealt withal, and to reduce
them to their duty, severity and violence must be made use of; others will be
flattered, and they must be gently dealt withal to make them obedient to
Reason. Though they be subjects, they are not slaves, and the understanding
which governs them, is rather their Father than their Sovereign. Others would
be cozened, and though Virtue be so generous, she is tied to accommodate
herself to the weakness of Passions, and to make use of wiles, when force will
not prevail. Love is of this nature, we must divert it, not being able to
banish it from out of our hearts, we must lay before it legitimate Objects, and
make it virtuous by an innocent cozenage: Choler would be flattered, and who
thinks to oppose this torrent by making a Dam, has but augmented its Fury.
Fear and Sorrow ought to be rudely dealt withal; and of these two Passions, the
former is so faint-hearted, as it is not to be overcome but by force; and the
second is opinionated, as it is not to be brought within rule, but by
provocation. These means being well observed, the Affections of our soul may be
sweetened. These savage Beasts become domestic, when they have lost their
natural fierceness; Reason makes good use of them, and Virtue shapes no design
which she executes without their mediation.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. That in what condition soever our passions be, they may
be governed by Reason.
THough Nature be so liberal, she cease not to be a good housewife, and to
employ with profit that which she has abundantly produced; all her parts have
their use, and amongst the infinite number of Creatures which do compose the
world, there is not any one which has not its use. Those which do us no
service, contribute to our pleasures; the most beautiful, and most delightful
serve to adorn the world, and the very deformed entertain her variety.

As shadows set off colors, ugliness gives a luster to Beauty; and Monsters
which are the defect of Nature, make her chiefest works and miracles be
esteemed. There is nothing more pernicious than poison; and were not sin
barren, one would take it for one of its production, since it seems to agree
with the other, to make all men die. Yet has it its use; Physic makes
Antidotes thereof, and there are certain sicknesses which cannot be cured but
by prepared poisons; use has turned them into nourishment. And if there have
been Princes whom poison could not kill, Beasts who bear it about in their
bodies, cannot live without it; that which is pernicious to us, is so necessary
to them, as they cannot be berest of it without loss of life. This is that
which makes all Philosophers grant with Saint Augustine, Si Scorpionis venenum
malum esset, prius scorpionem perimeret; ac contra si ei aliquo modo
detrahatur, fine dubitatione interiret, ergo illius corpori malum est amittere
quod nostro malum est recipere, and illi bonum est habere id quo nobis bonum
est cavere. Aug. l. De Moribus, c. 8.
that venom is no evil, since it is natural to Scorpions and Vipers, and that
they die when they lose it, as we do when we take it.

If our Adversaries would have the motions of our Soul; to pass for poisons, or
monsters; this Reason will enforce them to confess, that they are not so
absolutely evil, but that they may be prepared as well as poisons, and
Antidotes made thereof to cure our Maladies; or to continue our health. For
consider them how you please, and give them what countenance you like best to
make them hideous: Reason will always find a way to make use of them: and this
great Steward of our good and bad, can so wisely husband them, that in despite
of sin, which has disordered them, she will draw advantage and glory from them.

If we look upon them in their birth, they are tractable affections, and but of
weak resistance, and which by a little instruction become docile and obedient.
They are children which are afrighted with words, and who for fear of a small
punishment, amend their evil inclinations, and advantage their masters
councils. They are young grafts, which an ill wind has made crooked; but which
are easily set aright with a little care, and which not being yet become
inflexible, will be bowed contrary to their natural inclination. Neither would
the Platonists have the name of the Passions given to these disorders in their
birth; and knowing, that they were easily governed, they were contented to call
them affections, without giving them a more injurious title.

If we consider them when they are grown older, when making use of our
weakness, they have gotten new forces, and of simple Affections are become
violent Passions; we must treat them in order to their proper interests, and
feeding them with hope of pleasure or glory, draw them to what is good, and
divert them from evil. For in their greatest revolt, they reserve always an
inclination to virtue, and an abhorrition to sin; they are only faulty as they
are abused: Take away the Fillet wherewith their eyes are blinded, and that
will suffice to redress their motions, and correct their errors. Sin has not
been able so far to dishonor Nature, but that she has always kept the grounds
of her inclinations; she always loves what is good, and hates evil eternally;
she pursues glory, and shuns infamy; she wishes pleasure, and fears pain; all
her motions are as natural as innocent. The Devil, who very well sees this
disorder, is pernicious to his designs; and that this impression, which is set
on by the hand of God, cannot be defaced, changes our Passions; and not being
able to corrupt them, he endeavors to abuse them; he propounds unto them
appearing good, for what is real; he disguis^^h sin, and puts upon it the Cloak
of Virtue. And as thus hoodwinked they cannot discern falsehood from truth, they
confound evil with good, and by a deplorable misfortune, they love what they
ought to hate, and hate what they ought to love. Their cure consists in
disabusing them; for how firmly soever they be tied to these disguised objects,
they will fly from them as soon as they shall be made to know what is
beautiful, and what is ill favored; and following their first inclinations,
they will abhor their blindness, and will forgo the appearing good to embrace
the true one. We ought to comfort our selves in our misfortune, since that the
nature of Passions is not altogether changed; that since the disobedience of
our Forefathers, and the hatred of his enemy, they retain notwithstanding some
purity; and that in all their disorder, there is more of error, than of malice.

If in fine, we consider them in their extreme violence, and in the condition
wherein they throw about so much smoke and flame, as they darken Reason, and
force her to give over the government of them, it is hard to make good use of
them; for they seem to have changed condition, as having sided with sin, they
deserve to carry her name, and rather to be termed troubles and commotions than
Passions. They are so insolent, as they despise all counsel; instead of taking
law from the understanding, they will give it; and of natural subjects, become
insupportable Tyrants. When the mischief is risen to this height, it is very
hard to remedy it; and one may be said to have made all desperate, through too
long expectation; for Passions will listen no longer, and Reason is so
troubled, as she can prescribe them no further rules; the waves rise up even
unto Heaven; that part of man which ought always to be at quiet, is engaged in
the storm, and had need of others help to appease the troubles she is agitated
withal. Truly I do not believe, any Philosopher dare undertake to cure a man in
this frenzy; remedies will make his malady the worse: There is nothing but
time that can lessen it; and it is to be wished for, that this torrent may find
room enough wherein to extend in waters, and to dissipate the fury thereof. But
when this tempest is appeased, when the Passions are a little calmed, and when
reason has gotten a little light and strength, the evilness of his condition
must be laid before him; he must be made blush for his offense, and these
slavish rebels must be roundly chid; but above all, he must humble himself
before God, enrich himself by his Losses, and become wise at his cost. He ought
also to look, by what part the enemy has entered; what cunning he has used to
exercise sedition, and debauch his subjects; thus we shall be bettered by our
greatest misfortunes: We shall learn by experience, that storms may bring into
the Haven; and that if there be some ways that drown men, there are some which
throw them upon the Bank: But as there is no Sailor, who will run this hazard,
to oblige the Heavens to do a miracle in his behalf, no man ought to expose
himself to this disorder, that he may reap profits thereby; and it is better to
want an uncertain good, than to buy it by an assured loss.

In consideration of these truths, we may affirm our condition is not so
deplorable as those imagine it to be, who will excuse their sin upon their
misery: Since our good fortune is in our own power, and that we sail upon a
Sea, the calm or tempest whereof, depends upon our will; we may shun the Rocks
the Sea hides, assuage the fury of the winds which make it go high, bring ^ow
the waves which it raises, and make a calm succeed a storm; or by a more lucky
application, we may make those Rocks hide their heads, those Seas to bear our
Vessels, and those winds to conduct them. But to ^eave this figurative manner of
speech, let us ^ay, there are no Objects which we may not set at naught, no
opinions which we may not correct, nor no Passions which we may not overcome.
Thus our fortune is at our own disposal, the victory depends upon our own
weapons, our good fortune is fastened to our desire, and a little courage only
requisite to compass all these goods.

The FIFTH DISCOURSE. What means a man must use to moderate his Passions.
AMongst many other means, which Reason may make use of to govern our Passions,
the most ordinary seem to be those, which she has learned from hunting, where
men make use of beasts already tamed to take wild ones; and where to sport
themselves, they use the courage of Dogs, against the rage of Wolves. So may it
seem to be lawful to employ such Passions, as are most submis^ against those
which are most rebellious, and to make use of our reconciled enemies, to
vanquish those which yet war against us. Men oppose joy to sorrow, suppress
fear by hope, moderate delights by the pain which ensues thereupon. Sometimes
also men consider such Passions as produce others. To drain Rivers, men
endeavor to dry up the spring heads from whence they derive; and to destroy
causes that they may ruin their effects. D^fines timere si sperare desieris,
Sen. Ep. 5.
Who cease to hope, cease to fear; who bounds his Desires, bounds his
Hopes; and who covets not riches, will not be disquieted, nor have any fears
for them. Sometimes also a man may set upon that particular Passion which bears
most sway with him, that he may vanquish those that fight under the others
Colors, and the Victory is had by one Blow; by the Generals death the whole
Army is defeated. But though all these be specious means, and that they promise
unto us, either a sound peace or a long Truce, yet are they Deceivers, and make
us undertake things either unjust, impossible; or dangerous. For there is
danger in fortifying one enemy to destroy another, and there is no great
assurance in furnishing a Passion with weapons, which may as well make use of
them to oppose Reason, as in her behalf. It Is unjust to oppose the one against
the other, Cum affectus repercussit affectum, aut metus aut cupiditas aliquid
imperavit non rationis beneficio tunc quievit, sed affectuum infida and mala
pace, Sen. De Ira, l. 1. c. 8.
since they ought to hold intelligence together. For though a Politician be
permitted to make war, that peace may ensue, and to put division amongst such
enemies, whose agreement may prove prejudicial to us, morality is not suffered
to sow discord amongst her Subjects, under a vain hope of according them when
they shall b^ weakened. In fine, to endeavor to choke one Passion, thereby to
overcome the rest which proceed from thence, is to attempt an impossibility:
they may well be moderated, not destroyed; they proceed from the union of our
soul with our body; and to take away their life, the like must be done to man
who produces them. Our Passions are much more intimate to us than are our
members; a man may cut off these when they are infected, he cannot cut off the
others when they are disobedient. Also the greatest part of these advices are
given us by suspected persons; these bad Reasons come from the Stoics school,
who look upon Passions as enemies to our quiet, and who endeavor not to
regulate, but to annihilate them. They are persuaded it fares with them, as
with savage Beasts, which are never so well tamed, but that they always
preserve somewhat of their first fierceness, and that to reduce the soul into
perfect tranquillity, they ought not to be allayed, but destroyed.

To resolve these difficulties, we must remember that Reason is King over
Passions; that their Government is one of her chief employments, and that she
is bound to watch more particularly over those which by their motions carry
others along with them: For as their revolt is followed by an universal
Rebellion, their Obedience seems likewise to cause a general peace, and that
they never acknowledge Reason, but when they reduce together with themselves,
all those Passions which they had raised up.

One may very well sometimes oppose pleasure to grief, hope to fear, and
inclination to aversion, but in this combat Reason must take heed, lest by
weakening one Passion, she add too much strength unto another; and that whilst
she would reduce a Mutinier to obedience, she do not augment the number of
Rebels. When she undertakes these affairs, she must hold the Scales in her
hand; and remember that God (whom she imitateth) does all his Works by weight
and measure; and when he tempers the qualities of the Elements, to the end that
he may agree them, he does no advantage to one whereby another is prejudiced.
We may likewise well assail the Passion that masters us, and which we
acknowledge to be the cause of our disorders: For it is a Familiar which
possesses us; it is a Tyrant which uses not his power, save in order to his
own interest; and who is so much the more dangerous, as that he endeavors to
become welcome. Reason is bound to oppugn him as a public Enemy, and to employ
all her might, if not to destroy him, at least to weaken him.

I see not notwithstanding how she can with security make use of other Passions
to tame him; for they are too near allied unto him, to set upon him; and when
men shall think to make use of them to his destruction, he will have dexterity
enough to make them serve for his own preservation.

But not to leave so dangerous an evil without a remedy, I should think it good
to cut off the objects which nourish it, and to get the upper hand of an enemy,
by starving him, whom he could not overcome come by force. For though our
Passions are born with us, that they borrow their strength from our
constitution; and that those which are the most natural, are hardest to
overcome; yet they draw their nourishment from exterior things; and if they be
not entertained by Objects, they either die or pine away.

Ambition does not greatly torment us in solitude; and when she sees not the
greatness of Towns, the pride of Buildings, the pomp of Triumphs, she forgets
the memory of glory; and this fire not having wherewithal longer to nourish it,
consumes and goes out of it self: Grief and sadness are strengthened in
darkness; her obscure Chambers hung with mourning, conspire with her to afflict
us.

Men who make use thereof, seem to be afraid to forget their sorrow; and that
they would have all things they cast their eye upon, to call to mind their
loss: If we put these sad Objects far from us, Nature will grow weary of
weeping; and though she be irregular, by reason of sin, she will solace her
self when she shall see nothing which entertains her dislike.

What has been said of Sadness and Ambition, may be affirmed of all other
Passions, which are not stubborn, but as being aided by our own cunning; and as
we labor to increase them, so to become more miserable.

The Fourth Treatise. Of the Commerce of Passions with Virtues and Vices.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. That Passions are the Seeds of Virtue.
SInce most men consider but the appearances of things, we must not wonder if
the Stoics have had so many admirers; and if their proud Maxims have been
received with so much approbation and applause: For nothing of more noble or
generous can be imagined, than is their Philosophy, as it appears to be. She
promises to change men into Angels, to raise them above a mortal condition,
and to put storms and thunder under their feet. She boasts to cure them of all
their evils, and to free them from those vexatious disorders, which molest the
Souls tranquillity: all those fair promises have brought forth none effects, and
these proud billows, after having made such noise, are turned to foam.
Certainly we owe thanks to Providence, which has rendered their endeavors
vain; for if they had made good their words, they had deprived us of all those
aids which nature has endowed us withal, to make us virtuous; and the inferior
part of our soul has remained without either exercise or merit; Affectiones
nostrae motus animorum sunt laetitia animi diffusio, tristitia animi
contractio, cupiditas animi progres sio: Diffunderis enim animo cum laetaris,
contraheris animo cum molestaris, progrederis animo cum appetis, fugis animo
cum metuis. Aug. super Joan. Scim. 5.
for the passions are the motions thereof, they carry her whither she minds
to go, and without loosning her from her body, they join her to the Objects
which she looks after, or keep her aloof from those she desires to shun. Joy is
her blooming and displaying, sorrow is her contraction and pain, desire is her
seeking, and fear her eschewing; for when we are merry, our soul dilates it
self, when afflicted, she contracts her self, when we desire, she seems to
advance, and when we fear, she seems to retire, insomuch, as those who will
take the Passions from the soul, take away all her motions, and under color of
rendering her happy, make her unprofitable and unable. I know no rational man
that would purchase felicity at so dear a rate, and I know no true man that
would promise it upon so hard a condition: For if happiness consist in action,
and if to be content, a man must taste the good which he possesses, there is
none but will avow, That Passions are necessary to our soul, and that joy must
perfect the Felicity which desire has begun.

Those who side with the Stoics, will tell us peradventure, That these
Philosophers condemn not such desires as arise from the love of virtue, nor the
joy that accompanies the fruition thereof; but that they blame only those
irregular wishes, that we make every day for Riches and Honor; and that
consequently they blame the vain contentment which their accomplishment brings
us.

This answer weakens their Maxims, and confirms ours; for it admits of
Passions, and only forbids their excess: It admits of desires and hopes, and
only rejects their disorder; and to end all in few words, It heals the malady
of our affections, and does not destroy their nature. But the Stoics were not
so just, and their Philosophy had in it so much of severity, and so little of
reason, as it would have a man seek out virtue, without wishing for it, possess
it without relishing it, and that being as happy as God himself, he should be
void of desire, hope or joy. In brief, it had vowed the death of our Passions,
and yet this proud Sect did not consider, that in destroying them, they caused
the death of all Virtues; for they are the seeds thereof, and by taking a
little pain in trimming and pruning of them, they may be made advantageous to
us.

In optimo quoque antequam erudias, virtutis materia non virtus est, Sen. Ep.
91.
Though man be not born virtuous, and that art which teaches him to become so,
be as difficult as it is glorious; he seems notwithstanding to know before he
learneth it, that his understanding has the principles of Truth, and his will
the seeds of Virtue. That as science (according to the Platonicks) is but a
remembrance, or calling to mind; her good habits are but natural inclinations.
For all his Passions are budding Virtues, and if he take a little care to
perfect them, they become complete Virtues: Is not fear which foresees evil and
shunneth it, natural wisdom? Is not Choler, which takes up arms in the behalf
of good against the enemy thereof, a shadow of Justice? Is not Desire which
serves us from our selves, to join us with somewhat that is better, an Image of
Charity, which takes us from the Earth to raise us up to Heaven? What must be
added to Boldness, to make thereof true Fortitude? And what difference is there
between Sorrow and Repentance, save only that the one is the mere workmanship
of Nature, and the other the production of Grace? but both of them are
afflicted with evil, and they ofttimes mingle their tears to bewail the same
sin.

In fine, There are no Passions which may not become Virtues; and as they have
inclinations to what is good, and aversions from what is evil, they need but a
little Government to make them change Conditions.

The good Application of a man's Love is sufficient to make all his Passions
innocent; and without taking so much pain to love aright, is only requisite to
make us happy in this world. Since Virtue (faith St. Augustine) is the habit of
a well governed mind, we are but to moderate our Affections, that they may be
changed into Virtues; for when our hatred and our love, Quoniam virtus est
habitus mentis been composita, componendi, instituendi, atque ordinandi sunt
animi affectus ad id quod debent, ut in virtutes proficere possint: Cum ergo
prudenter, modeste, fortiter, and just amor and odium instituuntur, in
virtutes exurgunt, scilicet, prudentiam, temperantiam, fortitudinem and
justitiam, Aug. lib. De Spiritu and Anima, c. 1.
which are the Spring-heads of all other Passions, shall be wisely, modestly,
strongly, and justly guided, they will become rare Virtues, and will be
converted into wisdom, temperance, fortitude, and justice. Is it not then a
barbarous thing, to go about to strangle Passions, which have such affinity
with Virtue, and which without much labor may be raised to so noble a
Condition? Is it not ingratitude to mistake the advantages which we have
received from Nature? and is it not injustice to give infamous names to these
innocent Subjects, which being well managed by Reason, might merit such
glorious Titles?

It Is then an indubitable Maxim amongst the Philosophers, That Passions are the
seed of Virtues, and that they have no more noble employment, than to arm
themselves in their behalf, to fight their quarrels, and to revenge them of
their enemies. As mothers are never more courageous, than in the defense of
their children; the affections of our soul are never more vigorous, than when
they defend their products against Vices. This praise puzzles the brains of all
the Stoics. And Seneca could not endure that Virtues Army should be composed
of soldiers that could mutiny; he will not have us employ Passions in her
service, because some few have been found which have injured her authority.
Certainly if all Princes were so obdurate as is this Philosopher, they would
find few soldiers, and they must cashier all their troops, because formerly
they have found some of them unfaithful. The negligence of Princes is oft-times
cause why the soldiers mutiny, and the weakness of Reason is almost always
the cause of the revolt of Passions.

In true Philosophy the soul must be rather accused than the body, and the
Sovereign rather blamed than the Subjects. Who sees not that fear is watchful
for virtue, that she always mingles her self as a Spy amongst the enemies, to
find out their designs; that all her reports are faithful, and that we are for
the most part unhappy only for having neglected them? who knows not that hope
strengthens us, and that she encourages us to the understanding of glorious
and difficult designs? who does not confess that Boldness and Choler despise
danger, suffering hardness, and setting even upon death, that they may be
serviceable to Patience and Fortitude? what virtues would not become weak, were
they abandoned by Passions; how often has the fear of infamy infused courage
into soldiers who were seeking how shamefully to run away? how often has
shamefastness preserved Chastity, and kept both maids and married women within
their duty, when avarice and wantonness has endeavored to corrupt them? how
often has indignation encouraged Judges against the guilty, who were made
insolent in their misdemeanor, by the protection of great ones?

Let the Stoics then confess, that virtues owe their welfare to Passions; and
let them not tell us any more that they are too generous to implore aid from
their slaves. But let us tell them, they are too full of acknowledgment, to
despise such faithful friends; and that they will never make a difficulty in
accepting them for their allies, when ever they will assail the common enemy,
Vice. I had rather follow Aristotle's opinion than Seneca's, and rather govern
Passions than destroy them. This man out of an excessive pride will not have
Virtue to stand in need of any thing; and that the wise man who is thereof
possessed, way be happy, even contrary to the will of God himself; he will have
his happiness to be so firmly grounded, that the Heavens cannot overturn it;
and to judge by his words, it seems that insolency and impiety are the first
requisite dispositions for the acquiring of wisdom; the other on the contrary
acknowledges his weakness, uses such help as nature has afforded him; and
knowing very well that he is composed of a Soul and Body, he endeavors to
employ them both in the exercise of virtue. Ira necessaria est, nec quidquam
sine illa expugnari potest, nisi illa impleat animum, and spiritum attendat.
Arist. in Senec. l. 1. De Ira, c. 9.
He confesses we cannot undertake any thing of generous, unless chafed by
choler, and that we faint and droop when we are not irritated. But as he very
well knows likewise that this Passion has need of a bridle to hold it back, he
ranks it under Reason, and makes not use thereof, as of a General, but as of a
private Soldier. Let us use our Passions thus, Utendum autem illa est, non ut
duce, sed ut milite. idem ibidem.
let us teach the Stoics, that nature has made nothing in vain; and that
since she has endued us with fears and hopes, she intends we shall make use of
them to acquire Virtue, and fight against Vice.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. That Passions are the seeds of Vice.
IT were to flatter Passions, and deceive men, if after having showed the good
they are capable of doing, we should not show the evil they can do; and our
draught would be partial, if having, drawn their perfections, we should not
likewise set forth their defaults. But that we may not be mistaken in so
important a Subject, and whereupon our happiness seems to depend, we must
know that Passions are neither good nor bad, and that (to speak properly) these
two qualities are only found in the superior power which governs them. As that
is only free, it is only good or evil, and as it is the Original of merit, it
is also the Springhead either of wickedness or goodness. But as the Sun
spreads forth his light in the world, and enlightens solid bodies, though it
penetrate them not; So does the will dispense abroad wickedness and goodness,
amongst the Passions, and though she do not communicate them fully unto them,
yet gives she them a slight tincture thereof, which is sufficient to make them
either innocent or criminal.

For if we examine the qualities that they have received from nature, and if we
consider them in that estate which pleads the use of the will, we must
acknowledge that they are as well the seeds of vice as of virtue; and that
those two contraries are so confused in them, as they are hardly to be
discerned. They have an Inclination to good, Anima affectus omnium sunt
vitiorum and virtutum (...) quaedam principia and communis materia, Aug l. De
S^^ritu and Aunn. c. 4.
and thus they hold with virtue: They are easily seduced, soon moved, and thus
they resemble vice. For we are now no longer in that happy estate of innocence,
where the Passions expected their orders only from Reason, and where they never
raised themselves, till they had obtained leave; they are become disloyal, and
no longer acknowledging the voice of their Sovereign, they obey that first that
commands them, and take part as soon with a Tyrant as with their legitimate
Prince. This error whereinto they often fall, obliges us to confess, that they
are not much less inclinable to vice than to virtue; and that if we may hope
for great advantages by them, we ought also to fear notable mischiefs from
them. For the same desires which raise us up to Heaven, fasten us to the earth;
that which nature has given us to set us at liberty, casts us in prison, and
claps Bolts upon us. The same hope which flatters us, abuses us; and that
which ought to sweeten our past misfortunes, procures us new ones; the same
choler which brings the courageous to the combat, animates the faint-hearted
to revenge, and what is generous in war, becomes cruel in peace.

In fine, Passions are not farther distant from vices than they are from
virtue, as in the confusion of the Chaos fire was mingled with water, so is
evil mingled with good in the affections of the soul; and from those fatal
Mines, Iron is, as well drawn out as Gold; man ought therefore to keep himself
always upon his guard, and knowing that he carries about in his bosom both
life and death, it behooves him to be as circumspect in his comportments, as
those who handle poison, or who walk upon the edge of a Precipice.

But that which makes the danger the greater, is, that when these unruly
Passions have brought forth a vice, they put themselves in arms to defend it,
and serve it with more courage, than do the innocent Passions obey virtue. They
are servants which are more cruel than are their Masters; Officers which are
more furious than the Tyrants that set them on work; and they commit more of
outrage upon Virtue, than does Vice it self. All wars are occasioned by these
insolent Affections, and he who shall banish love and hatred from off the
earth, will find neither Murder nor Adultery there. They furnish the subject of
all Tragedies; and though men accuse Poets of Fictions, they have committed
more Errors than the others have invented. But they are never more prejudicial
than when they meet in the person of a Prince, and when they abuse Sovereign
power, to exercise their fury; for then whole States groan under their tyranny,
the people are oppressed by their violence, and all parts confess that neither
the Plague nor the Sword are so pernicious, as are Passions when they have got
the supreme power.

An unlawful love put all Greece in Arms; and the flames thereof reduced the
goodliest City of all Asia to Ashes. Jealousy between Caesar and Pompey was
the loss of the lives of more than a million of men; the world was divided in
their quarrel, their ambition put arms into the hands of all people; their
unjust war was the ruin of their Country, and the loss of the liberty thereof.
the world does yet bemoan this disaster; the spoils of this shipwreck are yet
seen; and the States of Europe are but so many pieces which did compose the
Body of that puissant Republique. Ambition when confounded with virtue, is
guilty of more murders than Revenge and Choler; though this passion pretend to
be generous, she is always stained with blood; whatsoever delight she takes in
pardoning, her greatness is grounded upon the ruin of her enemies; she is
cause of more deaths than she procures pardons; and she is the loss of more
innocents, than safety of those that are guilty. She astonisheth all the world,
when she is seen in the person of an Alexander. And it seems Nature produced
him to no other end, than to teach us what ambition can do, when assisted by
fortune. He ruined all Princes who would defend their own States; he treated
those as Enemies who refused to be his Subjects; he could not permit an equal
in any place through which he passed: He complained of the Seas that stopped the
current of his victories, and wished for a new world, that he might conquer it;
If his vainglory caused so many disorders, his Choler committed no less
ransack; and if by the one he revenged himself of his Enemies, he rid his hands
of his Friends by the other; the least suspicions encouraged these passions to
revenge, one indiscreet word provoked it; an honest freedom set it a going, and
his Choler grew to be so nice, as there was as much danger in doing well, as in
saying ill; As he was possessed by all these violences, so did he obey them; he
dipped his hands in the blood of his Favorites; he took upon him the office of
a Hangman; and that he might taste all the pleasures of revenge, he himself
would be the Minister thereof, and with his own hands kill him who had saved
his life.

But amongst all the cruelties whereunto his Choler often did persuade him, I
know none more infamous than that which he exercised upon Innocent Calisthenes,
his condition was a Sanctuary to him, and professing Philosophy, it seemed he
ought not fear the fury of Alexander; the very fault for which he was condemed,
was glorious; and had it happened in the time of true Religion, it would have
passed for an eminent virtue; for he defended the cause of his gods, and was of
opinion that Temples could not be built to his Prince without provoking the
gods against him; he guided himself so dexterously in so ticklish a business,
as that whilst he preserved the honor of Heaven, he flattered Alexanders
humor, Intervallo opus est ut quis credatur Deus, semperque hanc gratiam
magnis vi^is posteri reddunt. Ego autem seram immortalitatem precor Regi, ut
vita diuturna sit aeterna Majestas: hominem consequitur aliquando, nunquam
comittatur Divinitas, Curt. l. 8 circa medium.
and by an admirable piece of cunning, he accorded flattery with piety; for if
the reasons which Quintus Curtius alleges, be true, he represented unto the
Macedonians, that since men could not dispose of Crowns, they ought not to
dispose of Altars; that since they made not Kings, they ought not go about to
make Gods; and that when humane vanity would attribute unto it self that power,
she could not make use thereof till after the death of such as she would
Deisie; that to receive adoration from men, one must keep far from any commerce
with them, and lose his life to purchase a divinity. That Alexander was yet
necessary to them, and that he ought not to mount into the Heavens, till he had
conquered all the Earth. This short O^a^ion was able to have obliged the most
ambitious of mankind; yet did it offend the vainglory of this Prince, and so
far provoked his Choler, as not many days after he caused this Philosopher to
be put to death, not allowing him liberty to defend himself. This Murder drew
upon him the hatred of all Greece; and as Parmenio's death had exasperated all
the Soldiers, this of Calisthenes did much more all the Orators; and these men
who revenge themselves with their Tongue, have spoke so often of this excess, as
it is yet dishonor to him that did commit it.

All the praises that can be given to his gallant actions, are darkened by the
murder of Calisthenes. Hoc est Alexandri crimen aeternum, quod nulla virtus,
nulla bellorum felicitas redimet. Senec. quaest. Nature. l. 7. c. 23.
And that I may make use of Seneca's eloquent words; this irregular proceeding
is Alexander's everlasting fault, which neither his Fortune nor his Valor will
ever be able to blot out. For if a man shall say he defeated the Persians in
three pitched Battles; another will say, he slew Calisthenes: If men put a
valuation upon him for having overcome Darius, the most puissant Monarch of the
world, they will blame him for having killed Calisthenes. If men praise him for
having carried the Bounds of his Empire to the utmost parts of the East, they
will add, he was guilty of the death of Calisthenes. If finally, to end his
Panegyric, a man shall say he has stained the glory of as many Princes as
preceded him: another will reply, his fault is greater than his valor, and
that all his actions of memory are sullied by Calisthenes his Blood.

This example ought to instruct and teach all Princes, that if irregular
Passions are maladies in private men, they are Plagues and contagious diseases
in public Personages, and that, if well guided by Reason they may become
glorious virtues, they may by the tyranny of our senses degenerate into most
infamous vices.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. That there are no Passions which may not be changed into
Virtues.
WE have said in our former discourses, that Passions are the seeds of
Virtues, and that by having a care of husbanding them well, their effects were
very advantageous to us. But proceeding on further, my intention is in this
discourse, to teach Christians the secret, how they may change them into
Virtues, and to take from them whatsoever they have of savage or monstrous.
This Metamorphosis is certainly very hard, but not impossible; and if we advise
with nature, she will furnish us with inventions; for this wise Mother is
continually working of strange alterations.

Her power never appears to be greater, than when she alters the Elements, or
Metals; and when she takes from them their former qualities, that she may give
them others more excellent, and more noble. But she observes therein an
admirable method, which well deserves consideration; for though she be
all-powerful, and that holding the place of God, she may act as a Sovereign,
and do what she pleases with the Elements or Metals, yet does she never use
violence; and she seems rather to accommodate her self to their interests,
than to her own inclinations; she observes their sympathies, and works no
alteration which is not agreeable unto them.

Thus we see she ratifies air, to change it into fire, and conduces water to
turn it into earth; thus we observe she purifies silver, to give it the
tincture of Gold, and labors whole ages to finish without violence this useful
Metamorphosis.

Now as Morality is an imitation of Nature, her chief care ought to be employed
in observing the proprieties of our Passions, and in converting them into
virtues which are not contrary unto them; for he that would go about to change
Choler into Mildness, or fear into generousness, would endeavor an
impossibility, and would have ill success in all his labors; but that his
designs may succeed well, he must study the nature of every Passion, and use
all his means to turn each passion into such a virtue as it has least aversion
unto; and this ought not to seem strange, since the most rational of all men
has been of opinion, that in the opposition which Nature has placed between
vice and virtue, they had notwithstanding somewhat of resemblance one with the
other; for all men will confess, that prodigality has more relation to
liberality than avarice; and that it is not hard to reduce a prodigal man to be
a liberal man; every one is bound to confess that Rashness sides more with
Courage than with Cowardice, and that it is easier to make a rash man, than a
Coward, courageous.

Therefore do Philosophers agree, that of the two extremes which do environ
virtue, one of them is always more favorable unto her; and a little care
being had will easily take her part, and defend her interest.

Following the same Maxim, we must confess that there are some passions which
have more of affinity with some virtues, than with some others, and which by
the help of Morality, may easily become virtues.

That fear which foresees dangers, Metuamus ergo ut non metuamus, hoc est
prudenter metuamus, ne inamter metuamus, Aug. Ser. 15. De Martyribus.
which labors how to shun them, which looks far into what is to come, that
it may find a remedy, may easily be changed into wisdom, provided the
distraction which accompanies it, and which does most commonly abuse us in our
deliberations, be taken away. That hope which makes us taste a good which we do
not yet enjoy, which comfort us in our misfortunes, and which through our
present evils shows us a future happiness, may easily be converted into that
virtue which we call Assurance. That Choler which punishes faults, and arms us
to revenge our friends injuries, differs not far from Justice; for provided it
be not too violent, and that the self interests thereof leave it light enough
to guide it self, it will wage war with all the wicked, and take all that are
innocent into its protection.

That boldness which encourages us to the combat, which gives assurance in
danger, and which makes us prefer a glorious death before a shameful retreat,
will become exact Valor; if we suppress its inclination to fury, and if we
mingle a little light with the too much heat thereof. Love and Hatred, Desire
and Eschewing, are rather Virtues, than Passions, when governed by Reason.
Provided they love nothing but what is lovely, and hate nothing but what is
hateful, they deserve praise rather than reproach.

Sadness and Despair, Jealousy and Envy, are indeed more cried down; they seem
to be enemies to our quiet, that the Heavens have made them Ministers of their
Justice, and that they supply the places of those revengeful Furies which Poets
feign to punish the faulty. Yet may they be useful to Reason, if well managed,
and under those hideous faces wherein they appear, they hide good meanings,
which are of use to virtue. A good emulation may be framed out of a
well-regulated Envy. Discreet zeal may be shaped out of moderated Jealousy;
without which neither profane nor sacred yet love undertakes any thing of
Generous. Sorrow has so many praises given her in the holy Scripture, as it is
easy to judge, that if she be not amongst the number of the virtues, she may
be advantageously made use of to their service. Melior est tristitia iniqua
parientis, quam laetitia iniqua facientis. Aug. lib. De vera Innocentia.
She loosens us from the earth; and by a despising all the contentments of the
world, she makes us thirst after eternal delights; she appeaseth Gods anger;
she furnishes us with tears, wherewithal to wash away our sins and to water
his Altars; She is always a faithful companion to Repentance; and no sin in
Christian Religion was ever forgiven, before Sorrow and Repentance had obtained
pardon. Despair has but the name of terrible; but who shall well consider her
effects, Ratio terrorem prudentibus excutit: In peritis fit magna ex
desperatione securitas. Senec. quaest. not. l. 6. c. 2.
will avow it is a wise invention of nature which cures the greatest part of our
maladies, by taking away from us the hope of remedy; for then we make virtue of
necessity, we draw force from our weakness; we turn our fear into fury, and our
desires into contempt; we set upon enemies whose approach we dare not expect;
and we misprize objects which we cannot abandon. Thus shall we find many men
who owe their quiet more to Despair, than to hope; and who shall well examine
the humor of these two Affections, will be forced to acknowledge, that the one
makes us miserable by her promises, the other happy by her refusals; that the
one nourishes our desires, the other causes them to die; that the one
cozeneth us, and the other disabuseth us; that we are lost by the flatteries of
the one, and saved by the others affliction. This is the Reason why the
greatest Poet in the world has affirmed, that Despair is that which raises up
the Courage of the conquered, and which restores unto them the Victory which
Hope and Rashness had berest them of.

But whatever advantage I attribute to these Passions, I confess they have
their errors, and that to make them virtuous, they must be carefully cleansed.
And because so profitable an affair cannot be too often treated of, I shall
willingly observe their chiefest enormities; to the end that discerning them,
as in a Looking-glass, every one may be careful how to eface them. Take
blindness from love, and he will be no more faulty; for it is permitted to love
such subjects as deserve love, Amor est motus cordis, qui cum se inordinate mov
t, id est, ad ea quae non debet, cupiditas dicitur; cum vero ordinatus est,
charitas appellatur. Aug. lib. De Substantia Electionis, c. ^.
and there is no less injustice in denying it to personages of excellency, than
to grant it to deformed persons. Exempt error from hatred, and hatred will
become consonant to Reason; for it is not just to confound the sinner with his
sin; and who can make this distinguishment, may boast to hate with justice;
desire and eschewing are innocent, provided they be moderated; joy and sorrow
are only blameable in their excess; and the same Reason which permits us to
taste with pleasure a good which we wish for, does not forbid us sorrowing for
an evil which we apprehend. Hope is only then unjust, when she measures not
her forces; and despair is only then faulty, when it takes its rise rather from
our remissness, than from our weakness. Boldness is then praiseworthy, when it
grapples with a danger which it may overcome; and fear is wisdom, when it shuns
a danger it cannot overcome. Choler is an act of justice, when born against
sin, and provided it be not judge in its own cause, it pronounces none but
lawful decrees. Envy is generous, provided it excite us unto virtue, and that
it lay before us the good qualities of our neighbor, only so far forth as that
we may imitate them. Jealousy is only hateful, because it has in it too much
of love; yet this fault is pardonable when not accompanied with suspicion, and
if the beloved cannot cure it, they are bound to endure it. But to put an end
to this discourse with S. Augustine; Christians make good use of their
Passions, Metuunt enim poenam aeternam, cupiunt vitam aeternam, dolent in re
quia adhuc ingemescunt adoptionem filiorum Dei, expectantes redemptionem
corporis sui; gaudent in spe, quia mors absorbebitur in victoriam. Aug. l. 14.
De Civ. Dei. c. 3.
if they employ them for the glory of Jesus Christ, and for the salvation of
their own souls. Their fears correspond with Reason, when they consider Gods
judgments, and the punishment of the damned; their desire is just when they aim
at the happiness of the blessed. Their sorrow is harmless when they afflict
themselves for all the evils which our first Father has left us to inherit,
and when oppressed with grief, they sigh after the liberty of the children of
God. Their joy is a holy joy when they expect the fruition of the good which is
prepared for them, and when by a firm hope they already taste the effects of
their Masters promises. Metuunt peccare, cupiunt perseverare, dolent in
peccatis, gaudent in operibus bon^. Idem ibid.
Briefly, if they fear unbelief, if they desire perseverance, if they sorrow
for their evil actions, and rejoice when they do well, they turn all their
Passions into holy and glorious Virtues.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. That the government of Passions is virtues chief
employment.
MAn is brought into so happy a condition by sin, as his very advantages
reproach his misery unto him, and he is made to know his faultiness by what is
most excellent in him. Those noble qualities which beautify his soul, and
which restore unto him the glory which he had lost, have but unpleasing
employments, and are engaged in combats, which though they be difficult, cease
not to be shameful. For man's most illustrious virtues, have no other employment
than to make war upon vice, and the necessity he has to make use thereof is
one of the chiefest proofs of the irregularity of his nature. Prudence which
serves him for a guide, advertiseth him that he walks in darkness, and that
he is in an enemies Country. Fortitude teaches him that he ought to fight, and
that in all the course of his life he tastes no pleasure which is not mingled
with pain; temperance gives him to understand, that his constitution is out of
order, and that he has delights which flatter him only, that they may destroy
him.

Lastly, Justice obliges him to believe, that not any thing which he
possesses is his, and that having a Sovereign who has given him all that he
enjoys, he is only the Steward to distribute them. These virtues do what they
say, their employments answer their counsels; they act not, without going about
to stifle some disorder, and to overcome some vicious inclinations. Prudence
chooses the Arms and the Enemy; temperance rejects pleasure; fortitude sets
upon sorrow; justice sits President in all these combats; she takes care that
the conqueror be not insolent in his victory; that the Soul take not such
advantage over the Body, that in thinking to tame it, it destroy it, and that
whilst it would revenge it self of a disobedient Vassal, it lose not a faithful
friend. So as we must conclude, that the exercise of Virtue is a continual
warfare against Vice. And that these glorious qualities have no more noble
employment than to charge upon Monsters, and fight with Infamous Enemies.

It Is therefore that Saint Augustine, with all the Divines, do acknowledge that
they were only given us to assist us during this miserable life, and that they
are steps whereby to arrive at that height of felicity which consists in the
enjoyment of the Summum bonum. For then our Prudence will be no more necessary,
since we shall have no evils to shun; our Justice will then be superfluous, for
we shall possess all our riches in common. Temperance will then be useless, for
we shall have no more unlawful motions to suppress. Then our Fortitude will
have no employment, since we shall suffer no further evils. It Is true, I have
much ado to banish those Virtues from Heaven, Hic enim sunt virtute^ in actu
ibi in affectu; hic in opere, ibi in mercede; hic in officio, ibi in fine. Aug.
Epist.
which have opened us the way thither. But as nothing can be received there
which is imperfect, we must say that they shall be cleansed before they get
admittance thither, that they shall lose what they have of earthly, to become
wholly heavenly, and that the glory which makes men spiritual, will make them
Divine, and will take from them what they have of impurity; they shall have all
their beauty, and shall have no more defects; they shall triumph, and fight no
more, they shall serve for ornaments, and no longer for defense to the happy;
they shall receive the recompense of their Labors, and that wearisom exercise
which held them employed whilst on earth, shall be turned to an honorable rest
in Heaven. Now amongst a thousand different employments which the virtues have
here below, one of the most advantageous is the government of Passions. For it
seems nature has destined them to tame these savage subjects, and so reduce
them under the Empire of Reason. Some have dexterity to win them, others
strength to beat them down; some use threats to astonish them, others promises
to allure them, and all of them together use several means to arrive at the end.

Prudence never comes to handy-blows, but as she is the Queen of Moral Virtues,
she contents her self with giving Orders, with providing for our souls peace,
with stifling seditions in their birth, and with suppressing unruly motions
which threaten her with an intestine war. If the match be already made, she
endeavors to break it by her dexterity, and not meddling in the fight, she
opposes to every Passion that Virtue which is contrary to it, she sends
succors to the weakest places* or to such as are most briefly assailed. She
foresees the evils that are to come, or if she think sometimes that the Rebels
are capable of Reason, she exhorts them to obedience; and to reduce them to
their duty, she lays before them their own interests; she makes them know, that
all the pleasures which they seek after, are fatal to them, and that all the
evils which they so fear, are honorable. Temperance is a little more exposed
to danger; for she is obliged to come to handy-blows, and to defend her self
against her enemies, which are so much the more dangerous as they are the more
pleasing.

She resists all those Passions which flatter our senses, and which propound
nothing unto our minds, but voluptuousness and delights; she regulates desires
and hopes, she moderates love and joy, and as often as any motions rise up with
us, which promise unto us unlawful pleasures, she furnishes us with weapons to
overcome them; when she thinks her self not strong enough to vanquish them, she
calls in Penance and Austerity to her aid, and with these severe virtues she
defeats these dissolute enemies: fortitude takes care to govern the most
vi^lent Passions, to set upon fear, sorrow, de^pair, and hatred; as soon as any
danger troubles the peace of our soul, or that any angersome object which does
astonish us presents it self, this Heroic Virtue employes all her courage to
enhearten, and by a noble piece of art, she makes use of chole^ and boldness to
overcome sorrow and despair. If these courageous passions are not puissant
enough to purchase an assured peace, she puts us in mind of honor, she
charge constancy and fidelity to make our dutie^ known unto us, and to
encourage us by recompenses which are ordained for the honor of glorious and
difficult actions* Justice enters not the Lists, but she weighs the right of
all parties, she prepares crowns for the conquerors, she keeps the conquered
from being oppressed, and she does so well moderate the victory, as that she is
neither cruel nor insolent; she keeps Reason in authority, she obliges Passion
to acknowledge it for their Sovereign; she makes the Body subject to the Soul,
without enslaving it; and she submits the Soul to God, without taking from it
its liberty. This Virtue being just, is an enemy to all disorders, and whilst
she rules in chief in man, one may say, he has no passions but such as are
consonant to Reason; but when she is banished, peace and tranquillity retire with
her; during her absence man is like a State without policy, where Rebels are
permitted to do what they list, where vice is honored and virtue despised, and
where every one without advising with his duty, considers only his own
Interest or Pleasure. He therefore that ^oseth justice, loses all the Virtues,
and who possesses her, may boast to possess them all; it may be it is out of
this reason that a Philosopher has affirmed, that every Virtue was a
particular Justice, and that Justice was a general Virtue, which of it self was
sufficient to fight against all Vice, and to regulate all Passions.

But as the multitude of Soldiers cannot be harmful when there is no confusion
therein; the like of virtues cannot be prejudicial, when disorder is banished.
And though those that our Savior Christ has ^aught us, are of a much more
sublime condition than are the moral Virtues; they conspire altogether for our
felicity. We ought therefore employ them in our affairs, and when one alone is
not sufficient to rule a Passion, we must borrow aid from the rest; and augment
our Forces to overcome our Enemies. When tempe^ance cannot regulate our unjust
desires; we may call modesty, and humility, into our assistance, who will
persuade us that the glory of the world is not due to us, if we be criminal;
and that it is not worthy of us if we be innocent; when fortitude cannot
overcome fear or despair, we are permitted to have recourse unto hope, to
listen unto her promises, and to encourage our selves to victory by calling to
mind the rewards which she propounds unto us; when hatred and envy gnaw our
hearts, and when to revenge our selves of an injury they advise us to make use
of sword and poison. It Is fit that Justice emplore the assistance of Charity;
and that to stop the impetuosity of these two headstrong Passions, she join
divine Maxims with humane; Thus Nature shaking hands with Grace to destroy
sin, man will become victorious; the motions of his soul being regulated by
virtue, he will enjoy perfect peace, and he will taste pleasures, which shall
not come much short of those which our first Father Adam tasted in the state of
Innocence.

The Fifth Treatise. Of the Power that Passions have upon the will of man.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. That to know, and win upon men, we must study their
Passions.
NOt without Reason did that great King, who knew so well how to join in his
own person, Piety, Poetry, and Prowess, compare the heart of man to the Depths;
for they are so profound, as nothing can fill them, and the heart of man is so
vast in its desires, as it is not to be satisfied with whole Kingdoms. The
Depths are the Depositories of the Treasures of nature; and God, to exercise
ou^ industry, or to punish our avarice, hat^ hid riches in the bowels of the
earth. S^ likewise are all the goods of man shut u^ within his heart; that part
which has the advantage of forming thoughts, has the care to preserve them;
and it is from thenc^ that we do borrow them, either to persuade, or move our
Auditors. But as the depths are obscure places which are no^ lightened by the
light of the Sun, and where horror and night seem to sojourn, or t^ have made
their abode, so is the heart o^ man environed with darkness, which is no^ to be
dissipated, and whatsoever it conceives is so hidden, as we can guess therea^
but by weak conjectures. For words are not always faithful representations of
the hearts conceptions; it is God alone who has the privilege of knowing them.
Humane wisdom (which vaunts it self to see far into what is to come) is much
troubled to discover the intentions thereof; and the greatest work a Statesman
can undertake, i^, when by his dexterity he endeavors to expound a dissembling
heart, and there to observe such thoughts as are endeavored to be kept
concealed.

I know very well that policy teaches as how to arrive at this knowledge, and
that he gives us rules how to sound these depths which seem to have no bottom.
Men judge of meanings by actions, Nulla vehementior intra cogitatio est, quae
nihil moveat in vultu. Sen. l. 1. D^ Ira. c. 1.
and read in ^he eyes and face, the most secret motion^ of the soul. One may
observe their nature by their designs, and may study men so well, as that he
may guess at their thoughts, and by one piece of cunning discover that which
they by another seek to conceal. But of all these ways I find ^one more easy,
Sicut aequor profunda, sic consilium in cord viri: Sed homo Sapiens exhauriet
illud. Prove. c. 20.
nor more certain, than that of the Passions; for they escape us against our
will, they betray us by their promptness and likeness; We daily find that it is
much more hard to withhold a man's choler than his hand, and to impose silence
to his sufferings, than to his mouth. They mutiny without our leave, and by ^n
Impression which they make in our countenance, they teach our enemies all that
lies within our hearts. Vino tortus (...) Ira. Horat.
I therefore much value that Poets Invention, who terms Passions Tortures, not
only for that they torment us through their rigor, but because they force us
by their violence to confess the truth. A man must be very faithful to himself,
if he do not declare himself either by hatred or vanity. And one must have
great authority over his Passions, if he can suppress them when a skilful man
undertakes to move them.

The wisest men forget their resolutions, and oft-times a praise, or a
reproach, draw a truth from them, which wisdom had a long time kept concealed.

Never was a Prince a greater dissembler than was Tiberius; all his words and
actions were so hidden, as a man could not discover his intentions. He uttered
nothing but Aenigma's, and the Senate trembled as often as they were to treat
with so close a man.

One word of Agrippina did notwithstanding incense him, and made him say a
thing, whilst so agitated, Haec raram occulti pectoris vocem elicere,
correptamque Graeco versu admonuit, ideo laedi quia non regnaret, Tacit. Annal.
which doubtless he would have concealed, had he continued in his ordinary
temper; for finding fault with her, he said her coffeehouse arose only
because she did not reign; thus was the most concealed man of the world
betrayed by the heat of Passion; and did by an indiscreet answer discover the
bottom of his heart. Politicians are likewise never more troubled than when
they treat with a man that is reserved in his speeches, and who does so well
master his Affections, as that they appear not in his Visage, no^ nor sparkle
out in his words nor actions, for all the doors of his soul are shut up, and
not being able to fathom this depth, they are enforced to consult with such as
come near unto it, or else to believe report. But all these are uncertain ways,
and who builds his belief only upon the report of others, is in danger to be
deceived; for Fame is fickle, Enemies are Liars, Friends Flatterers, and those
of the Household are interessed. Yet of as many people as accost great ones, the
testimony of their Domestics is least suspicious; and as they are by their
conditions bound to study their Masters humor, they are better acquainted with
their inclinations; their Enemies know only their weakness; the hatred
wherewith they are blinded, will not suffer them to see their virtues; and
their judgments as being passionate, are for the most part unjust; their
friends see only what is good in them, and their love makes them take faults
for perfections. Their Domestics are better informed than the rest, because
they know their inclinations, and read in those faithful Glasses, the secretest
motions of their hearts; for when Princes appear in public, they study their
countenance; they conceal their thoughts, and are ashamed to do that upon a
Theater which they do in their Closets. But when they have none but their
Domestics for witnesses, they do not constrain their nature, but afford their
Passions all the liberty they can desire.

Therefore it behooves that they moderate them; lest discovering their own
weaknesses, they give advantages to such as shall converse with them; and all
particular men ought to take the same care, if they will preserve their
freedom; for if any one Passion be out of order, it is impossible to conceal it;
and when it shall have discovered it self, it will be hard to keep our enemies
from making use thereof to our prejudice. If women did not discover how much
they are delighted with idle discourse, they would not run so much danger in
their honor; but when a man shall have discovered their weakness, and shall
observe that they are pleased in being praised, he insinuates himself into
their likings by flattery, and makes himself beloved by them, by approving of
what they love. An ambitious man has no fence against one who has discovered
his Passions; as he esteems nothing more than vainglory, he forgoes any thing
he has, to acquire it, and thinks to be a greater gainer by the exchange,
wherein he parts with real goods for applause; Ut cujusque studium ex aetate
flagrabat, aliis scorta praebere, aliis canes atque equos mercari, postremo,
neque sumptui, neque modestiae suae parcere, dum illos obnoxios fidosque sibi
faceret. Salust. in Catalin.
finally, all the world must confess, that our passions are chains, which make
us slaves to all such as know how to manage them well.

When the Paricide Cataline had vowed the ruin of his Country, and had
resolved to change the Roman Commonwealth into a cruel tyranny, he corrupted
all the young men by accommodating himself to their desires; he appeased
confederates by flattering their humor; he won their good wills, by following
their inclinations; and by promising preferment to such as were ambitious,
Novit quem moerore conturbet, quem gaudio fallat, quem admiratione seducat:
omnium discurit mores, omnium scrutatur affectus, and ibi quaerit causam
nocendi, ubi viderit quemquam diligentius occupari. D. Leo. Sermon.
women to such as were lascivious, and riches to the avaritious, he framed an
Association, whereinto Pretors, Counselors, and Senators did enter. This is
also the Devils most usual cunning, and the most dangerous wile with which he
uses to seduce sinners; for as he has great lights, (though he be the Prince
of darkness;) and as he knows all men's tempers, he fits all his suggestions to
their desires, and propounds nothing unto them which is not conformable to
their inclinations. To the proud he proffers honor, he awakens the Passion
which possesses them, and ingageth them in unlawful ways, to compass
pernicious designs; and endeavors to persuade them, that any whatsoever sin,
is glorious, when it is committed that reputation may be won thereby. He
sollicits the voluptuous by infamous pleasures; If he cannot commend their
sins, he seeks out names to excuse them; he terms that natural which is
irrational; and, as if Nature and Reason were at enmity, he counsels them to
follow the former, and forsake the latter. He encourages the furious to
revenge, he gives gallant Titles to shameful Passions, he endeavors to make
the resentment of an injury pass for an act of Justice; and contradicting all
Maxims of Christianity, he establishes the greatness of courage in hatred and
murder. He persuades the avaritious that there is nothing more generally sought
after than Riches; that our Ancestors have reverenced it, that our Successors
will honor it, that people who differ in other opinions, agree in the
reputation they put hereupon; that Fathers wish it to their children, that
children desire it from their fathers; that those who profess piety, offer
thereof to God, and appease his anger by presents. That poverty is infamous;
that it is the contempt of rich men, and the punishment of the poor. In fine,
this colloguing enemy undoes all men by flattering them, he gains upon their
understanding by their affections, he beats them with their own weapons, and by
a dangerous piece of cunning, he employes their Passions to corrupt their
wills. All men ought therefore to suppress such inclinations as are so
prejudicial to us; and submit unruly motions to Grace, which give so much
advantage over our liberty, to our most powerful enemies.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. That Arts seduce men by the means of Passions.
THe government of Passions is of such importance, and so difficult, as the
better part of Sciences seem only to have been invented to regulate them.
Though the mind of man makes use of them to serve their vanities, they in their
first institution intended only the government of our affections; and
Philosopher^ made use thereof only to cure our souls with delight. Music which
does only tickle our ears, and wherewithal our heart is not affected, save only
so far as thereby to let in impurity thereinto, labored formerly only to
suppress the disorders thereof; as it it is an harmony composed of different
voices, it produced harmonious effects; and agreeing the difference between the
body and the soul, it renewed their friendship, and made them keep perfect
intelligence together; it calmed the fury of Passions, and by the pleasantness
of its accords, it tamed such wild beasts as devour men when they are
irritated. In these happy days Musicians were Philosopher^; this art which is
become a slave to sensuality, was Virtues servant; it employed all its industry
in the service of Reason, whereas now it seduceth the soul by the senses; it
did then charm affections through the ears, and by pleasing tones, which were
no less powerful than words, it persuaded to good things, and kept men within
their duties. Thus it is said that Agistus could never corrupt Clitemnestra,
till he had made him be made away, who defended her Chastity by the sweetness
of his Harp, and who overthrew all the designs of this unchaste lover, by the
sweet accents of his voice. History (which is more to be believed than fables)
teaches us, that a player upon the Flute wrought so powerfully upon the mind
of Alexander, Alexandrum aiunt Xenophonto canente manum ad arma misisse. Sen.
l. 2. De Ira. c. 2.
that when he founded with a loftier tone than ordinary, he made this Conqueror
besides himself; and did so encourage him to the Combat, as he would call for
his Arms to set upon his Enemy; but when he played in a softer tone,
Alexander's fury grew more calm, as if it had been but a false Allarm; he
resumed his former countenance, and was wholly intent upon him who did enchant
his ears; the holy Scripture (the words whereof are Oracles) assures us that
David with his harp appeased the evil spirit in Saul; which lost his power,
when the humors which he had stirred up, were allayed by harmony. But Music
has now no more such virtue; she who formerly did dispossess people possessed
with evil spirits, does now give them over to the Devil; or if she produce not
so bad effects, she awakens our Passions, and by a strange, but true
misfortune, she increases the malady which she intended to cure. I very well
know that the Music used in Churches holds intelligence with Piety, and that
by a sweet violence it frees our souls from our bodies, and raises them up to
Heaven; but truly I suspect all other sorts of Music; though some will have
them pass for harmless, I esteem them dangerous or useless; and I should
willingly say with Seneca, Doces quomodo inter se acutae and graves voces
consonent, quomodo nervorum disparem reddentium sonum fiat concordia; fac
potius quomodo animus secum meus consonet, nec consilia mea discrepent, Sen.
Ep. 88.
to Musicians, that instead of teaching us how to tune a Lute, or to govern our
Voice, they ought to teach us how to regulate our Passions; that instead of
flattering our Senses, they would work upon our hearts, and inspire our souls
with the detestation of Vice, and love of Virtue.

Poetry (which we may style the Daughter of Music) did in former times imitate
her Mother; and employed all her comeliness in encouraging men to glorious
Enterprises; she sung the victories of Conquerors, and by praising their
Valor, made their Soldiers valiant; her very forgeries were useful; the
revengeful Furies which she introduced in her works, infused fear into the
wicked, and kept people in their duty: the pleasing number and cadence of her
Verse was able to sweeten the most savage humors, and she abused us not when
she would persuade us that her Orpheus tamed Lions, made Trees to walk, forced
Rocks to listen unto him, and to follow him, since he produced all these
effects in the heart of man, and that he banished from thence Choler and
Stupidity. But this brave Art never appeared more glorious than when it got
upon the Theater, and when infused with a new fury, it represented the
punishment of the faulty, the direful death of tyrants, and the ill success of
injustice or impiety. For it infused fear into Princes, it astonished Subjects,
and by sad examples taught the one Respect, the other Clemency, and to both of
them, Justice and Religion. Then all Comedies were as so many instructions; one
looked upon the places where they were acted, as upon the Academies of
Philosophers, and Auditors never departed with the dislike of Virtue. But men
who corrupt the best things, did at last abuse Poetry; and did unjustly submit
her unto their Passions, who had reformed them by her advice. This innocent art
which had always courted virtue, is become a slave to vice; and wanton people
have profaned all her chaste decencies; making them serve uncleanness. Since
these unhappy days Poetry was cried down throughout the world; Philosophers who
had always been the Poets Friends, became their enemies, and employed all their
credit to get them banished. In effect they corrupted all men, and fearing lest
their Verses were not of power enough to authorize obsceneness, they erected
Altars thereunto; and by the Incest of their Gods, they excused the Adulteries
of men. I am not ignorant that true Religion has reformed Poetry; that it has
done its utmost to restore her to her former use, and ancient beauty: I know
very well that our Poets are chaste in their Writings; and that Comedies,
though they be licentious, mount not the Stage, but only to condemn Vice; the
very rules imposed upon them, will not suffer them to be obscene; and by a
happy necessity it behooves that those who infuse a soul into the Scene, take
part always with Virtue; yet it unfortunately falls out (the which I rather
attribute to the disorder of Nature, than to the like o^ Poetry) that Chastity
appears not so beautiful in Verse as does uncleanness; and tha^ the obedience
of the Passions seems not so pleasing as their rebellion. Men betake themselves
more usually to violent affections, than to such as are answerable to Reason;
And as the Poets do express them with greater eloquence, their auditors liste^
unto them with more delight. In fine, let what care soever will be had,
Comedies are only Schools of Virtue for such gallant men, as can discern
between appearances and truth, and who abhor Vice even then when it comes
presented in Virtues Ornaments. But if you will examine the Common people, they
will confess, that Stage-Poetry does strangely move them, and that it imprints
in their souls the feelings of those personages which they represent.

Rhetoric is somewhat more happy in her designs than is Poetry; and let men
object what fault they will to Orators, I find them more blameless than Poets.
For as their chief end is to preserve the truth, they are enforced to employ
all their cunning to beat down such Passions as are contrary thereunto; and in
discharging themselves of their duty, they play the part of the Physician,
curing their auditors of all their maladies; If their Choler be too much
irritated, they appease it; If their Courage be too much suppressed, they raise
it up; they make Love exceed Hatred, Piety Revenge; and repressing one motion
by another, they draw a calm from out a storm. This employment is so fixed to
the condition of Orators, as they do therein only differ from Philosophers; for
these have no other design, save only to convince the understanding, they
propound naked Truths unto it; and knowing that it cannot behold them without
reverence, they take more care how to discover, than to adorn them. But Orators
who will work upon the soul by the senses, cloth their good Reasons in handsome
Language, tickling the Ear, that they may touch the Heart; and using Tropes and
figurative Speeches, to move affection. They set upon the two parts whereof man
is composed, they make use of the weakest to subdue the stronger; and as the
Devil undid man by the means of the Woman, they gain Reason by the means of
Passion.

By this harmless cunning, they formed Towns, governed Commonwealths, and for
a long time commanded Monarchies; for they studied their inclinations, and did
so handsomely handle them, as it seemed the hearts of Princes were in the hands
o^ Orators, and that Monarchy was become a slave to Eloquence; they committed
notwithstanding gross faults in their government, and by having too often excited
the motions of the souls inferior part, they overthrew the Empire of the
superior; and could not cure the wounds which they had made, nor quench the
flames which they had kindled. For thinking to flatter a Prince in his vanity,
they made him insolent, and whilst they thought to move him to revenge, they
made him cruel and fierce. They could not keep the mediocrity whereof Virtue is
composed, and desiring to raise up one Passion, that they might abase another,
they gave it so great strength, as it was no longer in their power to assubject
it to Reason. This, in my opinion, is the misfortune which they run into, who,
that they may be pleasing unto Princes, flatter such an inclination as does
tyrannize over them; and not considering the evil that may ensue thereon,
oppose that inclination, to all others, and by victories make it insolent. The
contrary way had been the better; for since the Passion which they ende^ored to
raise, was most violent, they should have employed all the rest to weaken it,
and have made them all conspire together, to bring it low. But because
eloquence is oft-times interessed, she neglects the good of her Auditors, and
is not troubled though her praises wound their souls, so long as she may obtain
what she desires. Thus did Cicero treat with Caesar; and being desirous to save
a guilty person whose cause he pleaded, he opposed the pride of this Conqueror
to his revenge; to destroy one Passion which was prejudicial only to one
particular man, he awakened that which had ruined the Republic, and oppressed
the liberty of Rome. Wherein certainly he was to blame, and sinned against the
laws of Eloquence, which was not so much invented to persuade men, as to make
them virtuous, and which ought not to endeavor so much to move affections, as
to re-establish Reason in her Empire. Policy seems to have better intentions
than Rhetoric; for when she excites fear or hope in man, by promises or by
threats, she endeavors the welfare of particulars, as the public quiet; if
she sometimes punish the faulty by dreadful punishments, it is but in desperate
evils, and when she has, to no purpose, tried all mild means; yet I believe
she might handle Passions better than she does, and that without violating the
respects wdich is due to Sovereignty, too easy to gain the hearts of the
Subjects by hopes, and to reduce them to their duties rather by love than fear.
This is that which we shall consider in the following Discourse, after having
concluded in this, that all Sciences are defective in the government of
Passions; that to regulate them well, they must implore help from morality, and
that they must consider the precepts she gives us to overcome enemies, which
are as opinionate as insolent.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. That Princes win upon their Subjects either by Love or
Fear.
ALl Politicians agree, that recompense and punishment are the two pillars
which uphold all States; and that, to the end the people may be peacefully
governed, their hopes or their fears must be excited by promises or threats; to
say truth, we never yet heard of any Republic or Monarchy, which from its
beginning did not ordain honors and chastisements for Vice and Virtue. He who
feared to instruct Vice by forbidding it, and to teach subjects paricide, by
punishing it, was forced to have recourse to this common remedy, and to propose
recompenses, and sufferings to men, thereby to awaken their hopes or their
fears. Experience showed that to gain their good will, their Passions must be
won upon, and that the lower part of their souls must be mastered, so to
assubject the higher part thereof.

God himself governs the world by this harmless piece of cunning; for though,
being infinitely more absolute than all Kings, he may treat with the soul
without the interposition of the senses, he rules himself according to man's
condition; and knowing that they are composed of a Soul and Body, he undertakes
nothing upon the former but by the means of the latter; he renounceth his own
rights, that he may adapt himself to the weakness of his Creatures, and not
using the power his Sovereignty affords him, he terrifieth them by threats, or
comfort them by promises. His bare will should serve us for a Law; and the
knowledge of his intentions oblige us to form whatsoever design;
notwithstanding he allureth us, by proposing a Paradise unto us; he terrifieth
us in representing us with a Hell; and as if he were much interessed in our
Souls health, or in our damnation, he employs all his Graces to purchase our
love and to shun our hatred. when he treated with the Jews as with his
subjects; when through his excessive goodness he disdained not to own the
quality of their Sovereign; when he gave them Laws by the mouth of Moses, and
when he governed them by the wisdom of their Judges, who were but his Images,
he terrified them many times by his Chastisements, and sent plagues and famine
into their habitations, to reduce them to obedience by fear. He many times also
promised them to enlarge their Borders, to assist them in their Battles, and to
give them advantage over their enemies, to the end that soliciting their hopes
by his promises, he might by their Passions win their good wills. In fine, all
the world confesses, that Politicians, like Orators, cannot more violently,
nor yet with more sweetness win man's consent, than by awakening the motions of
his Soul, and by dexterously insinuating themselves into him by the hopes of
Honor, or fear of punishment; but they do not agree which of these two
passions ought to be employed to reduce him the more assuredly to his duty.

Those who take part with fear, Inter Principem and Subditos non est amicitia.
Arist. 1. Politic.
say, that this passion, being by nature servile, seems to be the portion of
subjects, that this their relation cannot be taken from them without taking
away their condition, and without reducing them into the quality of children or
friends; they add, that it is in the power of the Sovereign to make himself be
feared, not to make himself be loved; that punishments make greater impression
upon the souls of such as obey, than rewards; that love is always voluntary,
and that fear may be enforced; that contempt, which is the capital enemy to
Monarchy, may proceed as well from love as from familiarity; that fear can only
produce hatred, which injureth more the reputation, than the power of Kings;
that since wisdom will have us to choose the lesser of two evils, we must
resolve to lose the love of the people, to preserve their respect, and say with
that ancient Author, Let him hate me, provided that he fear me. They confirm
all these reasons by examples, and make it appear, that the most severe Empires
have flourished the most, that punishments have always exceeded rewards, and
that in the Roman Commonwealth, where they gave but an oaken Garland to such
soldiers as had mounted a Breach, they made them pass the Pikes for having
gone out of their Rank, or forsaken their Colors; that God himself (whose
government ought to serve for an example to all Princes) governed his people
with more severity than lenity, that he had been constrained to express himself
by the voice of Thunder to work obedience to him, that he had not preserved his
authority by the death of Rebels, and that notwithstanding whatever inclination
he had to Mercy, he was enforced to have recourse to Justice. Briefly, they
say, Sovereignty is somewhat hateful, that Love and Majesty agree not well
together, that one cannot rule over men and be beloved, that men are so jealous
of their liberty, as they hate all things that obviate it, and that Princes
according to the Maxim in the Gospel, Inimici hominis domestici ejus. Mat. 10.
have no greater enemies than their Subjects.

Those who take part with love have no less specious reasons, and much more
true ones; for they say that the Sovereign being the Father of his people, he
is bound to treat them as his Children, that fear makes them only Masters of
the Body, and that love makes them rule over the Heart. That such as fear their
Masters, seek an end of their servitude, and that such as love them dream not
of recovering their Liberty. That such Princes as govern with rigor, cannot
live securely, Necesse est multos timeat, quem multi timent. Senec.
that of necessity those who cause fear, must themselves be subject thereto,
and that they must fear their peoples revolt, who only obey them through
constraint. Semper in authors redundat timor, nec quisquam metuitur, ipse
securus. Sen. 2. De Ira. c. 13.
That if nothing that is violent be of continuance, an Empire which is only
grounded upon violence, cannot long subsist; and to answer the reasons objected
unto them, they reply that love enters much better into the heart than does
fear; that if there be angersom ways to make a man be feared, Non eo loco ubi
servitutem esse velint, fidem sperandam esse. Live. 8.
there be innocent Charms to make him be beloved; that in generously-minded
men, recompenses make greater impressions than punishments; and that the
promises of a Prince more animates his subjects than does his threats; that
contempt cannot arise from love, since love arises from valuation, and is
always accompanied by respect; that the justest Monarchies, and not the
severest, have flourished the most; and that if in the Roman Commonwealth
punishments exceeded recompenses, it was not, for that fear made deeper
impressions in the souls of men than love; but because Vice has not so much of
ugliness as virtue has of beauty; and that it is not necessary to propound
honor unto her, who finding all her glory within her self is as well satisfied
with silence as amidst all acclamations and applause. That if God dealt
rigorously with his people, 'twas contrary to his inclination, and that his
lenity had been greater than his severity, because the latter could not
purchase him all Iudaea, and the former has submitted unto him the whole
world. St. Paul represents us with the difference between these two laws,
often, in the holy Scripture; the one of which has made slaves, the other has
produced children; the one of which has fortified sin, the other has
destroyed the tyranny thereof. They add, that Sovereignty is not odious, since
it was consecrated in the person of Jesus Christ, Pertransit benefaciendo and
sanando omnes oppressos a diabolo, quoniam Deus erat cum illo. Act. c. 10.
who desirous to serve as an example to all Kings on earth, never used his
power, but in order of service to his mercy; and never did any miracle, unless
to help the afflicted: In fine, that subjects did not repine at the loss of
their liberty, since that being voluntary, they like it; that Princes are not
the objects of fear, since they are the images of God; and that some Princes
have been found even among Infidels, Titus deliciae generis humani. Suet* in
It Is.
who have been their peoples delight, whilst alive, and their sorrow, when dead.

Though these answers be so pertinent, as they are not be gainsaid; yet
methinks both the parties may be reconciled, and their difference so taken
away, as that each of them should therein find their advantage; for though
lenity be to be preferred before rigor, and that a State be better grounded
upon love than upon fear, there are occasions wherein a Prince ought to let his
clemency give place to his severity, and wherein he is obliged to quit the
quality of a Father, that he may exercise the like of a Judge. He ought to
govern his humor according to the humor of his Subjects; if they be
giddy-headed or proud, he must use rigor, to teach them obedience and
fidelity; if troublesome, and prone to Rebellion, he must make examples, and by
the punishment of a few, frighten more; if unquiet and desirous of novelty, he
must punish them by keeping them in continual employment; but amidst all these
punishments, he must not forget that he is the head of his State, that his
subjects are a part of himself, and that he ought to be as sparing in punishing
them as a Physician in cutting off the Arm or Leg of a diseased person. If
nothing be done in his Kingdom which enforces him to Rigor; if all things be
peaceable, and if the people under his government have no other motions than
his own will; Divus Nerva res olim insociabi^es miscuit, I^perium and
Libertatem. Tacit.
he ought to deal gently with them, afford them just liberty, which may
persuade them that they are rather his children than his subjects, and that
reserving to himself the marks only of Sovereignty, he permits them to gather
all the fruits thereof. In brief, he ought not to use Rigor, but when Clemency
is bootless: in his government, as well as in the like of God, mildness must
precede severity, and all the world must know that he punishes not the faulty
out of his own inclination, but forced thereunto by necessity. The power of a
Prince is sufficiently dreadful by reason of his greatness, he need not make it
odious by his cruelty. One word of theirs terrifies all their subjects; the
punishment of one guilty person astonisheth all the rest; their anger makes
even the innocent to quake; and as a Thunderbolt does little harm, yet
frightens much; so great men cannot punish a particular personage, without
infusing terror throughout their whole Dominions. I therefore am of opinion
with the wisest Politicians, That Sovereignty ought to be tempered with lenity,
and that being accompanied with all qualities that may make it be feared, it
ought to seek out all such means as may make it be beloved.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. What Passions ought to reign in the power of a Prince.
ONe of the greatest Misfortunes which can befall Religion, is the liberty
which men take to frame unto themselves such a Divinity as likes them best; In
the first age every one adored the workmanship of his own hands, and made an
Idol unto himself, which had its worth from the industry of the Workman, or
from the excellency of the Materials; in pursuit of time, as men's spirits grew
more refined, Poets made the gods sensible, and gave them all such affections
as make us faulty or miserable: one might see them make love in their Writings,
fight in Fables; and one might observe in them all the chief affections of
those that had invented them; Philosophers not able to endure so unjust gods,
formed more rational Deities, and proposed unto the people the Idols of their
own minds; every one figured out unto himself a god according to his own
inclinations, and gave him what advantages may be imagined: Some placed him in
idleness, and that they might not trouble his rest, berest him of the
knowledge, or government of our affairs; some made him so good, as that he
suffered all faults to go unpunisht, and dealt as favorably with the guilty as
with the innocent; others made him so rigorous, as it seemed he had created man
only to destroy him, and that he found no contentment but in the death of his
Subjects; this disorder has passed from Religion into State-government, and
according to the ages wherein men have lived, they have framed unto themselves
diverse Ideas of Kings personages, and have placed in their Princes such
perfections only as they were acquainted withal; for in the beginning of the
world, when people preferred the body before the soul, they chose such Kings as
were of an extraordinary stature, and who were as strong as Giants: Nay, Ab
humero and sursum eminebat super omnem populum. 1 Reg. c. 9.
it seemed that God would apply himself to this humor, when he gave Saul unto
the Israelites; for the Scripture says, He was higher by the head than all his
subjects; and when the Poets describe unto us their Heroes, they never fail in
giving them this advantage; but when time had taught us that our good resided
not in the body, men begun to consider the mind of such men as they would make
their Kings, and cast their eyes upon such as had most of government in them,
or most of courage; they observed their inclinations, and knowing what power
their inclinations have over their wills, they esteemed them no less than
Virtues.

But Opinions do so differ upon this Subject, as a man may say that every
Politician fancies unto himself a Prince according to his humor, and indues
him with that Passion which is most agreeable unto himself. Some have wished
that their Prince had no Passion at all, and that being the Image of God, he
should be raised above the Creatures, he should see all the motions of the
earth without any alteration o^ spirit; but we know very well that his being in
a higher condition than his subjects makes him not be of another nature; and
that since he is not exempt from the Diseases of the Body, he cannot defend
himself against the passions of the soul. Others have been of opinion that he
ought to have a^ passions; that like unto the Sun and constellations he should
be in a perpetual motion, and employ all his care, and all his thoughts upon
the welfare of his State. Some have thought that the desire of glory was the
most lawful Passion in a King, Contemptu famae, contemni virtutes. Tacit. 4.
annal.
and that since Fortune had endued him with all the goods she could confer upon
him, he should only labor how to atchieve honor. That virtue was only
preserved by this desire, and that he who valued not reputation, could not love
Justice, that a Prince ought not to endeavor the eternizing of his memory by
the pomp of glorious Buildings, but by the gallantry of his actions; that
setting all other things at naught, he should only study how to leave a happy
memory of his reign after his death. Caetera principibus statim adesse, unum
insatiabiliter parandum, prosperam sui memoriam. Tacit. 4. annal.
That nothing could more further him in this generous design than an insatiable
desire of Glory; that Riches were the goods of particular men, but that glory
was the humor of Kings; and that he might well hazard all other things to
compass it. Others less glorious, but more rational, have thought that fear
ought to reign in the soul of Princes, and that as their wisdom exceeded their
valor, the apprehension of danger should in them also surpass the desire of
glory; for to boot that their fortune is exposed to a thousand mischiefs; that
the greater it is, it runs the greater danger; that it is the more brittle by
how much the more glorious; they are bound to prevent accidents by their
watchfulness, to withstand storms by their Constancy, and to forgo their own
happiness, to share in the misery of their Subjects.

All these opinions are upheld by examples; for there have been some Kings who
have known so well how to moderate their passions, as they seemed not to have
any; they have not been troubled at ill Successes, and they would receive the
news of a Defeat, with the same countenance, as the tidings of Victory. The
quiet of their mind was not altered by the diverse functions they were obliged
unto; they punished faults with the same easiness as they rewarded Virtue; and
whatever alteration befell their States, you should find none in them; they
seemed to be raised to so high a pitch of perfection, as one might say, in the
weakness of man they had the assurance of a God. Quid majus est quam in
infirmitate hominis, habere securitatem Dei? Sen.
There have been others, whose government has been no less happy, and who have
yet been of a quite different disposition; for as their Empire was no less dear
unto them than were their own bodies, no alteration could happen therein which
might not be read in their faces; good success put them in good humor, they
were afflicted at unhappy accidents, they were touched to the quick even with
evils that threatened them from afar off, and every thing that befell their State
made so strong an impression in them, as they seemed to live in two bodies, and
that having two lives to lose, they had two deaths to fear. I dare not blame
this their restlesness, since it was occasioned by an extreme love; and a body
must be unjust to condemn a Prince that makes himself miserable, for no other
cause, but that he may make his Subjects happy. Augustus Caesar was of this
humor, and though he had endeavored to compass so much constancy, as not to be
troubled at any thing, yet could he not hear of any good or bad success which
befell his Commonwealth, without witnessing his resentment thereof by his word
and actions. Varrus his defeat cost him tears, and this accident which he was
not prepared for, made him say such things as I do rather impute to his
affection than to his weakness, since upon other occasions he had given so good
proof of his Courage.

Their number is great who have labored after glory, and who have had no other
Passion but how to acquire honor. Nothing seemed difficult unto them which
bear with it the face of glory, insomuch as by an inevitable misfortune, they
neglected virtue, when in obscurity; and put a valuation upon a glorious vice.
According to their Tenets it was as lawful to overthrow a State as to found
one, to oppress a Republic, as to defend it; and to undertake a War against
Allies, as well as against Enemies. Prosperum ac felix scelus virtus vocatur.
Sen. Tragoed.
They run after glory by unlawful ways, and as some make fortunate faults pass
for Virtues, these took glorious pieces of injustice for heroic Actions. The
first Caesar held this Maxim; his ambition persuaded him that nothing was
infamous that could purchase him honor, and that he ought not to consider
whether an enterprise were just or unjust, provided that it might add unto his
reputation, and make his Name look big in Story. Pompeius occultior, non
melior, Tacit. Ore probo, a^imo inverecundo. Salust.
His Son in Law was of the same opinion, and though he had fairer pretenses for
his designs, his motives thereunto were no better; for under color of
preserving the Commonwealth, he increased his particular authority, and by a
detestable piece of Art, he made use of the Senate, to establish his tyranny.
There needs no great policy go to the observation, that so unruly a Passion is
disadvantageous to States, and that this is not that which ought to precede in
the soul of Princes.

I shall therefore willingly side with those who attribute this honor to the
zeal of Justice, and who will have the hearts of Monarchs animated by this
harmless affection; for since the welfare of their people is the end of all
their labors, the justice that must produce and preserve it, must be the scope
of their desires, and they must maintain a well grounded quiet in the variety
of conditions whereof their States are compounded. Who is not endued with this
virtue, knows not how to reign; and though he have all the rest, he deserves
not to bear a Scepter, since he wants that which makes Kings good, and Kingdoms
happy. I cannot end this Discourse without taking notice of the excessive
obligation which we have to Divine providence, who has given us a Prince of so
pure inclinations, as he seems to have no part in this sin, which has put our
nature out of order; and who loves Justice so passionately, as he would be
therewithal adorned, and chose the title of just, as the only recompense of all
his heroic virtues. He might have assumed unto to himself the title of happy,
as well as Sylla; since the Sea has born respect unto his endeavors, that the
Alps have humbled themselves, and their Snow dissolved to make way for his
victorious forces; and that upon a thousand occasions the Elements have fought
in his behalf; he might have taken the title of Great, as well as Alexander,
since his Actions have exceeded our hopes, and that he has undertaken, and
effected designs which all his predecessors have thought unpossible: Lastly, he
might have challenged the name of Victorious, as well as Trajan, since men may
number his Victories by his Battles, since his soldiers were never worsted in
his presence, and since good success has always accompanied his Enterprises.
But knowing that Justice is the Virtue of Kings, he has contented himself with
the Title of Just, and has preferred it before those of Happy, Great, or
Victorious; to teach all Monarchs, that Zeal of the public good is the passion
which chiefly ought to rule in them.

The end of the First Part.
The Second Part of the Use of PASSIONS. Of Passions in particular.
The First Treatise of Love and Hatred.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Properties, and Effects of Love.
DIvinity teaches us that there is nothing more hidden, yet nothing more known
than the God whom we adore; his Essence fills the world, and his Immensity is
such as he can produce nothing which he encloseth not; all creatures are the
Images of his greatness, and the proofs of his power; one cannot see them
without knowing him; and they by their motions discover unto us what the
Prophets have declared unto us in their Writings; yet is there nothing more
secret than he, Qui ubique est, nullibi est.
he is every where, and he is no where; he makes himself to be felt, yet will
not suffer himself to be touched; he environeth us, yet will not permit us to
approach him; all people know he is, and no Philosophers know what he is. The
belief that we have, that he is, is so engraven in the very groundworks of our
Essence, as to eface it, were to annihilate our selves; yet cannot our
understanding comprehend him; and this Sun casts about so much light as dazles
the eyes that would behold him. Though love be but a Passion of our Soul, yet
has it this advantage common with the Divine Essence, that it is as secret, as
it is public; and that there is nothing in nature more evident, yet nothing
more hidden. Every one speaks of Love as of the soul that preserves the
Universe, and as the secret knot which entertains the Society of the world; our
desires declare it, and a man that wishes, witnesses his love; our hopes
divulge it, and all our Passions do discover it, yet is it retreated too within
the bottom of our hearts; and all the marks that it gives of its presence, are
as many clouds which hide it from our understandings; men feel the power
thereof, yet cannot explain its Essence; even they who live under its Empire,
and who reverence the Laws thereof, are ignorant of its nature.

Poets who interest themselves in its greateess, Deum esse amorem tu^piter
vitio favens finxit libido, quoque liberior foret, titulum, furori, numinis
falsi addidit. Sen. in Hipolyto.
will have it pass for a god; lest men may blame the violence of Love, they
give it a stately name, and endeavor to excuse the true fury thereof by a
false Piety. The Platonicks make Love a Spirit, and attribute unto it so
absolute a power over the Passions, as they will have even Hatred it self to
obey its Will, Odiumque parit, cum jussit amor, veteres cedunt ignibus irae.
Idem ibid.
and will have Hatred change all her Rage into Mildness, that she may please
Love. The Stoics term Love a Fury, and judging of its nature by its effects,
they cannot believe that that motion of our soul be well ruled, which is as
direful to us as Hatred, and which has so little government, as it most
commonly offends even those whom it intends to oblige. The Peripateticks
dare not give it any name at all, Idem est exitus odii and amoris insani. Sen.
6* Benefic. c. 25.
for fear of being mistaken; and Aristotle, who defines the most hidden
things, contents himself with the description thereof, leaving us in a despair
how to know a Passion which he knew not: Sometimes he terms it sympathizing,
sometimes an inclination, sometimes a complacency, and teaches us by these
different terms, that the nature of Love is no less obscure, than is the nature
of the Soul.

Amongst so many doubts, some Philosophers affirm, that it is the first
impression which the Bonum sensible makes in the heart of man, that it is a
pleasing wound which man has received from a fair Object, that it is the Beam
of a Sun which warms him, that it is a Charm whose virtue is attractive, and
that it is the first motion which carries him, either to what appears to be
good, or to what truly is so. But if I may be permitted to differ from common
opinions, that I may follow the more true, I will say that Love is all the
Passions; that according to its different conditions it has different names,
but that custom has so prevailed, as in its birth it bears the most glorious
name; for when an inclination is formed in the heart, and that a pleasing
object does with delight stir up the Will, we call it Love; when it sallies
forth from it self to join with what it loves, we call it Desire; when it grows
more vigorous, and that its strength promises good success, we call it Hope;
when it encourages it self against the difficulties it meets withal, we call
it Choler; when it prepares to fight, and seeks out weapons to defeat its
enemies, and to assist its Allies, we call it Boldness. But in all these
conditions it is still Love; the name which Philosophers have given it in its
birth, agrees not less with it in his progress; and if when but a Child, it
merit so honorable a title, it deserves it better when it is grown greater by
Desires, and strengthened by Hopes. It Is true that Loves first condition is the
rule of all the rest, and that as all rivers derive their greatness from their
Springhead, all the Passions borrow their strength from this first inclination
which is termed Love; for as soon as it is taken with the beauty of an object,
it kindles its desires, excites its hopes, and carries the fire into all the
passions which hold of its Empire: it is in the Will as in a Throne, where it
gives orders to its subjects; it is in the bottom of the soul as in a strong
Hold, from whence it inspireth courage into its soldiers; it is like the heart
which gives life to all the members, and the power thereof is so great as it
cannot be well expressed by any example. Kings often times meet with disobedience
in their subjects; the most valiant Commanders are sometimes forsaken by their
Soldiers, and the heart cannot always disperse its spirits throughout all the
members of the Body; but Love is so absolute in his dominion, as he never finds
any resistance to his will; all the Passions get on foot to execute his
commandments, and as the motion of the Moon causes the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea, so does the motions of Love cause peace, or trouble in our soul.

Charitas Dei diffusa est in cordibus per Spiritum sanctum, qui datus est
nobis. Romans 5.
Now this Love, the nature whereof is so hidden, has diverse branches; and may
be divided into natural and supernatural; the latter is that which God
disperseth into our wills, to make us capable of loving him as our Father, and
of pretending unto glory as to our inheritance; the former is that which Nature
has imprinted in our souls, to fasten us to those objects which are delightful
to us; and this is divided into spiritual and sensible love; spiritual love
resides in the will, and rather deserves to be styled a Virtue than a Passion;
sensible love is in the lower part of the soul, and has so much commerce with
the Senses, from whence he borrows his name, as he always makes impression upon
the Body; and this it is which is properly termed Passion. In fine, these two
lovers are divided again into two others; the one of which is called the love
of Friendship, the other the love of Interest. The first is the more noble, and
he who is touched therewith, respects nothing but what may be advantageous to
whom he loves; Amor amicitiae and amor concupiscentiae In quid amicum paro? Ut
habeam possim, pro quo mori, ut habeam quem in auxilium sequar, cujus me morti
opponam and impendam. Ep. 9.
he wishes him well, or procures what is good for him; and having no
consideration but honor, and his friends content, he sacrifices himself for
him, and thinks himself happy if he lose his life, to assure his friend of his
affection. This noble Passion is that which has done all the glorious actions
which are observed in History; It Is she that has filled Tyrants with
admiration, and who has made these enemies to Society, wish to love, and to be
beloved; judging aright that Sovereigns are better guarded by their friends
than by their soldiers, and that all their forces were but weak, were they not
supported by the love of their Subjects. Qui amicus esse coepit, quia expedit,
placebit ei aliquod pretium contra amicitiam, si ullum in illa placet pretium
praeter ipsam.
The second sort of Love, which we term the love of Interest, is as common as
unjust; for the greatest part of affections is grounded upon utility, or upon
pleasure; those who suffer themselves to be carried away thereby, have not so
much friendship as self-love, and if they will speak their minds, Ista quam tu
describis, negotiatio est, non amicitia, quae ad commodum accedit, Sen. Ep. 9.
they will confess that they love themselves in their friends, and that they
love them not so much for any virtue, which they observe in them, as for the
good they hope to reap by them; thus we may see that such like affections last
no longer then they are either useful, or pleasing; and that the same interest
which gave them life, makes them die; they betake themselves to the fortune,
not to the person, and these are commerces which last no longer than they are
entertained by hopes of profit or of pleasure.

Of so many sorts of love which Philosophy has marked out unto us, we will
here consider none but that which resides in the inferior part of the soul; let
it have either virtue or interest for its foundation. And since we know the
nature thereof, we will examine the qualities; the first whereof is, that it
always seeks what is good, and never betakes it self to an object, which either
is not good, or appears not so to be; for as nature is the workmanship of God,
she cannot have strayed so much out of the way, but that she must preserve some
remainder of his first inclinations, insomuch as having been destinied to enjoy
the Summum bonum, she longs after it; by an error which may very well be
excused, she fastens her self to all that has but the likeness thereof, and by
an instinct, which remains in her, though in disorder, she suffers her self to
be charmed by all things which have in them any thing of beauty or of goodness.
As if she had found what she seeks after, she indiscreetly betakes her self
thereunto, and by a deplorable misfortune she oft-times takes a falsehood for a
truth; she commits Idolatry whilst she thinks to perform actions of Piety;
and attributing that unto the work, which is only due unto the workman, she
runs into the same error which a lover should do, who by a strange malady
should forget the Mistress which he vows service to, and passionately adore her
Picture. This fault ought rather to be imputed to man, than to his love; for
love being blind follows his inclination, not being able to discern between
appearances and truth, he loves the good which offers it self unto him; that he
may not miss of what he looks for, he betakes himself to what he finds; and is
only to blame in being too faithful; but man cannot excuse his sin, since
Reason is his guide, and that he may learn by her, that all those goods which
are touched by the senses, or are the objects of the senses, are but the
shadows of that which he ought to love. He must correct his love, and keep it
from betaking it self to objects, which though they be indeed beautiful, are
not the Sovereign good, or Summum bonum which he seeks after. When he thinks
the qualities they are endued withal may work a change in him, he might shun
them as snares, and use violence upon himself to get free from the creatures,
lest they make him forget his Creator.

From this propriety of Love arises a second, which is, that he never is at
quiet, but goes always in pursuit of what he loves; for seeing so many shadows
of that supreme beauty which he adores, he is always in action, leaving one to
take another, he seeks in all, what he cannot find in one alone; and his change
is not so much a proof of his fickleness, as of their vanity; he becoms wise at
his own cost; when he meets not with what he expects in the beauty which he
idolatrizeth, he repents him of his fault, and betakes himself to another
subject, which he is forced to forgo again, because he enjoys but one part of
that universal good wherewithal he is taken; his inconstancy would last as long
as his life, did not reason teach him, that what he covets is invisible, and
that the abiding place wherein we are, is not destined for the passion, but for
the hope thereof; he then sets at nothing what he so much esteemed, and
considering that natural beauties are but steps whereby to raise us to
supernatural beauty, he loves them with reservedness, and uses them as means
whereby to purchase what he seeks after.

The powerful impression which this beauty makes upon Love, causes Loves third
propriety, which is, that he cannot live in quiet, and that being solicited by
his desires, he is always busy; he is of the nature of the constellations,
which are in a perpetual motion; the end of one trouble is the beginning of
another; and he has not so soon ended his first design, but he frames a
second; he is like those conquerors, who egged on by ambition, prepare always
for new combats, never tasting the pleasure of victory. I cannot therefore
approve of the Poets invention, who have feigned Love to be the son of
Idleness; Habet omnis amor vim suam, nec potest vacare amor in anima amantis
Aug. in Psalm. 121.
for if his genealogy be true, we must confess he is not of his mothers humor.
That unfortunate Poet, who was Loves Martyr, and who saw himself justly
persecuted for having forged Weapons against women's Chastity, avows that this
passion is working; and that it is so far from being at rest, as it obliges
its partakers to be soldiers; and that to love, a man must resolve to wage
war. Hence it is that St. Augustine mixing sacred Love with profane, makes them
both equally operative, and acknowledges that a true affection cannot be idle.
Ambition, which is the love of honor, is a good proof of this, since it makes
such impression upon the hearts of those that are ambitious, as they have not
much more rest than have the damned, and that they are always cause of more
trouble to themselves, than to those whom they oppress. Avarice, which is the
love of money, does authorize this truth no less than does Ambition, since
those wretchmen which are therewithal possessed, rend up the bowels of the
earth that they may not be unuseful, and seek out Hell before their death, that
they may not be exempt from pain whilst alive. This propriety is so peculiar to
Love, as it is not found in any other of the Passions. For though our desires
be the first rivulets that derive from this Springhead, yet do they give us
some respit; and when they are weary of seeking after a far distant good, they
suffer us to take a little rest; we oft-times dry our tears, and if we make not
peace, we conclude a truce with our sorrow; we do not always meditate upon
revenge, and choler as so much less lasting as it has more of impetuosity and
violence. Our hatred is sometimes laid asleep, and requires a new injury to
awaken it; our joys are so short, as the longest of them endure but for a
moment, and they love idleness so much, as they cease to be pleasing when they
begin to be operative. But Love is always in action, it tarries not till age
give it strength to work, it forms designs as soon as it is born; though
abandoned by desires and hopes, it cease not to think of what it loves, and
to entertain it self to no purpose with the thought of good success, which it
never shall enjoy. In fine, activity is so natural unto it, as the life thereof
consists in motion; and as the heart, it cease to live when it cease to
move.

From hence proceeds its fourth propriety, which is the strength which does
accompany it in all its designs; for though but new born, it is vigorous, if
true; and giving proofs of its courage, it tameth Monsters, which it is not yet
acquainted withal; it measures its strength by its desires, and thinks it self
able to do whatsoever it will; it is not astonished with difficulties: If one
propound them to Love, that they may stay the careir thereof, he thinks it is
done to try its Will, and solicited by glory it endeavors to overcome them:
Love neither accepts of, nor makes excuses. It will try all its forces before
'twill acknowledge an impotency, and it does oft-times overcome enemies, which
the most generous virtues durst never set upon. Hence it is that the holy
Scripture compares it to death, not only for that it separateth us from our
selves, to join us to the things we love; but because nothing can resist it; for
of so many pains which Divine Justice has found out, Magnum verbum fortis ut
mors; Dilectio magnificentius exprimi non potuit fortitudo charitatis; quis
enim morti resistit ^ ignibus, undis, ferro,, potestatibus, Regibus resistitur,
venit una mors, quis ei resistit? nihil est illa fortius, propterea viribus
ejus charitas comparatur. Aug. in Psalm 121.
wherewith to punish us, there is none, but death, which we may not defend our
selves from. We save our selves from the injuries of the Weather by Clothes and
Houses; we overcome the Barrenness of the Earth by our excessive labor; we
correct nourishments by the help of Physic; we reduce wild Beasts to our
obedience by art or forces; we oft-times turn our pains into pleasure, and we
draw advantages from the misery of our condition, which we should not have
found in the state of Innocence. But nothing can resist death; and though
Physicians have found out secrets to prolong our lives, Et quia ipsa charitas
occidit quod fuimus, ut simus quod non eramus, facit in nobis quandam mortem
dilectio: ipsa morti erant mortui quibus Apostolus dicebat, mortui estis, etc.
Idem ibid.
yet do they in vain seek out means to defend themselves against death, which
makes havoc throughout the whole earth, pardons neither age nor sex; and
Palaces, which are environed with so many guards, cannot keep Kings from the
reach thereof: So Love finds no difficulties which it overcomes not, no pride
which it lays not low, no power which it tameth not, nor no rigor which it
does not allay.

Briefly, by another propriety which is not less considerable than the former,
Love charmeth troubles, mingleth pleasures with pain; and to encourage us to
difficult actions, finds out inventions to make them either pleasing or
glorious. Hunting is rather a business than a diversion, it is an image of war;
and men who pursue wild Beasts, seem as if they studied how to overcome their
enemies; the Victory is therein doubtful, as well as in combats; and honor is
therein purchased sometimes by the loss of life; yet all these troubles are the
hunters pleasures, and their passion to this Exercise makes them term that a
pastime which Reason would term a punishment. There is nothing of delight in
war, the very name thereof is odious; were it not accompanied with injustice,
disorder, and fear, it would notwithstanding have horrors enough to astonish
all men; death makes her self be there seen in a thousand different shapes;
there is no exercise in war wherein the danger does not exceed the glory; and
it never furnishes soldiers with any actions which are not as bloody as
glorious; yet those that love it, make it their delight, they esteem all the
deformities thereof beauties, Nullo modo sunt onerosi labores amantium sed
etiam ipsi delectant sicut venantium, piscantium; interest ergo quid ametur,
nam in eo quod amatur, aut non laborantur, aut labor amatur. Aug.
and by an inclination which proceeds rather from their love than from their
humor, they find delight in dangers, and taste the pleasantness of peace in
the tumults of war. This it is which made St. Augustine say, That Lovers
troubles are never troublesome, and that they never find pain in serving what
they love, or if they do, they cherish it.

But we shall never make an end if we would observe all the proprieties of
Love; I therefore pass on to the effects thereof, which being so many pictures
of Love, will represent unto us its nature, Extasim facit amor, amatores suo
statu dimovet, sui juris esse non finit, sed in ea quae amant penitus
transfert. Dionis. De Divin. No^ min. c. 4.
and will discover unto us what it is able to do. The first of its miracles, is
that which we call Ecstasy, for it frees the Soul from the Body which she
inanimates, that she may join to the Object which she loves; it parts us from
our selves by a pleasing violence; and what the holy Scripture attributes to
the Spirit of God, befalls this miraculous division; so as a lover is never at
home with himself; if you will find him, you must seek him in the person that
he adores. Vivo autem jam non ego, vivit vero in me Christus. Gal. 2.
He will have people know that contrary to the Laws of wisdom, he is always
without himself; and that he has forsaken all care of his own preservation;
since he became a slave to love. The Saints draw their glory from this ecstasy,
and truth it self, which speaks by their mouths, obliges them to confess, that
they live more in Jesus Christ, than in themselves. Now as a man must die to
himself, to live in another, death accompanies this life; and as well sacred
as profane lovers cannot love unless they be bound to die. It Is true that this
death is advantageous to them, since it procures unto them a life wherewithal
they are better pleased than with that which they have lost; for they live
again in those that they love; by a miracle of love, they, like the Phoenix,
take life again from their ashes, Mortui enim estis, and vi^a vestra est
abscondita cum Christo in Deo Col. 3.
and recover life in the very bosom of death. He who does not conceive this
truth, cannot understand those words, by which S. Paul teaches us, that we are
dead unto our selves, and alive in Jesus Christ.

This effect produces another, which is not much less admirable; for as lovers
have no other life than what they borrow from their love, it infallibly falls
out that they transform themselves thereinto, and that ceasing to be what they
were, they begin to be that which they love; they change condition as well as
nature, and by a wonder, which would surpass all belief, were it not usual,
they become like unto that which they cherish. It Is true that this power shines
much more gloriously in divine than in profane Love; for though Kings abase
themselves in loving their Subjects, and that they forgo their greatness, as
soon as they engage themselves in friendship, yet do they not raise those up
into their Throne whom they love. Jealousy (which is inseparable from Royalty)
will not suffer them to give their Crown away to him who possesses their
heart. But if they should arrive at this excess, the Maxim would only be true
in them, and their Subjects could not change conditions by the force of their
love, for the love of greatness makes not a Sovereign, nor is a man the more
accommodated though he love riches; the desire of health did never yet cure a
sick man; and we have not found, that the bare Passion to know, has made men
wise. But divine Love has so much power, as it raseth us up above our selves,
and by a strange Metamorphosis it makes us be that which it makes us love; It
renders the guilty innocent; it makes slaves children, changes Demons into
Angels; and that we may not diminish the virtue thereof, whilst we think to
heighten it, let it suffice to say, that of men, it makes Gods.

It does not therefore become us to complain of our misery, Quid enim refert
natura esse quod potest effici voluntate. D. Chrysostom. De laud. Paul. Hom. 6.
and to accuse our Creator, for not having equalled our condition to that of
Angels; for though those pure spirits have great advantages over us, and that
we hope for no other good than that which they possess, yet are we happy
enough, since we are permitted to love God, and that we are made to hope, that
our nature being by love transformed into his nature, we shall lose what we
have of mortal, and perishable, to acquire what is incorruptible and eternal.
This is the Consolation of divine Lovers, and this is the only means how to
aspire, without blame, to that happiness, which Lucifer could not do, but with
impiety. I cannot end this Discourse without justly reproaching those that
whilst they may love God, engage their affections on the earth, or on earthly
things, and deprive themselves of that immense felicity which divine love
promises them; for in loving of the creatures, they cannot share in their
perfections, without doing the like in their defaults; after having labored
much they oft-times change an obscure and peaceable condition, into a more
glorious, but a more dangerous one. So there is always hazard in the love of
the creatures, and the advantage that may be drawn from thence, is never so
pure, but that it is mingled with somewhat of misfortune. For whatsoever
passion we have for the creature, we are not sure the creature has the like
for us; yet this miraculous change, which passes for the principal effect of
love is made in this mutual affection, and in this correspondency of
friendship. But we run not these hazzards in consecrating our love to God; his
perfections are not accompanied with faults; and we know it cannot be
disadvantageous to us, to make a change with him. Our love is never without
this acknowledgment, since it is rather the effect than the cause of his, and
that we love not him, till he has first loved us. He is so just as he never
denies our affection the recompense which it deserves; he is not like those
misbelieving Mistresses, who amongst the numbers of their Lovers, prefer him
who is best behaved, before him that loves best; in the commerce which we hold
with him, we are sure that he that has most charity, shall have most glory,
and that in his Kingdom the most faithful lover shall be always the most
honored.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the Badness of Love.
SInce there is nothing so sacred but meets with some sacrilegious person,
which does profane it, Nihil in rerum natura tam sacrum quod sacrilegium non
inveniat. Sen.
we must not wonder if Love, which is the holiest Passion of our Soul, meet
with impious persons, which corrupt it, and who contrary to its own inclination
make it serve their designs; for love seeks only the Summum bonum; she is not
without some sort of violence made to love her own particular good, which is
but the shadow of what she desires; to abuse it therefore, sin must disorder
nature, and turn natural love into self-love, making the Springhead of good,
the original of all our evil. For during the state of innocence, men had no
love save only for good, and nature was so well tempered with grace, as that
all her inclinations were holy: In this happy condition, charity and self love
were the same thing; and a man feared not to injure his neighbor by loving
himself; but since his disobedience, his love changed Nature; he who looked
upon another man's advantage and his own with the same Eye, began to separate
them; and forgetting what he ought to God, he made a god of himself. He
confounded all the Laws of Innoceney, and as if he alone had been in the world,
he forsook the sweets of Society, he took a resolution to rule his affections
by his own interests, and to love no longer any thing but what was useful and
pleasing unto him. This mischief, like poison, dispersed it self throughout the
whole fabric of Nature; and Reason cannot defend her self against it, without
the assistance of Grace. The gallantest actions lost their luster by this
irregularity; Philosophy by all her precepts could not reform a disorder, which
was rather in the bottom of Nature, than in the Will. She put some of her might
to fight against this Monster, and spying a glimering of light amidst the
darkness with which she was blinded, she confessed that man did not belong so
much to himself as to his Country, and that he ought endeavor more the glory
of the State, than the good of his own family. She thought that the love of our
neighbor should be formed upon the love of our selves, and believed that in
willing us to treat them as our selves, she had corrected all the abuse of
Humane Nature. But this malady lying not only in the Understanding, her advice
was not sufficient to cure it, so as she was enforced to confess that there was
none could reform man, but he that made him. Thus shall we find no remedy for
our misfortunes but by the assistance of Grace; and our desires have had no
freedom, save since Jesus Christ came into the world to banish self-love from
out our souls; for his coming had no other motive, nor his Doctrine any other
end, than the ruin of this dreadful Monster. He sets upon it throughout all
his Maxims, and hardly does any word proceed from his divine mouth which gives
it not a mortal wound. He protests he would admit of no Disciples, who have not
changed their selflove into an holy aversion; Si quis venit ad me, and non odit
patrem suum, and matrem, and uxorem, and filios, and fratres, and sorores,
adhuc autem and animam suam, non potest meus esse discipulus, Luc. 14.
and that he will not suffer any Subject in his Kingdom, who are not ready to
lose their lives for the glory of their Sovereign. He condemns the excess of
riches, and the love of honor, only for that they nourish this inordinate
Passion. and he obliges us to love our enemies, only to teach us to hate our
selves. Mortification and Humility, which are the ground-works of his doctrine,
tend only to destroy this inordinate affection which we bear unto our Souls, or
our Bodies. In fine, he has appointed us charity, only to overthrow self-love,
Interficiens inimicitias in semetipso. Ephesians. c. 2.
and he died upon the Cross, only to make his enemy die, which is the cause of
all our quarrels and divisions.

We ought also to confess that this evil includes all others, and that there is
no disorder in the world which does not acknowledge this for its original; and
I am of opinion, that a man cannot only not make a good Christian of one that
does too excessively love himself, but I hold that according to the laws of
Policy and Morality, one cannot make a good man, nor a good Statesman, of such
a man; for Justice it absolutely necessary in all manner of conditions, and
this Virtue cannot subsist with self-love. Justice will have a man endued with
Reason, to prefer the inclinations of the soul before those of the body, and
that he preserve all the rights of authority to the Sovereign. Self-love (which
leans always toward the flesh) will have the slave to govern his Master, and
that the Body command over the Soul; Justice will have a good man not to wish
for any thing which exceeds his merit, or his birth; and she instructs him,
that to be happy and innocent he must prescribe bounds to his designs.
Self-love commands us to follow our own inclinations, and to govern our desires
only according to our Vanity; it flatters our Ambition, and to insinuate it
self into us, it gives us leave to do what we please. Justice will have a good
Statesman prefer the public interest before that of his own house; that he be
ready to lose his wealth, and to sacrifice his own person for the preservation
of his Country; she persuades him that there is no death more glorious than
that which is suffered for the defense of a man's Country; and that the Horatii
and Scaevola's are famous in the Roman History, only for having sacrificed
themselves to the Glory of their Commonwealth; though there be nothing more
natural to a man than to love his Children, some men have been found, whom
Justice has made to lose this affection to preserve the like of good
Statesmen; who solicited by this Virtue, have butcherd those whose fathers they
were, teaching by so rigorous an example, that the love to a man's Country,
ought to exceed the love to his own flesh and blood. A State cannot be happy
wherein there (...) any doubts made of these Maxims, as often (...) the public
interest shall give way unto th^^ particular, it shall always be near ruin,
an^ shall have no less trouble to defend it sel^ against its subjects than
against its enemies Self-love, this mean while makes a man labor only for his
own pleasure or glory; (...) makes this the end of all his actions, an^ does so
bind man up within himself, as (...) suffers him not to consider the public
if he do his Country any service, it is in order to his own particular good;
and when he seems most busy for the good of the State, he wishes the slavery
thereof, (...) conspires its ruin: Marius and Scilla do witness these truths;
Pompey and Caesar ha^^ made us see how dangerous such Statesmen are, who love
themselves better than the Commonwealth; and who, so they man preserve their
own power, fear not to (...) press their Countries liberty.

In Religion this unjust Passion is (...) more fatal, and Piety can never agree
wi^^ Self-love. For there is no man that understands any thing, who will not
affirm, the to be godly, a man must submit himself (...) the will of God. That
with like submissi^ we ought to receive punishments and rewards at his hands;
that we must adore the thunder wherewith he smites us, and have as great
respect unto his Justice as to his Mercy; that we must be cruel to our selves,
to be obedient to him. That it i^ Piety to ^mmolate the innocent to him when he
demands them; and that as there is no creature which owes not his being to his
Power, there is none who is not bound to lose it for his Glory. Then what man
is he who will submit to these truths, if he be a slave to self-love? and how
shall he be faithful to God, if he be in love with himself? I conclude then,
that this inordinate affection is the undoing of Families, the ruin of States,
and the loss of Religion; that to live in the world, a man must denounce war to
this common enemy of Society, and that imitating the elements, which force
their inclinations to exclude a vacuum, we must use violence upon our desires,
to overcome a Passion so pernicious to Nature and Grace.

From this Springhead of mischief flow three rivers which drown the whole
world, and which cause a deluge, from the which it is very hard to save ones
self; for from this inordinate love arise three other loves which poison all
souls, and which banish all Virtue from the earth. The first is the love of
Beauty, which we term Incontinencie. The second is the love of Riches, which we
call Avarice. The third is the love of Glory, which we call Ambition. These
three capital enemies of man's welfare and quiet, corrupt all that belongs to
him, and render him guilty in his soul, in his body, and in his goods. It is
hard to say which of these three monsters is hardest to overcome; for to boot,
with their natural forces, they have Auxiliaries, which they draw from our
inclinations, or from our habits, and which make them so redoubted, that they
are not to be overcome without a miracle. To consider them notwithstanding in
themselves, Ambition is the most haughty and the strongest; Voluptuousness, the
most mild and soft; and Avarice the basest, and most opinionated.

These are fought against by diverse means, and all Morality is busied in
furnishing us with reasons to defend our selves against them. The Vanity of
Honor has cured some that have been thereof ambitious: Quosdam cum in
consummationem diguitatis, per mill indignitates erexissent.
For when they come to know that they labored after a good which happened not
to them till after death, and that from so many dangerous actions they could
only expect to have their sepulchers adorned, or some commendation in History,
they have ceased to covet an Idol, Misera subiit cogitatio ipsos laboraffe in
titulum sepulchri. Sen. De brev. vit. c. 19.
which rewards ill the slaves that serve it; and that for a little applause
which it promises them, obliges them many times to shed their own blood, or
that of their neighbor. The infamy of the voluptuous, the mischiefs which
accompany them, the displeasures which follow them, and the shame which never
forsakes them, have oft-times cured men to whom sin had left a little reason.
Age may likewise be a cure for this; it is a disorder in nature to find a
lascivious old man; and it is no less strange to see love under gray hairs,
than to see those mountains whose heads are covered with snow, and whose bowels
are full of flames. The misery of riches, the pain that is taken in
accumulating them, the care in preserving them, the evils which they cause to
their owners, Miser est omnis animus vinctus amicitia rerum temporalium, and
dilaniatur cum eas amittit, and tunc sentit miseriam qua miser est, and non
antequam amittit eas. Aug. Confess. l. 4. c. 6.
the ease which they afford to content unjust desires, and the sorrow caused by
their loss, are considerations strong enough to make those contemn them who are
not as yet become slaves thereunto. But when they shall exercise their tyranny
upon the spirits, I esteem their malady incurable: Age which cures other
Passions, increases this. Covetous men never love riches more than when they
are near losing them; and as love is then most sensible when it apprehends the
absence of the party beloved; Avarice is most violent, when it apprehends the
loss of its wealth. But without meddling with another man's work, I shall content
my self with saying, that to preserve a man's self from all these evils, he must
endeavor to forgo self-love. For, as natural love causes all the passions,
inordinate love causes all the Vices; and whosoever shall be vigilant in the
weakening of this Passion by repentance and charity, shall find himself happily
freed from Avarice, Ambition and Incontinency. But to arrive at this high
degree of happiness, we must remember, that in whatsoever condition Providence
has placed us, we are not for our selves, but for the public; and that we
must not love our selves to the prejudice of our Sovereign. We are in nature a
portion of the Universe, in civil life a part of the State, in Religion we are
the Members of Jesus Christ. In all these conditions, selflove must be
sacrificed to universal love. In nature we must die to give place to those that
follow us. In the State, we must contribute our goods and our blood for the
defense of our Prince; and in Religion, we must kill the old Adam, that Jesus
Christ may live in us.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good Use of Love.
MOrality considers not so much the goodness of things as the good use of them,
she neglects natural perfections, and puts a valuation only upon their rational
employment; Metals are indifferent to her, nor does she consider them otherwise
than earth, whose color the Sun has changed. Tollat malus divitias, inopes
opprimuntur, judices corrumpuntur: Tollat bonus, pauperes pascuntur, oppressi
liberantur, captivi redimuntur. Aug. Sermon. 3. De S. Cyprian.
But she blames the abuse, and commends the good husbanding thereof, she is
troubled when wicked men abuse them to oppress the innocent, to corrupt Judges,
to violate the Laws, and to seduce Women. She is well pleased when good men
make use thereof to nourish the poor, cloth the naked, to set Captives at
liberty, and to succor the miserable. There is nothing more glorious than the
vivacity wherewithal Nature has endued men nobly endued. It Is the key which
opens unto them the Treasury of Science, be it either to acquire them, or to
distribute them to others; it is that which is acceptable to all companies, and
it is a quality which is as soon beloved as seen. Yet does not Morality esteem
it otherwise than as it is well husbanded; Celeritas intelligendi, and acumen
disputandi, donum tuum est; sed inde non sacrificabam tibi: Itaque mihi non ad
usum, sed ad perniciem magis valebat; nam quid mihi proderat bona tes non
utenti been? Aug. l. 4. Confess. 1. ult.
and S. Augustine who acknowledged it for a Grace, confesses it has been
pernicious to him, by reason of his ill employment thereof, and because he had
entertained it amongst his errors. Love without all question is the holiest of
all our Passions, and the greatest advantage which we have received from
Nature, since by the means thereof we may fasten our selves to good things, and
make our souls perfect in the love thereof. It Is the spirit of Life, the Cement
of the whole world, an innocent piece of art, by which we change condition, not
changing Nature; and we transform our selves into the party whom we love. It Is
the truest and purest of all pleasures; it is a shadow of that happiness which
the blessed enjoy. Earth would be Hell, if Love were vanished thence; and it
would be a great piece of rigor in God, if he should permit us to see handsome
things, and forbid us to love them. But that we may the better govern this
Passion, we must learn of Morality what Laws to prescribe unto it, and what
liberty we must allow it.

There are three objects of our Love, God, Man, and Creatures deprived of
Reason. Some Philosophers have doubted whether we could love the first, or no;
they were persuaded his greatness did rather require our adoration than our
love; but though this be a religious opinion, and that it merits the greater
esteem since it proceeds from the profane; we cannot deny, but that we were
endued with love, to unite us to God; for to boot, with our thorough sense of
this inclination, to boot, that it is imprinted by Nature in the very
groundwork of our wills, and that uninstructed by our Parents or our Teachers,
we labor after the Summumbonum: Reason teaches us that he is the Abyss of all
perfections, Deus nosteris est, quem amat id omne quod amare potest. Aug.
and the Center of all love; so as a man need not fear committing any excess in
loving him with all his might. He is so good as he cannot be loved so much as
he ought to be; and let a man do his utmost, he is obliged to confess, that the
goodness of God does far exceed the greatness of man's Love. Such Souls as are
elevated, Omnia offa mea dicent, Domine, quis fimilis tibi? Psalm. 34.
and approach nearer unto him, complain of their coolness; and wish that all
the parts of their Bodies were turned into Tongues, to praise him; or into
Hearts to love him. They are troubled, that since his greatness is so well
known, his goodness is no more loved; and that having so many subjects, he has
no more that love him. Modus amandi Deum sine modo. Bern.
We must not then prescribe any bounds to this Passion, when it has respect
unto God, but every one ought to make it his sole desire, and to wish that his
heart were dilated, that he might infinitely love him, who is infinitely
lovely; but we must take great heed, not to rob him of what does so justly
belong unto him; and we must remember, that though his goodness should not
force his duty from us, we should be bound to render it unto him, in order to
our own interest. For our love is never content but when it rests in God. It
fears infidelity in the creatures, is never so assured of them, but that there
remains some rational doubts; and though it should have such proofs of their
good will, as that it were constrained to banish all suspicion, yet would it
fear lest death might take from it what good fortue has given; and in one or
other of these just apprehensions it could not shun being miserable. But it
knows very well that God is immutable, and that he never forsakes us till we
have forsaken him, it knows that God is eternal, and that death being no less
distant from him than change, his affection cannot end, but through our
infidelity.

It Is true there are carnal souls, who complain that he is invisible, and who
cannot resolve to give up their hearts to a Divinity which does not content
their eyes. But all things are full of him, his greatness is poured out in all
the parts of the Universe; every Creature is an Image of his perfections, he
seems to have made these pictures only to make himself be thereby known and
loved; and if he should not have used this piece of skill, we need only consult
with our own Reason to know what he is. Error cannot corrupt her, and in the
souls of Pagans she has verified Oracles. Anima licet carcere corporis preffa,
cum tamen resipiscit, unum Deum nominat. Deus dedit, omnium vox est; o
Testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae: dicens haec, non respicis
Capitolium, sed ad Coelum, novit enim anima sedem Dei vivi. Tert. in Apol-
Those very men who offered Incense unto Idols, knew very well that there was
but one God; when Nature spoke in their mouths, she made them speak like
Christians, and they confessed those truths, for which they persecuted the
Martyrs. For as Tertullian observes, their soul was naturally Christian; when
they were surprised with a danger, they implored the succor of the true God,
and not that of their Jupiter: when they took an oath, they raised up their
eyes toward heaven, and not toward the Capitol so as we must not complain
that God is invisible, but we must wish that he may be as much loved, as he is
known. And moreover this complaint is no more to be admitted of, since the
mystery of the Incarnation, where God became man, that he might treat with men;
where he has given sensible proofs of his presence, and where clothing himself
with our nature, he has suffered our eyes to behold his beauty, our hands to
touch his body, and our ears to hear his voice. Since that happy moment he is
become our Allie, and he who was our Sovereign, is become our Brother, to the
end that this double quality might oblige us to love him with more ardor, and
might permit us to accost him with more freedom; we cannot then fail in the use
of that love which we owe unto him, but by being either too much reserved or
too unfaithful. But the love we render to men may be defective in two manner of
ways, and we may abuse it either in loving them too much, or not enough, as
shall be shown in the pursuit of this Discourse.

Friendship is certainly one of the chief effects of Love, and the harmlessest
delight which men can take in Society. Very Barbarians did reverence the Name
thereof; those who despise the Laws of Civility, put an estimation upon the
laws of friendship, and cannot live within their Forests without having some
whom they trust, who know their thoughts, who rejoice at their good fortune,
and who are afflicted when any ill besals them. Thieves who entrench upon the
public liberty, who make war in time of peace, and who seem desirous to stifle
that love which Nature has placed in mankind, cease not to bear respect to
friendship; they have a certain shadow of society amongst them; they keep their
word, though with prejudice to their condition; tortures cannot sometimes make
them violate their Faith; and they will rather lose their lives than betray
their Companions. In fine, people subsist only by virtue hereof; Amicitia
plurimas res continet; quoquo te verteris, praesto est, ullo loco excluditur,
nunquam intempestiva, nuquam molesta est. Itaque non aqua, non igni, non aere
(ut aiunt) pluribus locis utimur quam amicitia. Cic. in Laeli.
and who should banish friendship from off the earth, must raze Towns, and send
men into Deserts. She is more powerful than the Laws, and who shall have well
established her in Kingdoms, need neither tortures nor punishments to contain
the wicked within their duties. But to be just she must have her bounds, to be
true she must be founded upon Piety; those who will love one another, must be
united in faith, and must have the same sense of Religion; their friendship
must be a study after Virtue, and they must labor to become better by their
mutual communication; their souls should rather be mingled than united; from
this mixture a perfect community of all things must arise; their goods must be
no more divided; and the words thine and mine (which cause whatever there is of
division in the world must be totally banished; when their conditions meet
together, friendship is not to be blamed; nay, the very excess thereof is to be
praised, since being more divine than humane, and more grounded upon grace than
nature, she should be freed from all those Laws which are only made for common
friendship. But in the one and the other of them, the pains which accompany
them must be endured, and we must remember, that as there is nothing so perfect
in the world, but has its faults, there is nothing so pleasing which has not
its dislikes. Friendship is that which sweetens life, and who is not
therewithal endued, cannot hope for happiness; It is the most rational concord
which this world can afford; and of as many pleasures as are, Ejus enim nobis
amara mors cujus dulcis erat vita. Aug. l. 19. De Civ. Dei. c. 8.
I find none more harmless, nor more true, but it has its incommodity; and who
begins to love, must prepare to suffer. Absence is a short death, and death is
an eternal absence, which entayles upon us as much sorrow, as the presence of
the beloved gives satisfaction. A man who loses his friend, loses one half of
himself, he is at once both alive and dead; and death accords not with life,
save only to make him more miserable. But say they should be so fortunate in
their fate, ^go se^si anmam meam and animam amici mei, unam fuisse animam in
duobus corporibus. Et ideo mihi horrori erat vita, quia nolebam dimidius
vivere, and ideo forte mori metuebam, ne tutus ille moreretur quem mu^tum
amaveram. Aug. l. 4. Co^. c. 6.
as they should both die in one day, they could not shun the miseries which
accompany life; they seem by being linkt together in affection, to have given
Fortune the greater hold of them, and their soul seems to be in two bodies,
only that it may be the more capable of grief. Aristotle therefore would not
have a man to have many friends, lest he should be bound to spend his whole
life in bewailing their misfortunes, or that exacting the same duty from them,
he might not trouble all their joy, and make his friendship fatal. It Is true
that these pains are pleasing, and that by a just dispensation of love they are
always mingled with some contentment. Tears are sweet when Friendship is the
cause of their shedding, if they ease him that sheds them, they comfort him for
whom they are shed; and they make them both taste of true pleasure in a common
misery; thus their malady bears the cure thereof about with it, and deserves
rather to be envied than pitied, since the sufferer and bemoaner are equally
assured of their mutual fidelity.

But it is much the harder matter to regulate the love between men and women,
and to prescribe bounds unto a Passion which asks counsel only of it self, and
which thinks it self not true, if it be not in excess. Therefore the greatest
part of our Divines do blame it; Casuale est omne quod foemina est, ejus
societas semper infesta, est, foedere suo magnas molestias praestat, and cui
adhaeserit contra fas, insanabilem ingerit plagam: de carbonibus scintillae
dissiliunt, de ferro rubigo intritur, morbos aspides sibilent, and mulier
fundit concupiscentiae malum. Aug. lib. De Singularit. Cler.
and though it be not faulty, but as it is dangerous, they forbid the use
thereof, to shun the hazard. To say true, this virtue is never so pure, but
that it has some clouds, it easily slides from the soul into the body; and
grant it could be without danger, it could never be without scandal. The age is
too corrupt to judge uprightly of these communications; if they were publicly
allowed of, they would serve for a cloak to irregular affections; and under
pretense of friendship, every one would assume the liberty to make Love. I know
very well, there have been Saints in former ages, but they have not been exempt
from calumnies. Paulinus bare no respect to the Empress Eudoxe, save only for
that she was learned; he was enamoured of her mind, not of her body; and if he
drew many times near to this fair Sun, it was that he might be thereby
enlightened, not heated. Yet their frequent conversation caused Jealousy in
young Theodosius; and an Apple as fatal as that of Paris, wrought the death of
Paulinus, and Eudoxes banishment. I know there is no Sex amongst Souls, and
that a man's mind may be found in a Woman's Body. I know that Virtue undervalues
not the advantages of Beauty, and that she is oft-times more eloquent in the
mouth of a fair Maid, than in the like of an Orator; I know there have been
Muses as well as Amazons; and that men have no Endowments which women possess
not with as much or more of excellency. Augustus followed Livias Counsel, and
consulted with her in his most important affairs, as often as with Mecaenas, or
Agrippa. Great Origen's School was open as well to women as to men; he thought
them no less capable of the Secrets of Learning, or Mysteries of Religion, than
men; so as a man may conclude, for these Reasons, and out of these Examples,
that the conversation of women is no less profitable than pleasing, and that if
there be danger in their friendships, there is therein likewise advantage.

But notwithstanding whatsoever all these discourses may persuade us, I am
firmly of opinion, that an honest woman ought to have no other friend than her
Husband; and that she gave a Divorce of friendship when she engaged herself in
marriage. She must have no more Masters, nor Servants, since she has given
away her liberty, and she ought to suspect even the holiest affections, since
they may serve for colors to lewd desires. Aculeus peccati est forma foeminea,
and mortis conditio non aliunde surrexit quam de muliebri substantia:
Separamini deprecor a contagione pestifera. Quantumcunque fuerit unusquisque
longius ab adversis, rantum non sentit adversa. Et minus voluptatibus
stimulatur, ubi non est frequentia voluptatum, and minus avaritiae molestias
patitur, qui divitias non videt. Cyp and Aug De Singularit. Cler.
Such complacencies as are found in those who are not of the same sex, are
seldom innocent; the same discourse which entertains, works upon their wills;
and love glides into the heart under the name of sutableness of disposition,
and of Civility. The Malady is contracted before it be known; men are oft-times
in a Fever before they feel any distemper; and poison has already infected the
heart before we think the mouth has swallowed it. Briefly, the danger is equal
on all sides; men make strong assaults, and women weak defenses. The freedom of
conversation makes men more insolent, and the pleasingness thereof makes women
less courageous. I shall therefore never approve of such friendships as may
cause more harm than advantage, and which for vain satisfaction of the sense,
hazards the souls health. We live under a Religion which commands us to forgo
pleasures which are purely innocent; we are taught by a Master which commands
his Disciples to pluck out such eyes, and cut off such hands as have been cause
of scandal to them; we are brought up in a School where we are forbidden to
look upon the face of women; yet under pretense of a naughty custom we will
have it lawful for us to win their Affections, and to contract Friendship with
them, which beginning by irregular inclinations, are entertained by useless
discourse, and end in criminal delights. Chastity runs hazzards enough, and
needs not to have new Gins laid for her. The luster of apparel, freedom of
conversation, and that which is termed civility make sufficient open war
against continency; there needs no addition of Wiles, or cunning to surprise
her. When men shall be Angels, it shall be lawful for them to contract amity
with women; when death shall have severed them from their bodies, they may
without scandal converse together, and satisfy their inclinations; but as long
as they shall have sense common with Beasts, and that Beauty shall make more
impression on their senses than Virtue, they must imitate the Prophet, which
had sentenced his eyes not to look upon those innocent countenances, which
seemed not to infuse other than chaste thoughts. In fine, they should resolve
never to approach near those malign Constellations, which burn more than they
do enlighten, and which raise more tempests, than they shed light abroad.

To remedy these evils, we must implore aid from Charity; for it is she that
purifies Love, that reforms the excesses, and amends the errors thereof; she
will not have it to be excessive, neither will she that it be confined to our
own persons, or to our families; she knows that Love is dispersed throughout all
the world, and that when it goes from us, it passes into our enemies; Incipit
licitus amor conjugio, sed adhuc carnalis est, quia communis cum pecoribus.
Secundus est amor filiorum, sed adhuc and ipse carnalis, non enim est laudandus
qui amat filios, sed detestandus qui non amat filios suos; si vero non amaveris
tuos, a serpentibus vinceris. Aug. l. 15. Hom. 38.
It takes its birth (says St. Augustine) in marriage, Alius amor est
propinquorum: jam esse videtur proprius hominis, si non consuetudinis, qui
tamen amat propinquos adhuc sanguinem suum amat; amet alios qui non sunt
propinqui suscipiat peregrinum, jam ^ultum dilatatus est amor. Tantum autem
crescit, ut a conjuge ad filios, a ^^liis ad propinquos, a propinquis ad
extraneos, ab extraneis ad inimicos perveniat. Idem ibid.
and enlarges it self upon the children that proceed from thence. But in this
condition it is carnal. That Passion is not to be commended amongst men, which
is observed to be in Tigers, and a man cannot praise such natural affections in
reasonable creatures, as are seen in the most savage beasts. In its progress it
extends it self to our Kindred, and begins to be rational; for though he that
loves his Parents, loves his Blood, and that though his love forgo his own
Person, it does not forgo his Family, yet is his love more expiated than is the
love of Fathers, and communicates it self to personages which are not so near
unto him as are his Children; in the vigor thereof it passes even unto
strangers, it receives them into its house, it makes them share of what it
has, and not considering either their humors or their languages, their very
having the aspects of men is sufficient to make them the objects of its
liberality; in this acceptance Love is well waxen, but to be perfect, it must
descend even to our enemies, and induing us with strength to overcome our
inclinations, it obliges us to do good to them who endeavor to do us harm.
When it is arrived at this pitch, it may hope for reward; but if it stop in the
middle of its Carier, it must expect nothing but punishment. These words
comprehend all the use of this Passion, and I can add nothing thereunto which
will not prove weak or useless; passing therefore forward, I come to the last
Object of our Love, which is Creatures void of Reason.

I wonder that in this point all men join not with the Stoics, and that their
opinion passes not for a law among all the people of the world; for they hold,
that Creatures which want reason do not deserve our love, and that our will is
given us only to tie us to God, or to man. Truly if this Maxim be a Paradox, I
hold it extremely rational; for what appearance is there that we should bestow
our affection on Creatures which not knowing it, cannot be obliged to us for
it, and having no obligation, cannot be conscious of our affection? In my
opinion no man can be more prodigal than is the avaritious man, since he
engages his affection to an insensible Metal, and that he loves without hope
of being re-beloved. I think no man more irrational, than he who ties his love
to the beauty of a flower, which for all its odor and splendour, is not
sensible of the adoration that is given it. I cannot endure those extravagant
men, who place all their Passions upon a Dog, or a Horse, which do them no
other service than what they are carried unto, either by instinct, or by
necessity. I therefore think the profit which we reap by them should be the
rule of the affection we bear them; or, to speak more correctly, we must rather
love ourselves in them, than them for our selves; for they are too much beneath
us to deserve our love; and though some shadow of fidelity be observed to be
amongst Dogs, and some sparks of love amongst horses, yet both of them being
void of reason, they are incapable of friendship. To set our hearts on things
insensible, is to profane them. It is not just that the same soul, which may
love the Angels, love dumb beasts; that the soul which may unite himself to
God, join itself to Metals; and that it lodge in the same heart, the noblest of
all spirits, with the most imperfect of all bodies. I would then make use of
Gold, yet not love it; I would be Master thereof, yet not Slave thereunto; I
would keep it for my occasions, not adore it; I would teach the whole world
that it has no valuation but what the good employment thereof bestows upon it,
and that it is no less useless in the bowels of the earth, than in the Coffers
of the Avaritious.

But not to be mistaken in so important an affair, we must use some
distinction, and say that the Creatures may be considered in a threefold
acceptance; either as ways that lead us to our last end; and thus they ought
to be loved: or as nets which stay us on the earth, and thus they ought to be
shunned: or as Instruments which Divine Justice makes use of to punish us
withal, and thus they ought to be reverenced: for when the Creatures lead us
unto God, that they express unto us his beauty, and that their perfections
raise us up to the consideration of him that is their fountain, there is no
harm in loving them; and it were a piece of injustice not to acknowledge;
Viditque Deus cuncta quae fecerat, and erant valde bona. Genesis 1.
in them, him, whose Images they are; God himself has invited us so to do;
when he made them, he praised them; and having given them his approbation, he
obliges us to give them our love; yet this our love must be moderate, and must
unite us no further to them than they may unite us to the Creator; we must look
upon them as Pictures which we love not, but only for his sake whom they
represent; Respondent and singula quaque eleamenta clamantia, and ipsis suis
operibus suum demonstrantia artificem. Aug lib. De Symbolo, Tract.
we must consider their beauties as the shadows of the like in God, and never
permit that their perfections engage us so strongly, that we reserve not
freedom enough to forgo them, when our Souls health, or the glory of Jesus
Christ requires it. If the Devil make use of them to seduce us, and if by the
permission which he has received from God, he employ them to tempt us: If he
will make the Stars serve to make us Idolaters; if he will corrupt our
innocence with gold; if he make our pride swell, or sooth our vanity with
riches; and if by beauty he will rob us of our continency, we must shun them as
nets spread abroad in the world to surprise us: Creaturae Dei in odium factae
sunt, and in tentationem animabus hominum, and in mulcipula^ pedibus
insipientium. Sap. 14.
and as things, which since the fall of man seem to have changed their
inclination; since they labor now to undo him, as they formerly labored for
his welfare. If, in fine, they be serviceable to the justice of God, if through
a zeal to his honor they pursue his enemies, if the earth quake underneath our
feet, if the thunder roar above our heads, and if the fire and water agree to
declare war unto us, we must suffer them with respect, Aliquando no^ mundus
dilectatione retraxit a Deo; nunc tantis p^agis plenus est, ut ipse nos jam
mundus mittat ad Deum. Ipsas ejus amaritudines amamus, fugientem sequimur,
persequentem diligimus, and labenti inhaeremus, Greg. Hom. 21. in Evang.
and love them with so much ardency, as we may with less danger; for in this
acceptance they have nothing of charm in them, which may flatter or abuse us;
they are rather hateful than loving, they cause in us rather a fear of God than
love of our selves, and by an happy effect they loosen us from the earth and
raise us up to heaven; this counsel comprehends all that Religion teaches us
touching the use of the creatures, and whosoever shall upon occasions make use
thereof, will by experience find that they are never less dangerous, than when
most cruel, and that they never oblige us more than when they punish us most
severely.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Properties, and Effects of Love.
THose who judge of things by their appearances, imagine there is nothing more
contrary to man than Hatred, and that since he takes his name from Humanity, he
should not tolerate a passion which breathes forth nothing but blood, and finds
no delight but in murder. Yet it is a part of his being, and if he need love,
to fasten him unto objects which may preserve him; he has need of hatred, to
drive him from those that may destroy him. These two motions are so natural to
all Creatures, as they subsist not but by the love of their like, and by the
hatred of their contraries.

The world had been ruined ere this, had not the Elements, whereof it is
composed, kept it in being, by their oppositions and accords; did not water by
reason of the coldness thereof resist fire, fire would ere this have reduced
all into ashes, and having no further fuel to nourish it, it would have
consumed it self; our humors which are nothing but tempered elements preserve
us by their natural Antipathies; and Choler would have dried up our whole body,
were it not perpetually watered with phlegm; so as the great and little world
consist only by the contrariety of their parts; and if the author which has
produced them, should appease their difference, he would overthrow all his
work, which would cease to love one another, if they ceased to hate their
contraries. What is seen in Nature, is observed in Morality, where the soul
has her inclinations and aversions, to preserve and to defend her self, to
fasten her self to things she likes, and to make her keep aloof off from what
she likes not. And had not God endued her with these two Passions, she would be
reduced to a necessity of suffering all the evils which assail her, not having
power to oppose them, or hope to defeat them. Hatred is then as requisite as
Love; we should have reason to complain of Nature, if having given us
inclinations to what is good, she should not likewise have given us an aversion
from the contrary; and if she had not endued our souls with as much vigor to
shun objects which are prejudicial to her, as to draw near to these that are
useful. These two inclinations differ then only in their objects, and to speak
exactly, we must say, that Love and Hatred make but one and the same Passion,
which changes name according to their different uses; which is called Love,
when it has a liking to what is good; and Hatred, when it abhors what is evil.
Leaving here the first effect of Hatred, which we have already considered, we
will now examine the second, and will see what the nature, properties and
effects thereof are.

Hatred in her birth is nothing else but a mere aversion in us from whatsoever
is contrary unto us. It Is an antipathy of our Appetite to a subject which
displeases it; It Is the first impression which a true, or an appearing evil
makes in the lowest part of our soul, it is a wound which we have received from
a displeasing object, and it is the beginning of that motion which our Soul
makes to keep aloof off, or to defend it self from an enemy which pursues it.
She has this in common with Love, that she oft-times prevents Reason, and
shapes her self in our will, not consulting with our judgment. She takes
offense at diverse things, which are not unpleasing in themselves; and many
times one and the same object causes Hatred and Love in two different
personages. Sometimes it so falls out, that according to the diverse
dispositions of our minds we like what formerly we have disliked; that which
did hurt us, cures us, and becomes the remedy of the evil which it caused: she
has this of different with Love, that she is much more sensible. For Love is
oft-times formed in our Souls before we are aware; our friends must give us*
notice thereof, and those whose company we keep, must teach us that we do love;
we must reflect upon our selves to know this Passion in its birth, and as it is
extremely delightful, it wounds us so pleasingly as we do not feel the hurt,
till by process of time it become an incurable Ulcer. But Hatred discovers it
self as soon as it is conceived, because it proceeds from an Object wherein we
are only concerned, as it hurts us; it makes us suffer in its birth, and from
the time that it possesses us, it becomes our punishment.

It is as readily formed as Love, a moment serves to produce it in our wills,
notwithstanding the little care we have to entertain it; It disposes its
flames abroad into all the faculties of our Soul; and as the most active of all
the Elements, it feeds upon whatever it encountereth; but it has this of
misfortune, that it is not so soon efaced as is Love; when it has once taken
root in the heart, there is no tearing of it out; time which has produced it,
preserves it; and Philosophy is defective of sufficient reasons, to cure a man
who is affected with this troublesome malady. Religion it self is never more
troubled, than when she oppugns so opinionated a passion; and the Son of God
seems to have descended upon earth, only to teach us to subdue Hatred, and to
pardon our enemies. Neither did he oblige us to this duty, till he had suffered
death for his enemies; he believed that to establish so strange a Doctrine, it
must be confirmed by his example, authorized by his death, and signed by his
own blood. Thus did he declare war to a passion which has this advantage over
other Passions, as that it ends not with our self; it is so dearly esteemed
of by men, as it is their sole entertainment. It serves to divert them when
they are displeased; and though it corrode their Bowels, it gives content to
their heart. I have heard of a Princess, who after having lost her Kingdom and
her Liberty, found comfort in the hatred she bore her enemies; and confessed
she was not so much possessed with sorrow for her past happiness, as by her
desire of revenge. We see fathers, who having their souls hanging upon their
lips, and who being no longer able to live, do yet think how to continue their
hatred; they leave it as an inheritance to their Children, they oblige them to
eternal enmity, and make imprecations against them, if they be ever reconciled
to their enemies. In fine, this Passion is immortal, and as it resides in the
bottom of the soul, it accompanies her whithersoever she goes; and does not
forgo her, no not when she is loosened from the Body. This it is which the
Poets (who are the most excellent Painters of our affections) would represent
unto us in the persons of Eteocles and Polynices, who continued their hatred
after death, and who went to end the combat in Hell, which they begun on earth;
this Passion lived in their bodies deprived of Sense, it passed by a secret
contagion into their funeral Pile, and waged war in the flames which were to
consume them.

But I wonder not that this Passion is so opinionated, since it is so daring;
and I think it not strange that it continues after death, since it has made
men resolute to lose their lives for love of revenge, and that it makes them
find some contentment in death, provided they see their enemies accompany them
therein. For Hatred ceases to be true when it becomes discreet, and we may say
a man is not wholly possessed therewithal, when to spare his own blood, he
dares not shed the blood of his adversary. When he has given himself over to
the tyranny thereof, he thinks he can never purchase the pleasures of revenge
at too dear a rate. And propose whatever punishment you list unto him, he is
well-pleased therewithal, provided his Passion may be satisfied. Atreus wishes
to be overwhelmed under the ruin of his Palace, provided it fall upon his
brothers head, and so cruel a death seems pleasing to him, so as he be therein
accompanied by Theistes. In short, Hatred is very puissant, since all torments
are endured to give it satisfaction* and it uses strange tyranny upon such as
it possesses, since there is no fault which they are not ready to commit in
obedience to it.

If the proprieties of Hatred be thus strange, the effects thereof are no less
fatal. For as Love is the cause of all generous and gallant actions; Hatred is
the rise of all base and tragical actions. And those who are advised by so bad
a Counselor, are capable of all the evil that can be imagined. Murder, and
Paricide, are the ordinary effects of this unnatural Passion. 'Twas this, that
made us see in the daybreak of the world, that a man might die in the flower
of his age, and that one brother was not secure in the company of another.
'Twas this, that found out weapons to dispeople the world, and to ruinate Gods
goodliest workmanship. 'Twas this, that making man forget the sweetness of his
nature, taught him to mingle poison in drinks, to shed humane blood at
Banquets, and to kill under pretense of hospitality; 'twas this, that first
instituted that fatal art which teaches us how to murder with method, how to
kill men handsomely, and which forces us to approve of Paricide, if it be done
according to the laws of the world. 'Twas this, in fine, and not avarice, which
tore up the bosom of the earth, and which sought within the bowels thereof for
that cruel Metal wherewith it exercises its fury. And to describe in a few
words all the evils it is cause of, it will suffice to say, that Anger is her
first Masterpiece, Envy her Counselor, Despair her Officer; and that after
having pronounced bloody sentences as Judge, it self puts them in execution as
Hangman. It Is true, that hatred never comes to these extremities, till it grow
unruly; but this unruliness is almost natural thereunto; and unless Reason and
Grace labor jointly how to moderate this Passion, it easily becomes excessive.
The fierceness thereof is oft-times augmented by resistance; like an impetuous
torrent it overthrows all the banks which oppose its fury, and when it is
forbidden any thing, it believes it may lawfully do all things; therefore the
remedy which is ordained for Love, is no less necessary for Hatred; and to heal
an evil which becomes incurable by time, early withstandings must be made, lest
gaining strength, it grow furious, and be the death of its Physician, for
having been negligent in its cure.

The FIFTH DISCOURSE. Of the bad use of Hatred.
THough the greatest part of effects produced by Hatred may pass for disorders;
and that after having described the nature thereof, it may seem unprofitable to
observe the ill use that may be made of it, yet that I may not fail in the laws
that I have prescribed unto my self, I will employ all this discourse in
discovering the injustice thereof, and I will make it appear to all the world,
that of as many Aversions as molest our quiet, there is hardly any one that is
rational. For as all creatures are the workmanship of God, and bear in their
Foreheads the Character of him that produced them, they have qualities which
render them lovely; and goodness, which is the principal object of Love, is so
natural unto them, as it is not to be separated from the Essence; to cease to
be good, they must cease to be; and as long as they have a subsistence in
nature, we are obliged to confess, that there remains some tincture of goodness
in them, which cannot be taken from them without an absolute annihilation. Thus
God gave them his approbation when they were first made; he made their
Panegyric after they were created; and to oblige us to make much of them, he
has taught us by his own mouth that they were exceeding good; so as the Belief
of their goodness is an Article of Faith in our Religion; whatsoever opposition
they may have to our humors, or our inclinations, we ought to believe that they
have nothing of evil in them, and that their very qualities which hurt us, have
their employments, and their use; Poisons are serviceable for Physic; and
there are certain maladies which are not to be cured but by prepared poison;
Monsters which seem to be errors of nature, or ordained by Providence which
cannot do amiss; they do not only contribute, by their ugliness, to heighten
the beauty of other creatures; but are presages, which advertise us of our
misfortunes, and which invite us to bewail our sins; the very Devils themselves
have lost nothing of their natural Advantages; and the malice of their Will
has not been able to destroy the goodness of their essence; and though they
are completed in evil, they cease not to possess all the good which purely
appertains unto their nature; Nulla pugna est sine malo, cum enim pugnatur, aut
bonum pugnat and malum, aut malum and malum: aut si duo bona pugnant inter se,
ipsa pugna est magnum malum, Aug. l. 5. contra Julian. c. ^.
they have yet that beauty which they did Idolatrize; they enjoy all their
lights which they received at the first moment of their creation; they have yet
that vigor, which makes a part of their being; and were they not restrained by
the power of God, they would form thunder, raise storms, spread abroad
contagions, and confound all the Elements; it is true, that these their
advantages contribute to their punishments, and that Divine Justice makes use
of their Enlightnings and Beauties, to make them the more miserable; but this
consideration, hinders not that their nature be not good, and that God see not
in the Groundwork of their Being, Qualities which he loves and conserveth, as
he sees in the groundwork of their Wills, qualities which he detests and
punishes. Therefore it is that hatred seemed useless, and that to exercise it,
a man must go out of this world to seek for creatures which may be the object
of his indignation; for there is nothing, neither in Heaven nor in Earth, which
is not lovely; if we meet with any thing which crosses our inclinations, we
must attribute it to our ill humor; or else we must blame sin for it, which
having disordered our will, has given it irrational antipathies, and forces
it to hate the workmanship of God. I know there are natural aversions between
insensible creatures, and that it is no little wonder, that the worlds peace is
caused by the discord of the Elements: If their bodies of which all other
bodies are compounded, had not some difference amongst them, Nature could not
subsist; anh it is Gods will that their warfare be the worlds quiet; but to
boot, that their quarrels are innocent, and that they set not upon one another,
to destroy, but to preserve themselves; their Combats are caused through their
defaults, and their bad intelligence proceeds from their being imperfect; for
those other bodies which are more noble, and which natural Philosophers call
perfect mixta, do not wage war, they cease not to love; though they have
different inclinations, and they oft-times use violence upon themselves, that
they may not trouble the worlds tranquillity; whence I infer, that if a man bear
a dislike unto his neighbor, he ought to blame his own misery; and confess
that his hatred is an evident proof of his defaults; for if he could reconcile
the particular differences of others, he would love in them, what he should
find in himself; and he could not hate that in their persons, which he should
observe to be in his own; but he cannot tolerate their advantages, because he
himself is not Master thereof; the bonds which Nature has prescribed unto him,
close him in within himself, and separate him from all others. If he were an
universal good, he would love every particular good; and if he were endued with
all the perfections that are found in all men, he would find none that would
contrary him; but he is unjust because he is poor, and his aversion takes its
original from his poverty; God suffers not these unfortunate divisions, his
infinite love cannot be bounded; Diligis enim omnia quae sunt, and nihil odisti
eorum quae fecisti Sap. c. 11.
as he is the summum bonum, he loves all things that bear any badge of
goodness; as he gathers up within himself all these perfections, which are
dispersed abroad in his workmanship, he cherishes them all together; and he
has no aversion, because he has no defaults. Hatred is then a weakness in our
nature; a proof of our indigence; and a Passion which a man cannot with Reason
employ against the handy-works of God.

Self-love is the secend cause of its disorder; for if we were more regulate in
our affections, we should be more moderate in our aversions; and not consulting
with our own interests, we should hate nothing but what is truly odious; but we
are so unjust, as we judge of things only by the credit we bear them; we
condemn them when they displease us; we approve of them when they like us; and
by a strange blindness, we esteem them good or evil, only by the satisfaction
or displeasure which they cause in us; we would have them change qualities
according to our humors; that like Camelions, they should assume our colors,
and accommodate themselves to our desires; we would be the Center of the world,
and that all creatures had no other inclinations, than what we have. The
fairest seem ugly to us, because they are not pleasing to us; we are offended
with the brightness of the Sun, because the weakness of our eyes cannot
tolerate it; the beams of Virtue dazzle us, because that virtue condemns our
defaults, and truth (which is the second object of Love) becomes the object of
our indignation, because she censures our offenses: there is nothing of truly
glittering, but her light; she discovers all the beauties of nature, which
would to no use have produced so many rare Master pieces, had not truth taught
us how to know them. Truth has more lovers (says St. Austin) than Hellen of
Greece; Pulchrior est v^ritas Christianorum quam fuit Helena Graecorum: and pro
illa fortius nostri martyrs adversus Sodomam quam pro illa illi tyrones
adversus Trojam dimicaveru^t. Aug. 20. Hieronym.
all Philosophers court her; she is the subject of all their contestations, she
infuseth Jealousies into them, and they dispute with as much heat to possess
her, as do two Rivals to enjoy a Mistress; every one seeks her out by several
ways: Divines in her Fountains head, which is Divinity; Naturalists in the
bowels of the earth; Alchymists, in the bosom of Metals; Painters and Poets,
under Colors and Fables; yet this beauty, which causes so much love to the
whole world, cease not to have enemies; she angers those she would oblige,
she loses her friends in thinking to preserve them; if she make her self be
beloved of them by instructing them; Homines amant veritatem lucentem, oderunt
eam redarguentem. Aug. lib. 10 Confess. c. 28.
she makes her self be hated by reprehending them; and she then becomes odious,
when she ought to be most beloved. It is therefore extremely dangerous to
employ a Passion, which assails Virtue oftener than Vice; and which contrary to
the design of him that endued us therewithal, undertakes good, and wages war
with it, because having some shadow of evil, it crosses our interests, or our
delights. For remedy of this evil, I would advise, to consider well the things
which we hate, and to look on them on that side which may render them agreeable
unto us; for as they are good in their foundation, we shall always find some
quality in them, which will oblige us to love them; and we shall observe even
in our enemies some advantages, which will force an estimation from us; the
injuries they have done us, and whereupon we ground the justice of our
resentments, will furnish us with reasons to excuse them, Puer est? aetati
donetur, nescit an peccet: mulier est? errat. Laesus est? non est injuria pati
quod prior ipse feceris. Rex est? si nocentem punit, cede justitiae; si
innocentem, cede fortunae. Bonus vir est qui injuriam fecit? noli credere.
Malus est? noli mirari. Dabit poenas alteris quas debet sibi and jam sibi
dedit, quia peccavit. Sen. l 1* De Ira. c. 30.
and if we will calmly examine them, we shall confess, that there is hardly any
injury, which bears not with it its excuse; for (that I may make use of
Seneca's words, and to confute Christians by Infidels) methinks there can no
outrage be done, which may not be sweetened, when a man shall consider the
motive, or the quality thereof. Has a woman offended you? you must pardon the
weakness of her sex; and remember, that she is as subject to do amiss, as to
change. Is it a Child that has injured you? you must excuse his age, which
suffers him not yet to distinguish between what is good and bad. Has your
enemy used outrage to you? it may be you have obliged him so to do; and in this
case Reason wills that you suffer your turn about, for what you have made him
suffer: Is it your King that undertakes you? if he punish you, you must honor
his Justice; if he oppress you, you must give way to his Fortune: does a good
man persecute you; disabuse your self, and forgo that Error, and give him no
longer a quality, which his fault has made him lose. Is it a naughty man that
has offended you? wonder not at it; effects hold of their causes; you will
find some body that will revenge you; and without that wish, you are already
revenged, and he is already punished, since he is faulty.

The SIXTH DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Hatred.
SInce Nature makes nothing unuseful, and that of so many things that she
produces, there is not any one which has not its employment; Hatred must find
out its use; and this Passion which is born in us together with Love, must find
out some objects upon which it may innocently discharge its fury; but since
nature loves her workmanship, since this common Mother bears an affection to
all her Children, and that she keeps them in so good a correspondency, as that
those who violate it, pass for Monsters; Hatred must likewise bear a respect
unto them, and must go out of the world to find a Subject which may provoke its
indignation; it must fight with the disorders of our soul, and must charge such
enemies, as would destroy Virtue; yet must it take great heed lest it be
deceived by appearances, and that thinking to do an act of Justice, it commit
not parricide; for good lies oft-times hidden under the bark of evil, and
things seem evil unto us, because they are contrary to us; their contrariety is
notwithstanding a perfection; that which thwarts our humor, may agree with the
humors of others; and what is not pleasing to our eyes, contribute to the
beauty of the Universe; This difference of affection makes it appear, that the
evil which we hate, is rather imaginary than true; and that we must rather lay
the fault upon opinion, than upon nature. Sin is therefore the only object of
hatred; to use it aright, we must govern our hatred according to Gods Example;
we must declare war against this Monster, sin; which God has chased out of
Heaven; which he pursues upon the Earth, and which he punishes in Hell; for
this Passion is the chastisement of the greatest crimes, it is the punishment
of Paricides, who defend themselves contrary to the Justice of men: It
besieges tyrants in their Palaces, sets upon them in the midst of their
Guards, and maugre the fortune which protects them, it exacts reason for all
the violences which they have committed; Inpunita tu credis esse quae invisa
sunt? aut ullum supplicium gravius existimas publico (...) Sen. l. 2. B^nefi^.
c. 17.
for they are not unpunished who are hated by all people, and sin is not
without punishment, which draws public Hatred upon the Author thereof.

But as we are not made Judges of other men, and that Gods Justice demands not
an account of us for other men's sins, methinks our own sins are the only
legitimate objects of our hatred; our neighbors sins may admit of some excuses;
we ought to suspend our judgments, and withhold our aversions, since we know
not their intententions; when they are become so public, as they can be no
longer dissembled, they should rather excite compassion in us, than hatred, and
should rather draw tears from our eyes, than reproachs from our mouths; since
God excuses them, we ought not to condemn them, and since he hides them, we
ought not to publish them. I should not notwithstanding blame a man, who
preferring Gods glory before the Creatures welfare, should wish that the guilty
might be punished, or who not being able to tolerate them, should avoid their
company, and make his indignation be thereby known; for the hatred of sin is an
act of justice and the zeal which makes us detest sinners, is an effect of
Charity. Perfecto ^dio oderam illos; and inimici facti sunt mihi. Psalm. 138.
David gave over praising of God, that he might make imprecations against the
wicked; and thought to assure God of his love, by assuring him of the hatred
which he bore unto his enemies; but that this aversion may be pleasing unto
him, it must be perfect as was that of David; and to be perfect, Perfectum
odium est quod nec justitia, nec scientia caret; at nec propter vitia oderis
homines, nec vitia propter homines diligas Aug. lib. De vera Innocent.
it must have two conditions which his had; it must hate sin, and love nature;
it must detest the work of the creature, and cherish the work of God; by reason
of Wisdom and Justice, it must not love sin, for the man's sake; neither must it
hate the man for the sins sake; with these restrictions, a man may make good
use of hatred; This guilty Passion becomes innocent, it takes part with two
excelent virtues; and guided by grace, it is serviceable, at once, both to
justice and charity. But it is much safelier exercised against our selves; and
we run much less danger in hating our own imperfections, than in hating the
like of our neighbors; for self-love keeps us from exceeding therein, Qu^m
verum est quod regnum coelorum vim patitur, and qui vim faciunt diripiant
illud? Quanta enim opus est, ut homo diligat in^micum, and oderit seips^^^
utrumque enim jubet, qui ^d regnum (...)-rum vocat. Aug, l. 1. De Sermon. Domini
in monte c. 25.
and notwithstanding any whatsoever holy fury Charity inspires in us, it is
moderated by the inclination which we have to love our selves. Therefore it is,
that the Son of God wills that the hatred of our selves be the foundation of
his Doctrine; He receives no Disciples into his School, whom he teaches not
this Maxim; he seems to have a Design to banish self-love from off the earth,
and to turn this irregular affection into an holy Aversion; He teaches us,
that we are criminal, and that entering into the zeal of divine Justice, we
should hate that which it hates, Qui amat animam suam, perdet eam; and qui odit
animam suam in hoc mundo, in vitam aeternam custodit eam Joan. 12.
and punish that, which it chastises. He would have us to be all ^ce for what
concerns our selves, and all fire for what concerns our friends. In fine,
Hatred and Love, Aversion and Inclination, are the two virtues which we learn
in his School; but he will have us husband them so, as that bestowing all love
upon our neighbors, we reserve nothing but hatred for our selves; It Is true,
that this Commandment is more rigorous in appearance, than in effect; for
whatsoever severity he witnesses, he breaths nothing but sweetness; He hides
the name of Love, under that of Hatred; Magna and mira sententia, que^admodum
sic hominis in animam suam amor ut pereat, odium ne pereat: si male amaveris
tunc odisti: si been oderis, tunc amasti. Foelices, qui oderunt custodiendo, ne
perdant amando. Aug tract. 41. in Joan.
and by obliging us to hate our selves, he ordaines us to love our selves well.

But all people do not agree in the manner that must be held to observe this. I
am offended to see that Christians do not better explicate this Maxim, than
profane men do; and that they confound Seneca's Doctrine, with that of Jesus
Christ: for the greatest part of Interpreters imagine, That the Son of God,
presupposing that we are composed of two parts, which fight one against the
other, will have us to take part with the more noble, against the more ignoble;
that we prefer the inclinations of the soul, before those of the body; and that
living like Angels, and not like Beasts, all the imaginations of our hearts be
rational: certainly had he had no other design than this, we must a vow, that
he flies no higher a pitch, than does Seneca; and that banishing only the love
of the body (which is the more gross, and less faulty) he should have left the
love of the Soul (which is the more delicate, and the more dangerous.) For this
Philosopher pleads always for the Soul against the Body; Honestum ei vile est,
cui corpus nimis charum est. Agatur ejus diligentissime cura: ita tamen ut cum
exigit ratio, cum dignitas, cum fides, in ignem mittendum sit. Sen. Ep. 14.
all his gallant Maxims tend only to re-establish Reason in her Empire, and to
give her absolute power over the Passions; He cannot endure, that a Subject
should become a Sovereign; and pride which enlivens all his Doctrine,
furnishes him with strong reasons to oppose voluptuousness. He will have the
Soul to treat her Body as her slave; that she grant unto it nothing but things
necessary, and abridge it of all superfluities: Major sum, and ad majora
genitus, quam ut mancipium sim corporis mei: quod equidem non aliter aspicio
quam vinculum aliquod libertati meae circundatum. Nunquam me caro ista
compellet ad metum, nunquam ad indignam bono viro simulationem, nunquam in
honorem hujus corpusculi mentiar. Sen. Ep. 65.
He will have her nourish the Body, to the end, that it may be serviceable to
her; He will have her love it only as a faithful servant, that she employ it to
execute her designs; But he wills likewise, when Reason shall require it, she
abandon it to the flames, expose it to savage beasts, and that she oblige it to
undergo deaths as cruel as shameful. All these are bold cogitations; we must
confess they proceed from a generously minded man, and that he makes good use
of the vanity of the Soul, to overcome the delights of the Body; but by curing
one evil, he causes a greater, by closing up a slight wound, he opens a
deeper; by chasing self-love from the Body, he drives it into the Soul; and to
prevent a man from becoming a beast, Cum visum fuerit, distraham cum illo
societatem; and nunc tamen cum haeremus, non erimus aequis partibus: Animus ad
se omne ejus ducet Contemptus corporis sui certa libertas. Idem Ibidem.
he endeavors to make him a Devil: these who side with this Philosopher, are
enforced to confess this Truth, and if they who hold his Maxims would examine
themselves well, they will confess, that they rather puff up than heighten
Courage: and that they inspire the soul with more of vanity, than strength, But
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ produces a clean contrary effect; for it subdues
the body without making the soul insolent; Philosophi fu erunt Epicurei and
Stoici: illi secundum car nem, isti secun dum animam viventes; sed nec isti,
nec illi secundum De um viventes. Contulerunt illi cum Apostolo dum erat
Athenis. Dice bat Epicureus, mihi frui carne bonum est: di cebat Stoicus, mihi
frui mea mente, bonum est: dicebat Apostolus, mi hi adhaerere Deo bonum est
Errat Epicureus, fallitur and Stoicus; Beatus enim est cujus nomen Domini spes
ejus. Aug. lib. De verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 13.
it sets at one and the same time, both upon Pride and voluptuousness; and
whilst it ordains mortification, to submit the senses to Reason, it commands
abnegation to subject the will unto God. Therefore (if it be lawful for me to
explain the intentions of Jesus Christ, and to serve him as an interpreter) I
believe that the Hatred which he requires from us, should pass from the Body to
the soul; and that to be perfect, it should extend it self to all the disorders
that sin has wrought in us; for nature has lost her purity; and the two parts
whereof we are composed, are become equally criminal; the inclinations of the
soul are not more innocent than are those of the body, the one and the other of
them have their weaknesses; and let Philosophers say what they please, they are
both corrupted; the understanding is clouded by darknesses; ignorance is
natural thereunto, it learns with difficulty, forgets easily; though truth be
its object, it forgoes truth for falsehood, and is enforced to acknowledge by the
mouth of the wisest man in the world, that there are some errors, which is
easilier persuaded unto than to some truths. Memory is not more happy, though
she pass for a miracle of Nature, Quid enim est quod cum labor meminimus, ine
labor obliviscimur; cum labor discimus, sine labor inertes sumus? Nonne hinc
apparet in quid, velut pondere suo, proclivis sit vitiosa natura, and quanta
open, ut hinc liberetur, indigeat ^ Aug. l. 22 De Civ. Dei. c 22.
that she keeps deposited all the species she is trusted withal, that she
boasts to represent them without confusion, and to be the enlivened treasure of
all wise men; yet since our disobedience she is become unfaithful, by reason of
a contagion, which has infected all the faculties of the Soul; ^^e fails us at
our needs, and furnishes us rather with unuseful, than with necessary things;
the Will, as most absolute, is also most criminal; for, though it have so
strong inclinations for the Summum bonum, as that sin has not been able to
eface it, yet she indifferently betakes her self to all objects that delight
her; not listening to the advice of Reason, she follows the errors of opinion,
and is guided by the report which the senses make, which are ignorant and
unfaithful messengers; so as man is bound to make war as well against his Soul,
as his Body, and to extend his hatred to both the parts which go to his
composition, since they are equally corrupted; Odit te Deus qualis es; sed amat
te qualem vult te esse Et tu debes te odisse qualis es Aegrum enim attend:
Aeger aegrotantem se odit qualis est: inde incipit concordare cum medico, quia
and medicus odit eum qualis est. Nam ideo vult sanum esse, quia odit eum
febricitantem: and est medicus febris persccutor, ut sit hominis liberator. Sic
peccata tua febres sunt animae tuae, and ideo debes eas cum Deo medico odisse.
Aug. lib. De December Chordis. c. 8.
and to obey Jesus Christ, he must fight against the darkness of his
understanding, the weakness of his memory, the wickedness of his will, the
error of his imagination, the perfidiousness of his senses, and the rebellion
of all the parts of his Body. These evil qualities which spoil the workmanship
of God, are the true objects of our aversion; it is the evil we may hate with
innocence, and with Justice punish; it is the enemy we are obliged to fight
with, and to overcome; for to comprehend in few words the intentions of Jesus
Christ, and the obligation of Christians, we must hate in our selves all those
sins which disorder has placed there, and which grace could not suffer there;
we must destroy in our selves all that grace will have destroyed: but very well
knowing that in this combat the victory is doubtful, we must humbly entreat the
Son of God, who prepares Crowns for the Victor, to endue us with Charity, to
the end that thereby self-love may be diminished in us, and the detestation of
our selves augmented.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF Desire and Eschewing.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Desire.
AS Good is the only Object of Love, it never changes form, but it obliges
this Passion to undertake new Customs; she depends so absolutely upon it, as
she changes names and offices, as often as it changes condition; when it is
present, and discovers unto her all its Beauties, she swims in pleasure; when
it runs any hazard, she is seized on by fear; when it is assaulted by enemies,
she takes up arms, and grows choleric, to defend it; when it is parted from
her, she is afflicted, and suffers her self to be overborn with grief; when it
is absent, she consumes her self in wishes, and charge her desires to go find
out an object, the far distance whereof causes all her anxieties (for Desire
is nothing else but the motion of the soul toward a good which she already
loves, but does not as yet possess; she extends her self, that she may arrive
at it; she endevors to forsake her body, and to separate her self from her
self, that she may join her self to what she seeks after, she forgets her own
delights, that she may not think of any thing save her beloved object; she
forces her self to overcome Nature and Fortune; and in spite of them, to
render present the absent good which she desires.

By this Definition, it is easy to observe the proprieties of Desire; the
first whereof is restlesness, which will not suffer the soul, which has
conceived it, to taste any true contentment; for this soul is in a violent
condition; she fights with the body which she inanimates, that she may unite
her self to an object which she loves; Nature detains her in the one, and Love
carries her to the other; she is divided between these two powerful Sovereigns,
Desideria occidunt pigrum. Prove. 21.
and she feels a torment little less rigorous than death. Thus have we seen
men, who to free themselves thereof, have voluntarily condemned themselves to
fearful punishments; and who have esteemed all remedies pleasing, which could
cure so vexatious a malady. Banishment is certainly one of the cruellest
punishments, which Justice has invented to chastise the guilty; it separates
us from all we love, and seems to be a long Death, which leaves us a little
life, only to make us the more miserable. Notwithstanding we have heard of a
Mother, Inventa est mulier, quae pati maluit exilium, quam desiderium. Sen. De
Consolat. ad Helvet. c 18.
who chose rather to suffer the rigor of this torment, than the violence of
Desire; and who would accompany her son in his banishment, that she might not
be necessitated to lament his absence, and wish for his return. Thus Nature
which saw that Desire was an affliction, ordained Hope to sweeten it; for
whilst we are upon the earth, we make no wishes, whereof our mind does not
promise us the accomplishment; these two motions of our soul are only divided
in hell, where divine Justice has condemned her enemies to frame Desires void
of hope, and to languish after a happiness which can never befall them. They
long after the Summum bonum, and whatever hatred they conceived against that
God which punishes them, they cease not, notwithstanding, to love him
naturally; and to wish they might enjoy him, though they are not permitted to
hope they shall: This Desire is cause of all their sufferings; and this
languishment is a more insufferable torment than the scorching flames, than the
company of the Devils, and than the eternity of their Prison; could they be
without Desire, they should be without anguish; and all those other pains which
astonish vulgar souls, would seem supportable to them, were they not adjudged
to wish a happiness which they cannot hope for.

But it is not in Hell only that this Passion is cruel, she afflicts all men
upon earth; and as she serves divine Justice, as a means wherewithal to punish
the guilty, she is serviceable unto mercy, as an holy piece of cunning
wherewithal to exercise the innocent; for Gods goodness causes them to consume
in desires; they are in a disquiet which cannot end but with their lives, they
strive to get free from their bodies; Desiderium habens dissolvi and esse cum
Ch^isto. Phil. cap. 1.
they call in death into their succor; and say with the Apostle, I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ; Justice employs Desires to revenge her
self upon sinners; and by a no less severe than rational guidance, she gives
them over to this Passion to torment them; Tradidit illos Deus in desideria
cordis eorum. Romans 1.
their desires tend only to afflict them, and their soul frames unruly wishes,
which failing of effects, leave them in a languishment, which lasts as long as
does their life. In fine, Divinity knowing that this Passion is the cause of
all our misfortunes, has thought, that she could not describe Happiness better
unto us, than in teaching us, it was the end of all Desires. Beatitudo
desideriorum quies. D. Thom.
Philosophy would have said, that it is the end of all our evils, and the
beginning of all our good, that it makes us forget our miseries by the sweets
of her delights; but Divinity which very well knows that desires are the most
violent punishments which we, suffer here below, is content to say, that
happiness was the period thereof, and that when we should begin to be happy, we
should cease to wish; we must also confess that Desire fastens it self to all
the other Passions of our soul, and that it either furnishes them with weapons
wherewithal to fight, or with strength to afflict us; for those Passions which
make most havoc in our hearts, would be either dead or languishing were they
not animated with Desire. Love is only cruel because it coveteth the presence
of what it loves: Hatred gnaws not on our Bowels, save only because it
desires revenge; Ambition is only angersom, because it aspires after Honor;
Avarice tortures the Avaritious, only because it thirsts after riches; and all
Passions are only insupportable, because they are accompanied by Desire, which
like a contagious Malady is shed abroad throughout all the affections of our
Soul to make us miserable.

If it be thus cruel, it is not much less shameful; and we are obliged to
confess, that it is an evidence of our weakness and indigency; for we never
have recourse to wishes but when our power fails us; our desires never do
appear, but when we cannot effect them; they are marks of our impotency, as
well as of our love; it teaches Kings upon earth, that their will exceeds
their power, and that they would do many things which they cannot. I know that
desires inheartens them to proud undertakings, where difficulty is always mixed
with glory; I know they excite their courage, and that they produce that
general heat, without which nothing of gallantry is either undertaken or
effected; but they likewise teach them, that there is none but God alone (who
is able to do what he will) that makes not fruitless wishes; and that it
appertains to him to change when he pleases desires into effects; he rather
wills than wishes; and does rather resolve events than desire them: but amongst
Princes their impotency hinders oft-times the execution of their desires; they
are enforced to make Vows, and to implore aid from Heaven, when they fail of
help on earth; poor Alexander seeing his dear Ephestion die, could not witness
his love unto him, but by his desires; He who distributed the Crowns of Kings
that he had conquered, and who made Sovereigns Slaves, could not restore health
unto his Favorite; the vows which he offered up to heaven for his amendment,
were as much evidences of his impotency, as of his sorrow, and taught the whole
world, that Princes wishes witness their weakness.

They are also public marks in all men of hidden poverty, for every soul that
desires is necessitous; the soul that desires forgoes her self, to seek out in
another what she finds missing in her; she discovers her misery by making her
desires known, and teaches the whole world, that the felicity which she
possesses is but in appearance, since it satisfies not all her desires: Great
Tertullian has therefore worthily expressed the nature of this Passion, Qni
optat, honorat. Tert. De Poenitent. Desiderium honor rei desideratae, and
dedecus d^sideranti.
when he says, it is the glory of the thing desired, and the shame of him that
does desire; for a thing must be lovely to kindle our desires, it must have
charms which may draw us, and perfections which may stay us; but for certain
likewise, the will that does desire must be indigent, and must stand in need of
somewhat which makes it seek out a remedy. Desire then is the honor of beauty,
and the shame of the unchaste; it is the glory of Riches, and the Avaritious
man's infamy; the praise of dignity, and the Ambitious man's blame; and as often as
Princes are prone to this Passion, it gives us to know, that their fortune has
more of glittering in it than of real truth; that she gives not all the
contentments she promises, since they are constrained to descend from their
Thrones, to quit their Palaces, Dixi Domino, Deus meus es tu, quoniam bonorum
meorum non eges. Psalm. 16.

Deus passim in Scripturis vocatur Sadui. id est. sibi sufficiens.


and by shameful prosecution to seek out a foreign good which they have not in
themselves. The greatest praise which the Holy Scripture gives to God, is that,
whereby they are taught that he is all-sufficient in himself; and that
possessing all things in the immensity of his Essence, he is not tied to wish
for any thing, nor to forgo his repose, to seek for contentment in his
creatures; the world contributes nothing to his greatness: if the worlds place
should be supplied by a vacuity, and that there were no Angels nor men to know
and love him, his felicity would be no whit the less entire; and all the
praises which we now give him, add nothing to his glory; when we offer
sacrifices unto him, when we make the earth resound with the noise of his
praises, when we burn Incense upon his Altars, and enrich his Temples with the
spoils of our Houses, we are bound to protest, that all our Presents are of no
use to him, that he obliges us in accepting them, and that we offer up nothing
to his greatness, which we have not received from his liberality; Desire is
then a mark of indigence, and whatsoever creature wishes, declares its poverty.

But not to dishonor this Passion totally, we must confess it is also a proof
of our dignity, for it extends it self to all things, and pretends some right
to whatsoever can enter into our imagination; it seeks out effects in the
bosom of their Causes, persuades it self it may aspire unto whatsoever may be
conceived, and that it may add unto the number of its riches, all the goods
which as yet it does not possess; it is humored with whatsoever is possible; it
is of so great a reach, as it embraces all that fortune promises; and nothing
has at any time happened to the most fortunate men in the world, which it
thinks not it may with some sort of Justice expect. Ecce nos reliquimus omnia,
and secuti sumus te, quid ergo erit nobis? Matthew. 19. Multum deseruit qui
voluntatem habendi dereliquit. A sequentibustanta relicta sunt, quanta a non
sequentibus desiderari potuerunt. Greg. Magn. hom. 5. in Evang.
A Father of the Church has therefore said, that the Apostles forgoing
nothing, had yet forgone very much, since they had forgone their own desires;
and that despoyling themselves of a Passion, which in their greatest poverty
gave them a right to all riches, they might boast to have forsaken all things
for Jesus Christ; for the heart of man has an infinite capacity, which can
only be filled with the Summum bonum; it is always empty, till it possess him
that made it, whatever else of good makes it the more hungry; and not being
able to satisfy it, they irritate the desires thereof, but do not appease
them; hence it is, that we cannot bound our desires, but that the
accomplishment of one begets another, and that we run from one object to
another to find him out, Infinita a concupiscentia existente, homines infinita
desiderant. Arist. 1. Polit. c. 6.
of whom, the rest are all but shadows.

Hence proceed all the unruly desires which gnaw upon the hearts of the
greatest Monarchs; hence did Alexander's ambition proceed, who thought the
earth too little, and who was offended, that his Conquests should be bounded by
the limits of the world: hence did Croesus his avarice derive, who thought
himself poor, Cumte habet anima, plenum est desiderium ejus; and jam nihii
assud quod destderetur, exterius restat. Du n autem aliquid exterius desiderat,
manifestum est quod ie non ^abet interius; quo habito nihil est quod ultra
desideret. Si autem creaturam deside at, continuam famem habet; quia licet quod
desiderat de creaturis adipiscatur, vacua tamen remanet, quia nihil est quod
eam impleat, nisi tu, ad cujus imaginem est creata. Aug. Soliloq. c. 30.
though he were the richest of all the Romans; and that he passed over hideous
Deserts to war against a people whose riches were their sole fault. These
disorders have no other rise, than the capacity of our heart, and the infinity
of our desires, which pursuing the good which solicits them, and finding none
that can satisfy them, go always in search for new ones, and never prescribes
any bounds unto them; for though our understandings be not sufficiently
enlightened to know the supreme truth in all his extent, and that our wills have
not force enough to love the Summum bonum, as much as he is lovely, yet the one
and the other of them cease not to have an infinite capacity, which all the
things of the earth cannot fill: a natural truth, how elevated soever it be,
serves but as a step to our understandings, whereby to raise us up yet to an
higher truth; and a created good, how rare soever it be, does only enlarge our
heart, and dilate our will to make it capable of what is yet more excelent; so
do our desires perpetualy change objects, they despise such as they formerly
valued, and advancing still forwards they become at last sensible that nothing
can stop them, but he that can satisfy them. From these three proprieties
which we have explained, it is easy to observe the effects which our desires
produce in us; or forth of us; for since they separate the soul from the body,
they cause all these ecstasies, and ravishments, which are attributed to the
excess of Love; since they arise from indigence, they oblige us to demand, and
consequently render us importunate to our friends; and since they suppose that
our hearts are fathomless, we must not wonder if they be not satisfied with all
that can be granted them, and if, after having pursued after so many different
objects, they grow weary of pursuing, and seek for their rest in the Summum
bonum, who is the end of all lawful desires.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the bad use of Desires.
THose who would take the people for Judges in this Affair, would doubtlesly
imagine, that there is no more solid, nor more harmless pleasure in the world,
than to see our desires changed into effects, since it is the ordinary wish
which our friends make for us; and certainly, if all their wishes were well
regulated, nothing would be more pleasing nor more useful to us than their
accomplishment, and we should have reason to think our selves happy, if after a
long pursuance, we should at last accomplish them; but as they are almost
always unjust, Bonae animae male precantur, and si vis foelix esse, Deum ora,
ne quid tibi ex his quae optantur, eveniat. Senec.
their success is ofttimes prejudicial to us; and for my part, I am of Seneca's
opinion, and hold with him, that the greatest part of our friends do innocently
wish us ill, and make vows in our behalf, which are most pernicious to us, than
the imprecations of our enemies; If we will be content, we must pray to God,
that nothing may befall us that is wished unto us: our very Parents contribute
to our misfortune through an excess of affection, and during our infancy, they
draw down the anger of heaven upon us by the unjustness of their desires; so as
we must not wonder, if when we are further advanced in years, Iam non admiror
si omnia nos a prima pueritia mala sequntur: Inter execrationes parentum
crevimus. Sen Ep. 60.
so many misfortunes befall us, since those that love us best have been the
causers of it.

There are three causes for the irregularity of our desires; the first is
self-love, which not being able to eface out of our Souls, the inclination
which we have to the Summum bonum, does turn it aside after such good things as
are perishable, and makes them to be wished for, with as much fervencie as if
they were eternal; for our heart longs always after God; though the good
desires thereof be weakened, they are not quite stifled, they betake themselves
to what is good; and sin has not been able to bereave them of an inclination
which is natural unto them; but Reason which ought to rule them, being clouded
with darkness, they mistake, and fasten themselves to all objects that are
pleasing to them. Man seeks after a beauty which time cannot alter, which age
cannot decay, nor death it self eface; as soon ^s he discovers the shadow
thereof in a vi^age, he awakens his desires, and thinks it ^s the eternal
beauty wherewith he ought ^o be satisfied. He longs after a good which puts an
end to all his miseries, which frees him from all his cares, and which cures
him of all the evils that oppress him; when he is falsely persuaded by opinion,
that Gold is a Metal which assisteth us at all our needs; which opens the gate
to Honor, which facilitates the execution of our Designs, and which makes us
triumph over all difficulties; he commands his desires to purchase a good unto
him, from whence he expects all his happiness: In fine, man seeks after a solid
and true Glory, which serves as a recompense to virtue, and which satiates him
with honor, which cannot be efaced by time, nor injured by back biters; when
error has once persuaded him, that Battles are Heroic actions, that conquests
are the businesses of Sovereigns, he orders his desires to go in quest of these
glorious occasions; and to undertake unjust wars, he forms designs to throw
down Towns, to ruin States, Tantum miscere vitia desideriis noli. Sen Ep. 119.
and to carry horror and death into all the parts of the world, that he may
look big in Story. The remedy to all these evils is easy; and since the Will
has not lost all her good inclination, there needs no more than to clear the
understanding, and to fortify it by solid reasons, which it may oppose to the
false maxims of the world.

The second cause of the irregularity of our desires, is Imagination, which
only makes use of its advantage to irritate them; for they would be regular
enough, did not this embroyling power put them in disorder. Nature seeks only
how to free her self from incommodities that molest her, Ad legem Naturae
revertamur, divitiae paratae funt: Aut gratuitum est quo egemus aut vide, panem
and aquam Natura desiderat; nemo ad haec pauper est Sen. Ep. 25.
she requires not magnificence in buildings; and provided they save her from
being injured by the air, all their adornments are of no use to her; she
wishes not for pomp in apparel, provided they hide her nakedness, and that
they fence her body from the rigor of the Cold; she is yet innocent enough to
blame the disorder; she seeks not after excessive pleasure, in what she eats or
drinks, provided they sustain life, and allay hunger and thirst; she values not
the delicacies which accompany them; but Imagination, which seems to have no
other employment, since the corruption of our Nature, than to invent new
delights, to defend us from our ancient misfortunes, adds dissoluteness to our
desires, and makes our wishes irregular; Luxuria ebore sustineri vult, purpura
vestiri, auro tegi, terra^ transfer, maria concludere, flumina praecipitare,
nemora suspendere. Sen. 1. 1. Delra. c. ult.
she advises us to enclose fields and rivers within our Parks; she obliges us
to build Palaces more glorious than our temples, and greater than our
forefathers Towns; she employes all Artificers to cloth us, she makes whole
nature labor ^o satisfy our pride, she dives into the Entrails of the earth,
and into the depths of the Sea, to find out Diamonds and Pearls to deck us
withal. In fine, she seeks out Delicates in food, she will have no Viands which
are not exquisite; she misprizeth what is common, and will try unknown Cates;
she awakens the appetite when it is asleep, she confounds the seasons to afford
us pleasure, and maugre the heat of Summer, she preserves Snow and Ice, to
mingle with our Wine. In a word, Imagination makes us wise in our coveted
delicates, she instructs them to wish for things which they did not know; and
putting our natural desires out of order, she makes them commit excuses, which
they are only guilty of in being obedient to her. Thus our debaucheries arise
from our advantages, and we are more irregular than beasts, only in that we are
more enlightened; for Aristotle, distinguishing between our desires, terms (by a
strange fashion of speech) the most modest ones unreasonable, Arist. Ethic. c.
11.
because they are common to us with Beasts, and the most insolent reasonable,
because they are proper and peculiar to our selves. In my opinion, it is for
this cause, that Philosophers reduce us to the condition of Beasts, and that
they have propounded nature unto us for example, believing her to be less
irregular or unruly than Reason; it is for the same reason, that they have
divided our desires, into necessary and superfluous; and that they have
affirmed the one to be bounded, the other infinite; that such as were necessary
would find wherewithal to content themselves in banishment and solitariness;
and that the superfluous would not find wherewithal to content themselves in
Towns and Palaces. Ambitiosa non est fames, contenta desinere est, quo desinat
non nimis curat. Sen. Ep. 119.
Hunger is not ambitious, she requires only meat which may appease her; all
those several services, in preparing whereof so much care is had, are the
punishments of Gluttony, which seeks out means how to provoke Appetite, after
it is satisfied; for she complains, that the Neck is not long enough to taste
meats, that the stomach is not large enough to receive them, and that natural
heat is not ready enough to digest them; she likes not wine, unless served in
costly vessels; nor can she resolve to take it, unless prepared by a fair hand.
But natural desires are not accompanied with all these distastes; we are almost
always pleased with what is absolutely necessary for us. And Nature which is a
good Mother, Inter reliqua, hoc nobis natura praestitit, praecipuum, quod
necessitati fastidium excussit. Idem ibidem.
has mingled pleasure with necessity, for our refreshment; let us make use
then of a benefit, which we may number amongst the greatest; and let us
believe, that she has never more apparently obliged us, than when she has
freed all our natural desires of distaste.

The third cause of their disorder is, our not sufficiently considering the
quality of the things which we desire; for we oft-times corrupt the nature of
desire, and by extreme violence we force it to seek out a thing which it ought
to shun; We only look upon objects, as they appear; we betake our selves
indiscreetly unto them, not considering their defaults; and make our desires be
succeeded by sorrow, and grief to be the sequel of our delights; We wish for
real evils, because they have some shadow of good; and when after a long
pursuit, we possess them, they begin to be unsupportable; changing opinion, we
change our desires, and accuse Heaven of having been too easy to us in
granting them; We know by experience, that there be Vows, which God does does
exact at our hands, unless he be angry, and that we make wishes, the
accomplishment whereof is fatal to us; Attonitus novitate mali, divesque
miserque, effugere optat opes, and quae modo viverat, odit. Ovid. Metam. 11. De
Mida.
We are like the Prince who repented his having wished for riches, and who was
afflicted for having obtained them, his desire becomes his punishment, he
abhorred that which he desired, and finding himself poor in the midst of
plenty, he prayed to be delivered from an evil, which he himself had procured;
Absence puts a valuation upon almost all we have of good, and their presence
makes us despise them; they appear great unto our Imagination when far off, Cui
enim assecuto satis fuit, quod optanti nimium videbatur? Sen. Ep. 118.
but when they draw nearer, they lose their false greatness, all their
advantages vanish away, as shadows before the Sun, and we turn our valuation
into disesteem, our love into hatred, and our desires into detestation.

Profane Philosophy, desirous to find out a remedy to so many evils, gives us
counsel which makes us despair; for she will have us to moderate our desires,
without reforming our Soul, she inhibits us the use of wishes, as if the
mischief lay only in them, and advises us to wish for nothing, if we woul be
happy; she builds her felicity in the cutting off of this Passion. She thinks
to have pronounced an Oracle, when by the mouth of Seneca, Qui desiderium iuum
clausit, cum Jove de felicitate contendit. Sen.
she says, that he who has bounded his desires, is as happy as Jupiter: and
that without increase of riches, or addition to delight. If we would find a
solid contentment, we need only lessen our desires. But certainly in flattering
us, she abuses us; and promising us an Imaginary happiness, she bereaves us of
the means how to come by a true one: For she leaves us in the indigency wherein
sin has placed us, and forbids us the use of desires: she leaves us with the
Inclination which nature has endowed us withal, for the Summum bonum; and will
not suffer us to seek after it; she will have us to be poor, and yet to have no
feeling thereof; and that to the misfortune of poverty, we add the like of
insolence and pride. When we shall reign in heaven, and shall find our perfect
happiness in the fruition of the Summum bonum, we shall banish all wishes. But
as long as we grovel upon earth, and that we suffer evils which enforce us to
seek for remedies, we shall conceive just desires; and shall learn from
religion, how to make use of them, to the glory of Jesus Christ, and salvation
of our own souls.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Desire.
THough there be nothing more common than Desires, there is nothing more rare
then the good use thereof; and of as many as make wishes, there are but very
few that know how to rule them well; for this Passion is as free as Love; and
as she is in her first production, she cannot endure to be constrained; she is
so glorious as that she receives no Laws but from the Summum bonum; she sets
not by the authority of Princes; and knowing that she holds not of their
Empire, she is not affrighted at their threats, nor is she moved by their
promises.

Therefore Kings, who sufficiently know the extent of their power, offer not to
entrench upon her liberty; they punish actions, forbid words, but they leave
thoughts and desires to his guidance, who seeing them in the bottom of the
heart can eternally recompense, or punish them, they make no laws to retain
them; they confess God is only able to suppress them, and that he is the only
Sovereign, whose prerogative it is to say unto his Subjects, Non concupisces.
Exodus 20.
you shall not covet: They therefore are to be esteemed insolent, who undertake
to reform desires unassisted by his Grace; and all the advices we can give to
regulate them, do necessarily presuppose his assistance; but after having
rendered this acknowledgment to him from whom we receive whatsoever we have of
good, me thinks we may prescribe certain conditions to the use of this Passion,
which may make it glorious, and useful to us.

Nature has endowed us with desires, only to come by the good which we have
not, and which is necessary for us; they are help in our need, they are the
hands of our will; as those parts of the body labor for all the rest, our
desires take pains for all the Passions of our Soul, and by their care oblige
our Love and Hatred: but this advantage would be prejudicial to us, if, being
given us to assist our poverty, we should make use thereof to increase it:
Therefore before we engage our selves in the pursuit of a good, we must be well
assured, whether it be great enough, or no, to enrich us; and if the enjoyment
thereof will cause those desires to die, to which the want thereof gave birth;
for if it do only irritate, and if in lieu of healing our evils, it make them
worse, a man must be mad to continue the desire. I would then only desire those
real good things which may free me from my miseries; and to the end that my
Passion may be rational, I would only wish them as far forward as they ought to
be wished; I would weigh their qualities, and I would fit my wishes to their
merits; I would endeavor riches, not to serve my vainglory, but to supply my
wants; I would endeavor meat for sustenance, Magnus ille est qui fictilibus
sic utitur, que^admodum argento: nec ille minor est qui sic argentutitur, quem
admodum fictilibus. Infirmi animi est, pati non posse divitias. Sen. Ep. 5.
not to provoke appetite; I would endeavor honor as an aid to virtue in its
birth, and which has need of some foreign help to defend it against vice; yea,
I would endevor harmless pleasures, but I would shun their excess; and I would
remember that they are of the nature of those fruits that are pleasing in taste,
but are harmful to the body; thus moderated, our desires would be rational; if
they fix us to things on earth, necessity will serve us for excuse, Idem
sentias de voluptatibus and honoribus.
and we shall esteem the servitude glorious, which will be common to us with
Saints.

We must have a care likewise to have only weak desires for things perishable,
and to hold a hanck in such desires as may be violently taken from us. The
Stoics Philosophy is too austere to be listened unto, their maxims tend more to
make us despair, than to instruct us; for it absolutely inhibits us the desire
of such things as we may be bereft of; and it employeth all its sophistical
reasons to persuade us, that the good which we come by by our desires, Alienum
est quicquid optando venit. Sen.
cannot be a true good: Christian Philosophy which knows very well that our
felicity is not within us, and that we must forgo our selves ere we fasten to
the Summum bonum, blames this Maxim; but as she is not likewise ignorant that
we may be bereft of other goods, she ordains us to desire them without anxiety,
and to consider we are not so sure of their possession, but that it may
sometimes meet with interruption; she prepars us for their loss, when she
permits us to seek after them; she teaches us that the desire of things
perishable ought not to be eternal; and that we must possess, without too much
of addition, what ought to be forgon without sorrow; she teaches us that the
goods of Fortune, and of Nature, depend upon divine Providence, which does not
give us, but lend us them; which refuses them to her friends, Hoc est
propositum Deo, ostendere haec quae vulgus appetit, quae reformidat, nec bona
esse, nec mala: apparebunt autem bona esse, si illa non nisi bonis viris
tribuerit, and mali tantum irrogaverit. Sen. De Provid. c. 5
and grants them to her enemies, and which does so bestow them, as if they be
not marks of hatred, neither are they testimonies of her love; by these good
reasons she fairly persuades us, that they ought not to be the principal
objects of our desires; and that to follow our Sovereigns intentions, we must
love them with coolness, desire them with moderation, possess them with
indifferency, and contentedly forgo them.

But the chief use we ought to make of so noble a Passion, is, thereby to raise
us up to God, and to make thereof a glorious chain to fasten us inseparably to
him; as he is the only object of Love, he is also the only object of desires;
they miss of their end when they keep aloof from him; they lose themselves,
when they seek not him; and they stop in the midst of their course, when they
come not full home to him. He is the Springhead of all perfections; and as
they are without mixture of default, there is nothing in them which is not
perfectly wishable: we see some creatures which have certain charms which make
them be desired; but then they have imperfections to make them be undervalued:
the Sun is so full of glory and beauty, as it has made Idolaters; one part of
the world does yet worship it; and Christian Religion, which is spread over the
whole earth, has not been able to dis-deceive all Infidels; yet has its
weaknesses; Clamat Sol, quid me colis ut Deum, quem vides ortu occasuque
concludi? Deus nec ortum habet nec occasum; sed illum deserendo magnum
incucurristi casum: Cum antem calor and splendour meus tibi differviant, quomodo
me pro Deo colendum ducis, nisi quia Deum verum colere nescis? Aug. 1. De
Symbolo. tract. 3.
which teaches Philosophers that it is but a creature; the light thereof is
bounded, and cannot at one and the same time enlighten the two halves of the
world; it suffers Eclipses, nor can it shun them; it grows faint, and sees it
self obscured by a constellation, not so great nor glorious as it self; it has
benign influences, it has also malignant ones; if it concur with the birth of
man, it does the like to his death; if it be the father of flowers it is also
their Paricide; if the brightness thereof serve to light us, it does also dazzle
us; if the heat thereof warm Europe, it scorcheth Africa; so as the noblest of
all constellations has its defaults; and if it cause desire in us, it is also
cause of aversions and under-valuations; but God has nothing that is not
lovely, innumerable numbers of Angels see all his perfections, and are destined
to honor them; they have immortal lovers, which adore them from the beginning
of the world; men who know them, desire them; and wish death unto themselves
that they may enjoy them: this Summum bonum is that which we ought to seek
after; for him it is that our wishes were given us; our heart is sinful when it
divides its love, and gives but one part thereof to him that deserves the
whole; Gods abundance and man's indigence are the first links of alliance which
we contract with him. Abyssus abyssum invocat. Psalm. 41. Deus totus
desiderabilis; homo totus desideria.
He is all, and we are nothing; He is a depth of mercy, and we are a depth of
misery; He has infinite perfections, and we faults without number; He
possesses no greatness which is not to be wished for, and we suffer no want
which obliges us not to make wishes; He is all desirable, and we are all
desire; and to express our nature aright, it will suffice to say, that we are
only a mere capacity of good; there is no part of our Body, nor faculty of our
Soul, which does not oblige us to seek him; we make Inrodes in the world by our
desires, we wander in our affections, but after having considered the beauty of
Heaven, and the riches of the Earth, we are constrained to return again unto
our selves, to fix our selves on him who is the groundwork of our being and to
confess that none but God alone is able to fill the capacity of our heart. Let
us draw these advantages from our misery, and let us rejoice that Nature has
endowed us with so many desires, since they have wings which raise us up to
God, and chains which fasten us to him. Upon all other occasions desires are
useless, and after having made us Long, a long time, they furnish us not with
what they made us hope for; they torment us whilst they possess us; and when
despair causes them to die, they leave us only shame and sorrow, for having
listened to so evil Counselors. I know very well that they awaken the Soul, and
that they endue it with vigor to compass the good which it wishes for; but the
good success of our undertakings depends not upon their efficacy; and should
the things that we love cost us nothing but desires, all ambitious men would be
Kings; all covetous men rich; and we should hear no Lovers complain of the
rigors of their Mistresses, or of their infidelity; women would take their
Husbands from their Graves, Mothers would cure their sick children, and
captives would regain their liberty; we should do as many Miracles as make
wishes, and all mischief would be banished from off the earth, since men can
wish; but experience shows us, they are for the most part impotent, and that
their accomplishment depends upon the supreme providence, which at its pleasure
can turn them into effects; those that concern our souls health, are never
useless; fervency in wishing is sufficient to make a man good; our conversion
depends only upon our will; our desire animated by Grace, blots out all our
sins; and though God be so great, he has only cost them wishes that possess
him; this Passion dilates our soul, Vas desideriorum ipsa infusione crescit.
Chrysostom.
and makes us capable of the good we wish for; she extends our heart, and
prepares us to receive the happiness which she procures us. In fine, she gets
audience, of God, Apud Deum voces non faciunt verba, fed desideria. Greg. Magn.
makes her self be understood without speaking, and she has such power in
heaven, as nothing is denied to her demands; she glorified Jesus Christ and the
Saints; Christ takes from them the most ancient of his Names; and before he was
known by that of Savior of the world, he was already known by that,
Desideratus cunctis gentibus. Aggaei c. 2.
of the desired of all the people. His Prophets honored him with this title
before he was born: He who showed us the time of his coming, took his title
from his wishes, and merited to be called, Vir desiderorum. Dan c. 9.
the man of Desires; His Vows did advance the Mystery of the Incarnation; the
like of the Virgin did obtain the accomplishment thereof, and ours will taste
the effect thereof, if they grow not weary in begging them at Gods hands.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of the good and
evil use of Eschewing.
NAture would have failed us at our need, if having endued us with Love to good
things, she had not furnished us with desire to seek after them. These good
things which now are cause of our happiness, would cause all our punishments,
if being permitted to love them, we should be forbidden to wish for them: the
Summum bonum would only serve to make us miserable, and the virtue which it
has to attract hearts would contribute to our misery, if we wanted a capacity
of atchieving it. We should have equal reason to complain of her charity, if
having imprinted in our hearts the hatred of evil, she had not likewise
engraven therein that Passion which we call Shunning, or Eschewing, to make us
keep aloof from it; for we should see our enemy, and not have the power to
defend our selves from him; we should have an aversion from vice, yet should be
enforced to tolerate it; and by an unfortunate necessity, we must give lodging
to a guest we should not be able to love; but Nature has well provided for
this, and her providence, which always watches over her children, has given us
a Passion which eschews evil with as much impetuosity, as desire seeks after
good. This keeps at distance from all that can hurt us; and following the
inclinations of hatred, whereof she is either the Daughter or Slave, she flies
from all objects that displease her; and fights to defend it self against her
enemies: it is the first succor we have received against evils; it is the first
violence, the first salley which the concupiscible appetite makes to free us
from them.

Though this Passion be almost always blameless, and that she cannot be made
criminal but by surprizal; yet cease she not to have her ill use, and to be
every day employed against the design of Nature. Those therefore that would
make use of her, are bound to consider, whether that which they endevor to
eschew, be truly so, or be but so in appearance; and whether opinion, which
easily seizes upon the understanding, has not persuaded them unto falsehoods
instead of truths. For it is apparent, that of two things that bear the name of
evil in the world, there is but one of them which may properly be said to
deserve it. Sin and Punishment are the two most ordinary objects of eschewing;
and most men do so confound them, Homines flagella sua dolent, pecc^ta sua non
dolent propter quae flagellantur. Greg. Magn.
as we know not which of them is most odious. Punishment being more sensible
than Sin, it is more carefully shunned; and there are not many people who do
not love rather to be faulty than unfortunate. We shun the Plague, and seek out
sin; we keep far from all infected places, the bad air whereof may work an
alteration in our health, and we draw near to evil company which may rob us of
our innocence: Religion obliges us not withstanding to believe that
Punishments are the effects of Divine Justice; that they have Beauties, which
though austere, ought not to be the less pleasing; that God honors himself by
punishing of his enemies, and that he finds as much satisfaction in chastening
the guilty, as in recompencing the just. The greatest Saints have known that
our punishments were favors, which did no less contribute to the welfare of
man, than to the glory of his Creator; they have confessed that we must adore
the arm which hurts us, love the wounds because of the arm that made them;
Justissima scias essa illa fulmina, quae percussi etiam colunt. Seuec. Consolat
ad Polyb.
and teach all the world that Heavens Thunders are just, since those who are
therewith struck, adore them; but sin is a true evil, which has nothing in it
which is not odious; its object is a sovereign good which it offends; and if
in the behalf of the committer, the malice thereof be bounded on his behalf
against whom it is committed, it is infinite. Sin violates all the Laws of
Nature, dishonors men and Angels; and all the evils which we suffer are the
just punishments of its disorders. 'Twas then for this dreadful evil that we
were endued with aversion; and this aversion cannot be more justly employed,
than in keeping us far from a Monster, the abode whereof will be hell, and
death the eternal punishment.

Next to sin, nothing ought to be more carefully eschewed, than those that do
defend it; and who to enlarge the Empire thereof, endeavor to make it appear
lovely and glorious. Omne malum aut timore aut pudore Natura perfudit. Tert. in
Apol.
As Nature is the pure workmanship of God, she cannot tolerate sin, and that
she may banish it from the earth, she has laden it with confusion and fear; it
dares not appear in full day; it hides it self in darkness, and seeks out
solitary places, where it has none but such as are accomplices with it, for
witnesses. But its partakers raise it up upon a throne, and play all their
cunning to win it glory; they cover it with the cloak of Virtue; and if it has
any thing of affinity with its enemy, they strive to make it pass for Virtue.
They change their names, and by one and the same action committing two faults,
they bereave Virtue of her honor, Sunt virtu^ibus vitia confinia, and perditis
quoque ac turpibus recti similitudo est Sic mentitur prodigus liberalem: cum
plurimum intersit, utrum quis dare sciat, an servare nesciat. Sen. Ep. 120.
that they may give it to Sin: they term Revenge greatness of Courage;
Ambition, a generous Passion; Uncleanness, an innocent pleasure; and
consequently they term Humility lowness of Spirit; the forgiving of injuries
faintheartedness; and continency, a savage humor. They spread abroad these
false maxims; they turn evils into contagious diseases, and their errors into
heresies; they seduce simple souls, and presenting poison in Crystal vessels,
they make it be swallowed down by innocent people. Those who are most
courageous have much ado to defend themselves from them; the best wits suffer
themselves to be persuaded by their lewd Reasons; we are therefore bound to
have recourse to the succor that Nature has given us, to excite this Passion,
which keeps us aloof from what is evil, and furnishes us with forces to fight
against it.

But her chief employment ought to be against Incontinence; and the Heavens
seem to have given a being to Aversion, only to rid our hands of an enemy which
cannot be overcome but by Eschewing. All Passions come in to the aid of Virtue
when she undertakes a war against Vice: Omnia in Christianorum pia certamina,
sola dura sunt praelia castitatis, ubi quotidiana pugna and tara victoria:
Gravem castitas fortita est inimicum, cui semper resistitur, and semper
timetur. Nemo ergo se salsa securitate decipiat, nec d^ viribus suis periculose
praesumat, nec cum mulieribus habitans, putet continentiae obtinere triumphum.
Aug. lib. De Honest. Mulier cap 2.
Choler grows hot in her quarrel; Audacity furnishes her with weapons; Hope
promises her Victory; and Joy, which always follows generous actions, serves
instead of Recompense: but when she is to set upon Incontinency, she dares not
employ all these faithful soldiers; and knowing very well that the enemy, she
is to fight withal, is as crafty as puissant, she fears lest he may seduce
them, and by his cunning draw them over to his side. In truth, Choler agrees
easily with Love; and Lovers quarrels serve only to re-kindle their extinct
flames Hope entertains their Affections; and Joy oft-times takes its rise from
their displeasures; so as Virtue can only make use of Eschewing, to defend her
self; and of so many Passions which assist her in her other designs, she is
only seconded by Eschewing, in her combat against Impurity. But she thinks her
self strong enough if succored therewithal; and there is no such charming
Beauty, no so strong inclination, nor so dangerous occasion which she does not
promise her self to overcome; provided she be accompanied by this faithful
Passion: She is the cause why Chastity reigns in the world; it is by reason of
her wisdom that men do imitate Angels, and triumph over evil spirits in the
frailty of the flesh.

But the greatest miracle which she produces, is, when being subservient to
Charity, she separateth us from our selves; and when preventing the violence of
death, she divides the soul from the body, for man has no greater enemy than
himself; he is the cause of all his own evils; and Christian Religion agrees
with the Sect of the Stoics, that man can receive no true displeasure, save
what he himself procures; he is therefore bound to keep at distance from
himself, and to hold no commerce with his Body, lest it take part with the
frailties thereof; he ought to shun its company, if he would preserve himself
in his innocence; and by the assistance of eschewing, the soul must loosen her
self from what she inanimates. Men forbid solitariness to such as are affected,
Lugentem timentemque custodire solemus, ne solitudine male utatur: Nemo est ex
imprudentibus qui relinqui sibi debeat. Tunc quicquid aut me^u aut pudore
celebat animus expromit: Tunc audaciam acuit, libidinem irritat, iracundiam
instigat. Sen. Ep. 10.
because it nourishes their sorrow; and endeavor to divert them, to make them
forget their displeasures. So is solitariness forbidden unto sinners; men dare
not abandon them to their own thoughts, lest they entertain themselves
therewithal, and be therewith too much possessed; and a thousand tricks are made
use of to take them from themselves, lest they finish their own ruin; for it is
well known that they take nothing but evil counsels in solitariness; that they
study how to lay traps for Chastity, that they meditate on Revenge, that they
excite their Choler; and that losing that Shame and Fear which withheld them
when in company, they give freedom to all their Passions when they are drawn
aside. To cure them of so many evils, it is endeavored to part them from
themselves; and to lead on this design with success, the charge is given to
Eschewing; which by harmless cunning, separates the Soul from the Body, and
keeps men aloof from what may hurt them.

Since then we are so much obliged to this Passion of Eschewing, and that we
owe our welfare to her; it will become us to employ the rest of this Discourse
in the consideration of her Proprieties, that we may the better know a Passion
which does us so many good Offices. She is the same to Hatred, which Desire is
to Love; though she seem to consider Evil only, to the intent she may keep
aloof from it; yet seeks she after good in all parts; and like to Watermen,
she turns her back toward the place where she would be: her effects are as
powerful as those of Desire; and those unfortunate people who keep far from a
great danger, have no less trouble in so doing, than those who seek after a
great good fortune. As Desire calls in Hope to her succor, to compass the good
which she esteems too difficult; Eschewing imployes the aid of Fear, to acquit
her self of an evil which surpasses her power. As Desire is a mark of our
indigence, Eschewing is a proof of our weakness; and as in Desiring, we obtain
that which we want; by Eschewing we overcome that which sets upon us. In fine,
as Desire does dilate our heart, and make it capable of the good which it
endeavors; Eschewing by a clean contrary effect, does close up our Soul, and
shuts the door upon the Enemy which would force her. So as these two Passions
are the faithful handmaids of Hatred and Love; and as Love undertaketh nothing
of generous, without the assistance of Desire; Hatred does nothing of
memorable, unassisted by Eschewing; and as we owe the possession of good to
Desire, which sought after it; we owe our escaping of Evil, to eschewing, which
has given it the Repulse.

THE THIRD TREATISE OF Hope and of Despair.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Hope.
THat Art which rises from the Earth to consider the Heavens, and neglects all
the Worlds beauties, that it may admire those of the Stars, teaches us that
the Sun changes Influences as she changes Houses; for though he lose nothing
of Virtue in his course; though the Eclipses which rob us of his sight, take
not from him that brightness which they hide from us, and his being the farther
off does not diminish his heat; yet are their certain parts in the heavens
where his aspects are more favorable, and his influences more benign; there be
constellations which he cherishes, and in which he delights to oblige whole
Nature; they seem to heighten his luster, to augment his force, and he appears
never to be more powerful, than when he communicates with them. Morality, which
knows no other Sun than Love, confesses that he takes new force as he takes
new countenances; for though he be always himself, and that the different names
that we give him, do not change his Essence, yet he accommodates himself to the
apprehensions of our Soul which he employeth, and does with them produce more
extraordinary, or more common effects. He is cloudy in sorrowfulness, violent
in choler, ready in desire, undertaking in boldness, calm in joy, and droops in
despair; but certainly, he is never more pleasing; than in Hope. It Is the
Throne wherein he appears with most pomp; it is the affection wherein he works
most strongly; it is the Passion wherein he most smoothly flattereth us; so is
it also the most generous motion of our Soul. Nature seems to have ordained it
to assist great men in their highest enterprise; and that nothing of memorable
can be effected without the assistance of this Passion. 'Twas at her
solicitation that Alexander undertook the conquest of Asia; distributing all
the wealth that he had received from his father, he only received her for his
patrimony; and he who found the world too little, contented himself with the
promises which Hope gave him. Caesar consulted only with her, when he resolved
to change the state of the Roman Commonwealth, and to make himself master of
that haughty Queen which gave Kings to all the people of the Earth; all
Conquerors have been her Slaves; and Ambition which commanded over them,
neither drew forth Forces, nor took advice but from Hope, which augmented their
Courage.

But she is not so appropriated unto Princes, Omne hac via. procedit officium,
sic serimus, sic militamur, sic uxores ducimus, sic liberos colimus; cum omnium
horum incertue sit eventus. Sen. Benefic. l. 4. c. 33.
as not to communicate her self unto their Subjects; for her care extends even
to the meanest condition of men: she preserves the worlds society; and all
that give her entertainments are only guided by her motions. The Husbandman
does not cultivate the ground, Merchants put not to sea, nor do Soldiers give
battle, but when solicited by the sweets of Hope. Though she have no warrant,
and that all her promises be uncertain, she sees a thousand people follow her
orders, and attend her recompenses. She has more subjects than all the Kings
of the earth put together; and she may boast, that neither the one nor the
other do any thing but by her advice. It Is she alone that contents all men, and
who in the difference of their conditions makes them expect the same success.
It Is she that promises the Labourer a happy harvest, favorable winds to
Mariners, Victory to Soldiers, and to Parents obedient children. Every one is
ready to engage himself upon her word; and that which is yet more strange, men
believe her though they have taken her in a lie; she gives so many colors to
her new promises, as upon the assurance thereof men form new enterprises, Ad ea
accedlmus, de quibus been sperandum esse credimus. Qui enim pollicetur serenti
proventum, naviganti portum, militanti victoriam, marito pudicam uxorem, patri
pios liberos? ^dem ibid.
and throw themselves into new dangers. The Labourer plows the ground after an
ill year, and endeavoreth to overcome the sterility of the soil by the
unwearisomness of his labor: Mariners remount their Vessels after a shipwreck,
and cozened by Hope, forget the horror of Tempests, and the seas
perfidiousness: Soldiers return to the fight after a defeat, by the strength
of hope; they charge enemies that have beaten them, and promise unto themselves
that Fortune will grow weary of always favoring one side. In fine, there is no
so unfortunate condition, which receives not comfort from this Passion; though
she be a Cheater, she will appear to be faithful; and even in her lightness she
gives proofs of her constancy; for she accompanies her slave, even to death;
she follows Gally-slaves to the Galleys; she enters Prison with the Prisoners,
she goes upon the Scaffold with the guilty, and with what bad success soever
she may have paid our desires, no man can resolve to abandon her.

But as there is no advantage in the world which is not mingled with some
defaults, Hope wants not hers; and if she flatter men by her sweetness, she
astonisheth them by the fear which accompanies it. For the good which she
purchases is absent and difficult; the absence thereof disquieteth her, and
the difficulty astonisheth her: She knows very well that what she seeks after,
is doubtful; her very name teaches her, that the event of her undertakings is
uncertain; Spes incerti boni nomen est. Sen. Ep. 10.
and as often as she considers the dangers that threaten her, she grows pale, as
well as fear: she seems to be of the humor of that great Commander, who always
trembled when he began to give battle; as if he apprehended the hazards
whereinto his courage was like to throw him: she fears her own endeavor; and
her boldness is the chiefest cause of her fearfulness. This Maxim is so true,
as that a certain Philosopher was of opinion, that our apprehensions sprung
from our hopes; and that to cease to fear, we must cease to hope; for, though
these two Passions seem to have a contrariety, and that the soul which hops
is full of assurance, yet does the one of them arise from the other; and,
notwithstanding their ill intelligence, they go hand in hand, and seldom part;
Quemadmodum eadem catena and custodem and militem copulat, sic ista quae tam
dissimilia sunt, pariter incedunt, Spem metus sequitur; nec miror ista sic ire,
utrumque; pendentis animi est, utrumque; futuri expectatione solliciti; Sen.
Ep. 5.
they march together as do the prisoners with their Guards, who are fastened
with the same Chain, and almost brought to the same servitude. But I wonder not
that they have so much affinity, since they relate so much one to another; and
that the one and the other of them is the Passion which holds a man in
suspense, whom the expectation of what is to come, continually disquiets.

When she has not this unhappiness, and that the knowledge of her strength
assures her of good success in what she takes in hand, she falls into another
extremity; and furnishes our enemies with means to surprise us; for she is
naturally inconsiderate, whatever good advice be given her; she has an eye
unto the good which attracts her, and considers not the evil which environs
her; she throws her self indiscreetly into danger, and guiding her self only by
appearances which deceive her, she engages her liberty to satisfy her
inclination. Thus we see fishes swallow the hook, Et fera and piscis, spe
aliquo oblectante decipitur. Sen. Ep. 8.
because it is covered with some bait; thus we see wild beasts give against the
toils, thinking to find some prey there; and Soldiers fall into an Ambush,
thinking to get some advantage. So as, Hope is a rash Counselor, which in the
obscurity of what is to come, sees only false lights, and discovers no apparent
good, save only to throw us into hidden and real evils: Therefore do
Politicians always distrust her advices; and those great men who govern States,
do not easily believe a Passion which has more heat than light, and more
courage than wisdom. But say she should make good all that she promises us,
and that the good fortune which she makes us expect, should not be mingled with
any displeasure; yet should we have reason to complain of her; since that in
feeding us with what is to come, she makes us forget what is past, and obliges
us to build our contentment on the the most uncertain part of our life.
Memoriae minimum tribuit, quisquis spei plurimum. Sen. Benef. l. 3. c. 4.


Time, which measures all things, has three differences; the Past, the
Present, and the Future: the Present is but punctum (a point;) it runs away so
fast as there is no staying of it; we are taken in a Lie whenever we speak of
it: it never understands the beginning and ending of the same discourse: when
we think to make use of it for a witness, or to allege it for an Example, it
escapes our hands; we find it is no longer Present, and that it is already
Past. The Future succeeds it; but it is so hidden, as the wisest men of the
world cannot discover the first moments thereof; the darkness of it is so
thick, as that the light of wisdom cannot dissipate it: the success of things
are shut up in the Abyss thereof; and one cannot come to the knowledge of them
upon smaller terms than entering into eternity: a man must be a Prophet to
penetrate its secrets; and all is there (in respect of us) so doubtful and so
confused, as the days which we destine for triumph, are oft-times destined for
our defeat; and we reserve for our Pastime, those which Heaven has ordained
for our punishment. The time Past is no more; it flies us, and we fly it; our
wishes, which have somewhat of claim to what is to come, pretend none to this;
they cannot dispose of that which has no further a being; and that sovereign
power which all things obey, will undertake nothing upon this part of Time,
save when the said power will new-mould the world; and drawing our bodies from
out the dust, will render unto the present that which the past had taken from
it. It Is true, our Memory has some jurisdiction over it: she makes use thereof
for our comfort; she calls back our good days past to recreate us; and by a
harmless piece of art she makes present happiness of our past evils; Haec est
pars temporis nostri sacra ac dedicata, omnes humanos casus supergresla, extra
fortunae regnum subducta; quem non inopia, non metus, non morborum incursus
exagitat. Haec nec turbari, nec eripi potest: perpetua ejus and intrepida
possessio est. Sen. De Brevis. ^it. c. 10.
she raises our friends from their graves that we may entertain our selves with
them; she converseth with the dead without horror; and maugre the necessary
laws of Time, she revives what is past, and restores unto us all the
contentments which Time has bereft us of. It is likewise that part of our life
which Philosophers love best; it is that over which Fortune has no more power,
and which cannot be incommodiated by Poverty, tormented by Fear, nor abused by
Hope. It Is a sacred time, which accidents dare not touch; it is a treasure which
cannot be taken from us; and Tyrants, who have power over the remainder of our
life, have none at all over that which is past: the Passion thereof is
peaceful; and let the Destinies do what they please, they cannot rob us of a
good which we enjoy only by remembrance; yet Hope deprives us of these harmless
riches; and busying her self only about what is to come, she hinders us from
thinking upon what is past; she makes us poor, to enrich us; she takes from us
a certainty, to feed us with uncertainty; and by an unjust extremity she draws
us out of a calm, to engage us in a storm.

I confess that Wisdom and Religion have an eye to what is to come, but they
consider it not as does Hope; for Religion does not ground her self upon that
uncertain futurity which amuseth most men, but upon an assured futurity which
we are promised in the holy Scriptures; she labors to compass it, she employs
all her reasons to persuade us, that it ought to be the chief object of our
desires; Nolite ergo soliciti esse in Crastinum. Crastinus enim dies solicitus
erit sibiipsi ^ sufficit diei malitia sua. Matthew. 6.
she despises that deceitful futurity which humane hope seeks after, and makes
so small esteem thereof, as she will not have us to esteem it a part of our
life; she forbids us to think of tomorrow, and even condemns the false wisdom
of men, who heap up riches, and build Palaces, as if they were sure to live to
eternity; she will not have us defer the execution of our good resolutions to
that unknown time; and by a profound knowledge which she has of the
uncertainty of all things, she forbids us to defer our repentance, and commands
us to look upon the present day as the last of our life. True wisdom considers
the time to come, rather as a wellspring of evil than of good; and when she
will seek into the obscurity thereof, she takes advice rather of Fear than of
Hope; Quam stultum est aetatem disponere^ ne crastino quidem dominamur. O
quanta dementia est spes longas inchoantium! Edam, aedificabo, credam, exigam,
honores geram, tum demum lassam and plenam senectutem, in otium referam. Omnia
mihi, creed, etiam felicibus dubia sunt: Nihil sibi quisquam de futuro debet
promittere. Sen. Ep. 101.
she defies all that depends upon Fortune; and knowing that the best
conjunctures are always doubtful, she impatiently expects the time to come; as
she knows that good success is out of our power, she leaves the ordering
thereof to divine Providence, and is not troubled when she sees the wisest
counsels succeed ill. So that Hope is too blame to engage us in a time which is
not in our disposal, and to ground all our good fortunes upon moments and
hours, which peradventure the course of our life will not arrive unto. I know
very well that the condition of our nature obliges us to pretend some right to
futurity; that there being none, but God alone, which possesses all his good
together, we must allow something to the succession of Time; and that having so
few present advantages, we may entertain our selves with those which futurity
promises us; but we must not build our welfare thereupon; and it is a high
piece of folly to forgo the present, to forget what is past, and only feed upon
what is to come.

By all these good and bad effects of Hope it is easy to know her nature, and
to make an exact definition thereof. It Is then a motion of the irascible
appetite, which with fervency seeks after an absent, difficult, possible good.
She has this of common with all Passions, that she is a motion of the Soul;
but she differs from Fear, in that she considers only what is good, not what is
bad; from Joy, in that she looks upon an absent, not a present good; from
Desire, in that she seeks not absolutely after good, but after such as is
difficult. All these qualities teach us, that she may have her good and her bad
uses; that if young people abuse her in their pleasures, old men make good use
thereof in their affairs; and if she be pernicious to Wisdom, when she leans
indriscreetly upon the uncertainty of what is to come, she is useful to
Religion, when she grounds her self upon Eternity. We shall see the proofs of
these truths in the ensuing Discourses.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the evil use of Hope.
PAssions cannot be more insolently abused, than when they are employed
contrary to the design of Nature; or when, thwarting their principal
proprieties, they are made to serve unworthy Masters, who either by cunning, or
violence, make them forgo Virtues part. I cannot therefore more evidently show
the ill use which most men make of Hope, than in letting them see that they
give against her inclinations; and that diverting her from her legitimate
object, they propose others unto her which are not so fit for her. For
according to the reason of all Philosophers, this Passion ought to respect a
good which is Absent, Difficult and Possible: whence I conclude, that the
riches, honors, or pleasures of life, cannot be her true objects, since they
have only an appearance of good; and that it is Opinion, which knows not well
how to name things, that has honored them with a title which they deserve not:
for Reason teaches us, that all these things have no other valuation than what
either Ignorance or Falsehood gives them. Aurum nomen terrae in igni relinquit,
at que exinde de tormentis in ornamenta, de suppliciis in delicias, de
ignominiis in honores metalli refuga mutatur. Tert. De habitu mulieb.
Before such time as Avarice had rent Gold from out the entrails of the earth,
and that by a thousand tortures which she had made it suffer, she had given it
the color that dazles our eyes, it past only for an useless sand. Honor
depends so strongly upon Opinion, as it is her mere workmanship: and Virtue
would be thought to be very miserable, had she no other Recompense, than what
is most commonly given to such crimes as have either good success or luster.
The Pleasures of life are not innocent enough, and they are too pernicious to
man, to be numbered among his good things: Shame and Sorrow accompany them;
Sorrow which they so carefully eschew, finds them always out, and makes them
bear the punishment of all the excess which they have committed. It Is
peradventure this which makes the Wiseman term these imaginary goods,
deceitful Pictures, which are in effect nothing less than what they appear unto
our senses; Umbra picturae, labor fine fructu. Sap. 15.
for those who judge of the workmanship of Pictures only by the eye, think they
see birds flying in the air, Plains at such a length, as the eye reaches not
their extent, and Personages which stand at distance from the cloth; yet when
they draw nearer, they find them but as strokes of a Pencil which deceive their
senses, and which make them see things that are not. It fares thus with all
those perishable goods which Opinion has cried up, and which owe all their
valuation either to the weakness or to the ignorance of men. They are but the
shadow of good, which having nothing of solidity, cannot be the objects of
Hope: the wisest men have therefore dismissed them; and there have been
Philosophers, who have never better known the vanity thereof than in their pomp
and greatness.

The example which Seneca gives us of this, is too useful not to be observed;
he tells us, that Attaius had a secret affection to Riches; and that though he
professed Philosophy, he thought that their goodness was answerable to their
beauty, and that there was as much of sweetness in them, as of luster: It fell
out fortunately one day, that he saw a Triumph, wherein all the magnificences
of Rome were exposed to sight; he saw vessels of Gold and Crystal, the
workmanship thereof augmented their price; stately habits, the colors whereof
were more precious than the stuff; multitudes of Children and Women, whose
different beauties did equally charm the eyes; slaves laden with chains, who
had formerly born Crowns and Seepters: he saw all the booty of the East, and
those vast treasures which so many Kings in process of so many ages had
gathered together: he saw, in fine, all of rare that the Roman power had
purchased since her ambition gave place to her avarice. Notwithstanding all
this, this Philosopher found a cure for his malady, where it was thought he
should have increased it he grew to know the vanity of riches in the midst of
their triumph; for reflecting upon all that he had seen, and finding that thos^
things were no less useless than deceitful he generously despised them; this
pom^ (says he) could endure but some few hours one afternoon has seen the
beginning and the end thereof; Vidistinequam iutra paucas horas ille ordo
quamvis lentus dispositusque transicrit? Hoc. totam vitam occupabit, totum diem
occupare non potuit. Sen Ep. 100.
and though the Chariot that carried all this treasure, marched but softly, they
were quickly gone; what likel^hood is then that that which could not entertain
us one whole day, should possess u^ all our lifetime; and that we should
suffe^ long punishment for a thing which is no^ able to give a long
contentment? Thus di^ this Philosopher learn Virtue, where others reaped
nothing but Vanity; and as often as any object presented it self before his eyes,
the appearance whereof might deceive him, Quid miraris? quid stupes? Pompa est:
Ostenduntur istae res, non possidentur, and dum placent transeunt. Sen. ibid.
he would say, What do thou admire (O my soul!) that which thou see is a
triumphant pomp, where we see things, but are not suffered to possess them; and
where, whilst we are therewithal delighted, they pass away and vanish.

If riches, not being a real good, cannot be the object of our hope, whatsoever
else the world promises us, cannot satisfy it, since they are not far enough
off. For this Passion looks far into what is to come: she neglects present
things, and longs after what is absent, and builds her felicity upon a
happiness which is not as yet come. It seems she would teach us, that the world
is not her resting place, and that all those contentments which smooth our
Senses, and which charm our eyes or ears, are not those which she seeks after.
She raises her self up to Heaven, and pretending to Eternity, she thinks not
that absent which is closed up in the un-intermitted course of Time; she, by a
generosity which cannot sufficiently be praised, does undervalue all those
greatnesses, of which imagination may form an Idea, Quod oculus non vidit, nec
auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quae praeparavit Deus iis qui
diligunt illum. 1 Cor. 2.
and aspires only to that supreme happiness which eye has not seen, neither
ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man. Those then injure her
who force her to fasten her self to all that we esteem good, and to languish
for Objects, which have not any one of those conditions that hers ought to
have. For to boot, that her object ought to be absent, it must be difficult,
and such as may cause trouble to those that will seek after it. This Epithete
will cause an error to arise in most minds, and men finding difficulties in the
pursuit of such things as they wish for, will imagine that they deserve to be
hoped for: the Covetous man, who crosses the Seas, who goes to discover
unknown Lands, and to seek out new maladies under new Climates, will persuade
himself that riches are very well worth the wishing, since they are so hard to
come by: the Ambitious man, who enjoys not one hour of content, and who finds a
thousand real Hells in the imaginary Paradise which he frames unto himself,
will think that Honor is the only object of Hope. But Philosophy pretends to
fix difficulty to greatness; she confounds the name of difficult, with that of
noble and generous, she blames all those that labor after an infamous good;
and who forgetting the nobleness of their birth, have desires only after such
things as are despicable. Hope is too courageous to value smoke or dirt; and
she pities all those mean Souls, which take such might pains to compass riches
or honors. It Is true, they cause trouble enough to those who seek after them;
but they are not the more to be wished for, for their difficulty; the pain
which they are accompanied with makes them not the more glorious; they resemble
the punishment of the guilty, which cease not to be infamous, though severe.

In fine, all that the most part of men desire, is not Hopes end, because it
is, for the most part, impossible. For though this passion be bold, yet is she
wise; she measures her strength; and though she engage her self in glorious
enterprises, she will have some assurance of success: she aspires only to what
she may obtain, and she quits the pursuit as soon as she finds they surpass her
power; she loves to be esteemed Reserved rather than Rash; and to confess her
impotency, rather than to show her vanity. Notwithstanding, all those that hope
exceed these bounds; and bereaving this Passion of her natural wisdom, they
raise their desires beyond their merits, and do oft-times labor after things
equally unjust and impossible: a slave in Irons promises himself liberty; a
guilty person under the Hangmans hand hopes yet for pardon; a man that is
banished from the Court, Spes est ultimum adversarum terum solatium. Sen. 5.
controv. 1.
pretends yet to government; and you shall hardly find any so miserable, who do
not indiscreetly feed themselves with some imaginary happiness: they persuade
themselves that the heavens will do miracles for their sakes, and that they
will change the order of the Universe, to fulfill their desires.

But of all these mad mad men, there are none more to be pitied than old men;
who seeing death already portrayed in their faces, do yet promise unto
themselves a long life; they lose every day the use of some part of their body;
they see not but by art, they hear not without difficulty, they walk not
without pain, and in every thing that they do, they have new proofs of their
weakness, yet they hope to live; and because our forefathers lived many ages,
they believe that in having a care of themselves, they may fence themselves
against death; and after so many sins that they have committed, taste a favor
which has not been granted save to such as had not as yet lost all Innocence.
A man must renounce his judgment to conceive so irrational a thought, and not
know the grievances which do inseparably accompany old age; Alia genera mortis
spei mixta sunt. Definit morbus, incendium extinguitor, ruina quos videbatur
oppressura, deposuit; mare quos hauserit, eadem vi qua sorbebat, ejecit
incolumes: gladium miles ab ipsa perituri cervice revocavit. Nihil habet quod
speret, quem senectus ducit ad mortem. Sen. Ep. 30.
for all sorts of death are mingled with some hope; a Fever leaves us after a
certain number of Fits, their heats lessen as they increased; the Sea throws on
shore those whom it had swallowed up, and a storm hurles ships into the Haven;
and a Soldier struck with pity, gives life to his conquered Enemy; but he whom
old age leads to death, has no more reason to hope; he is incapable of pardon;
and Kings who prolong the lives of such as are condemned, cannot do the like to
old men: their death is with less pain, but it is more certain; and as they
ought not to fear death, so they ought not to hope for life. But we have
sufficiently considered the outrages done unto Hope: let us see the good
offices that may be done unto her, employing her according to her own
inclinations, and our need.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Hope.
CHristian Religion is wholly built upon Hope; and as she neglects present
happiness, we must not wonder if she long after a felicity to come; she
confesses she is not of this world, Scit se peregrinam in terris agere, inter
extraneous facile inimicos invenire: Caeterum genus, sedem, spem, gratiam,
dignitatem, in coelis habere. Ters in Apol.
and she thinks it not strange if she be persecuted in an enemies Country: she
knows very well that she is called from this miserable world to another more
happy; and that having nothing to possess on earth, she ought to hope for all
in heaven. All Christians who are instructed in her School, do with a holy
impatience expect the happy day wherein the Son of God will punish his enemies,
and crown his Subjects. They think themselves already saved, because they are
so in hope; and amongst so many evils that afflict them, they solace themselves
in this virtue which promises much, but gives more: for it never confounded
any body; and though she suffer such as lay claim to her to be persecuted, Spes
non confundit, quia infundit certitudinem; per have enim ipse spiritus
testimonium perhibet spiritui nostro quod sumus filii Dei. Bern. in Cant. 37.
, she inspires them with so much courage, as that far from resenting their
sorrows, they cast the happiness of Angels amidst their punishments, and laugh
at the cruelty of Tyrants and Hang-men: let whatsoever accidents befall them,
they are always secure; and knowing that Jesus Christ is the foundation of
their Hope, they look upon all the changes of the earth, with calmness of mind.

But whatsoever advantage Christians may draw from the virtue, we must confess
that she has nothing to do with that Passion which considers the time to come,
and which seeks out a good which is possible and difficult; for the one is a
Christian Virtue which resides in the Will; and the other is a Passion which
resides in the sensitive appetite; the one is a mere effect of Nature, the
other is the pure work of Grace: the one by its one strength can extend but to
some ages, the other by its proper vigor mounts even to eternity; the one, in
brief, makes not good all that it promises, and failing in her word, leaves
her lovers in confusion and sorrow; but the other is so faithful in her
promises, as those who have sought under her banners, confess, that her
recompenses surpass all their services; yet in these their differences nothing
hinders them from agreeing: the best use of humane Hope is to assubject it to
divine Hope, and to make it aspire, by her assistance, to the Possession of
eternal happiness; for though Passion know no eternity, and that being engaged
in the body she raises her self not much higher than the Senses, she has yet
some inclination to follow after Grace, and to suffer her self to be guided by
her motions: as she obeys Reason, she may obey Godliness; as she is useful to
Moral Virtue, she may be useful to Christian Virtue; and (if it be not to give
her too much advantage) I should think, that as she inter meddles with Patience
and Fortitude to frame Moral habits; Fortitudinem Gentilium mundana cupiditas,
fortitudinem Christianorum Dei charitas facit, quae diffusa est in cordibus
nostris, non per voluntatis arbi, rium, sed per spiritum sanctum qui datus est
nobis. Aug. l. l. oper. imperf. cont. Iul.
she may do the like with Hope and Charity, to form supernatural habits. But
without engaging my self in a School-dispute, it shall suffice me to say, that
if all our Passions may be sanctified by Grace, Hope being of no worse
condition than the rest, may pretend unto the same favor, and contribute to
all the good works of a Christian.

Neither do I doubt but that the Saints have made good use thereof, and that
enlightened by Faith, they have placed all that hope in Jesus Christ, which they
placed in their Kings, or in their gods, whilst they lived in Paganism. I doubt
not but that this generous Passion which encouraged them in dangers for the
glory of their Princes, did animate them amidst flames for the quarrel of the
Son of God; and I am firmly of opinion, that as by her own forces she made them
good soldiers, so assisted from above, she made them courageous Martyrs; for
Nature is the groundwork of Grace; and as Faith presupposes Reason, the
fortitude of a Martyr did presuppose the hope of a man; and it behoved that
Passion should work in the hearts of those generous Champions, wh^st Grace
wrought in their Wills. God makes daily use of the mouths of his Prophets to
explain his Mysteries; when he discovers to them secrets to come, he makes use
of their words to declare them unto his people; and he accords Nature with
Grace in them, to execute his Designs.

I therefore think that the best use a man can make of Hope, is to assubject it
to three Christian virtues, which may make good use of her heat: the first is
that which bears her name, and which by a harmless piece of cunning, loosens
her from the earth, and gives her desires for heaven; for though humane Hope be
so generous, yet cannot she pretend to the happiness of eternity; and though in
the souls of Alexander and Caesar, she aspired to divine honors, it has not
proceeded so much from any motion of her own, as from the like of vainglory;
but when she is instructed by faith; when she knows that God has chosen us to
be his children, and that Jesus Christ has made us his brethren, that we may
be coheirs with him, she wishes with Humility, for what the others wished for
out of Ambition. The second Virtue which she may be serviceable unto, is
Patience; which in all the evils she undergoes has no other comfort, than what
Hope furnishes her withal; for while she fights with grief and pain, she would
be a thousand times oppressed by their violence, did not this glorious Passion
point out unto her the Rewards which are prepared for her; and if she did not
sweeten the present evil by future happiness which Hope promises her. To
understand this, you must know that Patience is a Virtue as mild as close; she
has nothing of luster; and though she undertake great matters, she spares Pomp
and the Theater; darkness and the deserts are pleasing unto her, and she is
content to fight in his prefence, by whom she expects to be crowned: neither is
she any ways given to use violence; and, though her enemies be so powerful, she
defends her self by suffering, and makes us win the victory by the loss of our
lives; she hardly takes the liberty to complain, and she shows so little
feeling of outrages done unto her, or of her sufferings, as those who do not
know her, Spes patientiae anima. unde B. Jacob. illas confundit, dum dicit,
patientes estote fratres, usque ad adventum Domini: Ecce Agricola expectat
pretiosum fructum terrae etc. Iac. cap. 5. Quae quidem patientia spes almixta,
aut potius innixa videtur.
accuse her of stupidity. So great a coldness ought to be animated by the heat
of Hope; and so mild a virtue requires the assistance of an active Passion.
During all her displeasures, the recompenses which are promised her do only
possess her, and in the sorrows which she suffers, she raises her self up to
heaven upon the wings of Hope; and with the eye of Faith, sees the happiness
which is prepared for her.

But the chief use which we ought to make of this Pashon is, when Fortitude
grapples with grief, and when she sets upon these dreadful enemies, which
endeavor to triumph over her Courage. For there is this difference between
Patience and Fortitude; the first is content to suffer; the second will be
doing; the one, out of modesty, hides her self; the other, out of generosity,
shows it self; the one expects till mischiefs come, the other goes to seek them
out; the one is mild, the other severe; the one (to speak properly) suffers
pains which she cannot shun; the other endures torments which she easily might
eschew. But amongst all these differences, they have this of common, that they
cannot subsist without Hope: Toll spem hominibus, nemo victus retentabit arma;
nemo infeliciter expertus negotiationem alios appetet quaestus: nemo naufragus
vivet. Sen. controv. 1.
it is the soul which gives them life, and these two bea^tiful virtues would not
attract the eyes of men and Angels, were they not encouraged by this Passion
which regards futurity. For vainglory is not able to inspire us with the
contempt of sorrow; and the Sect of the Stoics, as proud as it is, has been
able to make but few Philosophers generously suffer the violence of tortures,
and the Hang-mans cruelty; but Christian Religion has produced multitude of
Martyrs, who have overcome Flames and Savage Beasts, Finis spei, felicitas
aeterna. Aug.
and triumphed over Pagan Emperors. Their Fortitude was grounded upon the
virtue of Hope; and whilst men went about to corrupt them with promises, to
affright them with threats, and to vanquish them with to^ments, they raised up
their spirits to heaven, and considered the recompenses which God prepares for
those that serve him faithfully.

It Is doubtless out of this reason that the great Apostle has given such
glorious titles to hope, Quam spem sicut anchoram habemus animae tutam ac
firmam Heb. 6.
and that he employs all his divine eloquence to express the wonderful effects
thereof; for sometimes he calls it an Anchor, which stops our Vessel in the
Sea, which makes us find tranquillity in the midst of a storm, and which fixes
our desires on heaven, and not on earth; sometimes he terms it a Buckler, In
omnibus sumentes scutum fidei, in quo possitis omnia tela nequissimi ignea
extinguere. Ephesians p. 6.
under the shelter whereof we beat down the blows which our enraged adversary
makes against us; sometimes he calls it our Glory, and represents it unto us as
an honorable title, which blotting out our shame, makes us hope, that after
having been Gods enemies, we shall become his children, and that in this
acception we shall share in his inheritance. By all these praises he teaches us
that we have need of Hope in all manner of conditions; and that we may usefully
employ her in all the occurrences of our life; that it is our security in
storms, our defense in combats, Non est spes nostra de hoc saecula; ab amore
hujus saeculi vocati sumus, ut aliud saeculum speremus Aug. l. 3. De ve^b. Dom.
Sermon. 2.
and our glory in affronts. But let us observe that she is not of this world,
that she forbids us the love thereof, and that she promises unto us another
more glorious and innocent, to be the object of our desires. Let us neglect
such a good as is perishable, that we may acquire that which is eternal; let us
remember that it is hard to have pretenses at the same time both to heaven and
earth, and that we must set at naught the promises of the world, if we will
obtain those of Jesus Christ.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects, and of the good
and evil use of Despair.
OF all the Passions of man, Despair is that which has been most honored, and
most blamed by Antiquity; for she has past for the last proof of courage in
those famous men, who have made use of sword or poison, to free themselves from
the insolence of a victorious enemy. Poets and Orators never appeared more
eloquent, than when they describe the death of Cato; and they do so
artificially disguise that furious action, that did not faith persuade us that
it is an execrable attempt, we should take it for an Heroic action. Seneca
never praised Virtue so much, as this crime; Liquet mihi cum magno spectasse
gaudio Deos, cum vir ille, acerrimus sui vindex gladium sacro pectori infigit,
dum viscera spargit, and animam manu educit Sen. De Provid. c. 2.
he seems by the high Excomiums he gives it, to persuade all men to Despair;
and to oblige all unfortunate people to commit Paricide; he imagines that all
the gods descended into Vtica to consider this spectacle; and that they would
honor a Stoic Philosopher with their presence, who not able to endure Caesar's
government, though he had born with the like in Pompey, plunged his dagger into
his breast, tore his entrails; and that he might taste death, rent his soul
from his body with his own hands. Catoui ebrietas objecta est: ac facilius
efficiet, quisqus objecerit, hoc crimen hon^slum quam turpem Catonem Sen. De
tranquil. animi. c. 15.
But truly I do not wonder that Seneca would make a murder pass for a
Sacrifice, since he has approved of Drunkenness, and that he has made it a
Virtue, that he might not be constrained to blame Cato, who was accused
thereof. Others have absolutely condemned Despair; and because some men, giving
themselves over unto fury, have dipped their hands in their own blood, they have
been of opinion that this Passion ought to be banished from out our soul; and
that nothing could befall us in this life, wherein it was lawful to follow the
motions thereof.

Both these opinions are equally unjust, and do violate the Sense of Nature;
for let the disaster be what it please, which Fortune threatens us withal, and
whatsoever great mishap she prepares for us, we never may attempt against our
own life: our birth and our death depend only upon our Lord God, and none but
he who has brought us into the world, can take us out of it; he has left unto
us the disposal of all the conditions of our life, and has only reserved to
himself the beginning, and the end; we are born when he pleases, and we die
when he ordains it: to hasten the hour of our death, is to entrench upon his
rights; and he is so jealous of it, as he oft-times does miracles, to teach us
that it belongs unto him. But if Despair be forbidden us upon this occasion,
there are many others wherein it is permitted; and I am of opinion, that Nature
did never more evidently show her care over man, than in enduing him with a
Passion which may free him from all the evils for which Philosophy has no
remedy.

For though Good be a pleasing Object and that by its charm it powerfully
attracts the Will, yet it is sometimes environed with so many difficulties,
that the Will cannot come nigh it; its beauty makes her languish, she consumes
away in Desire, and Hope, which eggeth her on, obliges her to do her utmost in
vain: the more she has of Love, the more she has of Sorrow; and the more
excellent the good which she seeks after, is, the more miserable is she; that
which ought to cause her Happiness, occasioneth her punishment: and to speak it
in few words, she is unfortunate, for that she cannot forbear loving an object
which she cannot compass. This torment would last as long as her Love, did not
Despair come in to her succor, and by a natural wisdom oblige her to forgo the
search of an impossibility; and to stifle such Desires as seem only to afflict
her.

As this Passion takes us off from the pursuit of a difficult good which
surpasses our power, so are there a thousand occasions met withal in man's
life, wherein she may be advantageously made use of; and there is no condition
how great soever in the world which needs not her assistance. For men's powers
are limited, and the greater part of their designs are impossible; Hope and
Boldness which animate them, have more of heat than government; led on by these
blind guides, they would throw themselves headlong into Praecipices, did not
Despair withhold them, and did not she by her knowledge of their weakness,
divert them from their rash enterprises; she is also a faithful Counselor
which never does deceive us, and which deserves not to be blamed, if, not being
sent for till our affairs be in a sad condition, she gives us more wholesome
than honorable advice; we must accuse Hope, which engages us too easily in a
danger; and praise Despair, which finds a means to free us from it.

The greatest Princes are only unhappy, for not having listened unto her; for
would they measure their forces before they undertake a war, they would not be
enforced to make a dishonorable peace, and to take the law from their
victorious enemy: but the mischief is, they never implore Despairs assistance,
but when she cannot give it them; and they never advise with this Passion, till
all things be reduced to an extremity: yet is she not unuseful at such a time,
and her counsels cease not to be profitable, though precipitate. For when
Princes know that their forces are inferior to those of their enemies, and
that all the advantage lies on the enemies side, Despair wisely managed causes
them to retreat; and this Passion repairing the faults of Hope and Audacity,
makes them keep their soldiers till another time, when they may assuredly
promise themselves the victory for Despair is more cautious than courageous,
and aims more at the safety than glory of a Kingdom; it makes use of the evils
which it has observed, and thinks it self glorious enough, Arimus ex ipsa
desperatione sumitur: ignavissima animalia, quae natura ad fugam genuit, ubi
exitus non paret, tentant fugam corpore imbelli Nullus pernicior hostis est
quam quem audacem angustia faciunt. Majora, aut certe paria, conatur animus
magnu ac perdi^us. Sen. Quaest. ^ atur. l. c. 59.
if it can escape the fury of him that does pursue it. It Is true, that when it
sees all ways of safety barred up, and that it is on all sides environed by
death, it chooses the most honorable; and recalling Hope which it had chased
away, resolves either to die or overcome. Therefore it is, that good Commanders
do never put the vanquished to Despair; but knowing that this Passion becomes
valiant when provoked, they make her bridges of gold, open all passages to her;
and suffer this Torrent to disperse it self abroad in the open Champion, lest
her fury swelling by resistance, overbear such works as are opposed to her
impetuosity. Herein the nature of Despair is strange; for it arises from Fear;
and its greatest wisdom consists in its timorousness; in the good which it
offers it self, it rather considers the difficulty which may astonish, than
the glory which may attract; and be it, that it be more cold, or less
courageous than Hope, it has not so much an eye to good, as to bad events; yet
when the danger is extreme, and that the mischief is so great as it cannot be
evaded; it makes virtue of necessity, and gives battle to an enemy, which Hope
it self durst not assail; it oftentimes plucks the Laurel from out the
Conquerors hand; and performing actions which may pass for miracles, it exceeds
Nature, it preserves men's lives in making them contemn them, and wins the
victory by seeking after an honorable death.

By all these effects it is easy to judge of the nature of Despair, and to
know that it is a violent motion by which the soul keeps aloof from a difficult
good, which it thinks it cannot compass, and by which likewise it sometimes
draws near unto it; rather to shun the evil which threatens it, than to possess
the difficult good; for in its birth Despair is fearful, and has no other
design, than to divert the soul from the vain seeking after an impossible good;
but in its progress it becomes bold, and when it sees that by keeping aloof
from a difficult good, it engages it self in an infamous evil, it resumes
courage, and employs all its power to gain a thing which it thought assuredly
to have lost; so as this is not a single Passion, and to explain the nature
thereof well, we must say, that she is mixed of Fear and Hope; and that, as in
the beginning she is more faint-hearted than the former, she is in the end more
generous than the latter. But at both these times she has need of government;
and that she may be serviceable to Virtue, she must shun two dangerous extremes
which bear her name, and stain her glory; the one may be called
Faint-heartedness, the other Foolhardiness; she falls into the former, when not
knowing her own strength, she keeps at distance from a good which she might
compass; she falls into the second, when not regarding her own imbecility, or
the greatness of the danger, she undertakes an impossibilty, and engages her
self in a design which cannot have any good success. It belongs to Reason to
govern her, and to see when she may eschew without infamy, and when she may
charge without rashness: if it be a lawful good, which may with Justice be
expected, it must seldom or never be despaired of; upon such an occasion
Opiniatrecy is commendable; and a man is not to be blamed who attempts even an
impossibility, to purchase a happiness which his duty requires him to seek
after: but if that which he wishes for, be hard to come by, and perishable, he
must cure himself of his vain desires, and foolish ^^pes, by a rational
Despair. But he must beware, that though this Passion be in Nature oft-times
innocent, she is always guilty in relation to Grace; for nat^ral hope being
grounded upon our proper forces, it is lawful to forgo her, to embrace Despair;
and there is nothing of inconvenience, that man whose misery is so well known,
do quit his designs when he cannot compass them; but supernatural hope being
grounded upon divine power, we must not forgo her; and it is a capital fault to
suspect God of falsehood or of weakness. Those therefore who despair of their
souls health, justle his highest perfections, and make themselves unworthy to
receive pardon of their sins, from the time they cease to hope; for since the
holy Scripture teaches us, that God is good, and allpowerful, those who
persuade themselves, that he either will not, or cannot save them, commit
outrage against his Power and Goodness; and by one and the same fault give
against his two most excellent qualities: and if we will believe St. Austin,
they who despair imitate proud people, and make themselves equal with God, by
losing the hope of their salvation; for when they fall into despair, they
imagine that Gods Mercy is not so great as their sin is, and by an injurious
preferrence, they raise their wickedness above his goodness; Adhuc cum
diffidit, and suam nequitiam comparat Dei benignitati, finem imponit virtuti
Dei, dans finem infinito, and perfectionem auferens Deo, cui nihil deest, etiam
quod cogitari non potest. Aug. 1. De vera and falsa poenitent cap. 5.
they prescribe bounds to an infinite Love, and bereave him of perfections, who
possesses more than our souls can imagine.

True it is, that if Despair be faulty in relation to Grace, there is an excess
of Hope which is not much less dangerous; and there are certain Christians in
the Church, who are opinionated in their sins, only out of a confidence they
have of Gods Mercy: they make use of his goodness only to injure him; they
think not of his favors to sinners, save to abuse them; and by irrational
consequences, which Philosophy cannot have taught them, they conclude that they
ought to be wicked, because God is good, and that we ought to offend him,
because he does not punish his enemies: had not these shameless sinners lost
their judgment together with their Piety, they would argue after another
manner, and say; That since God is good, man must be obedient; that since he is
prone to forgive, man ought to have a care how to offend him; and that since he
loves the welfare of man, man ought to love his Honor. But certainly, if they
had not these just considerations, Gods mercy should not maintain in them their
foolish confidence; for to boot, that his Mercy agrees with his Justice, and
that the one does not entrench upon the others rights, he has so tempered his
Promises with his Threats in the holy Scripture, Propter illos qui desperatione
periclitantur, proposuit indulgentiae portum; propter eos vero qui spe
periclitantur, and dilationibus illuduntur, fecit diem mortis incertum. Aug. l.
3. D^ verb. DoM. Sermon. 10.
as they banish from out the soul of man both Despair and Presumption; to
assure those that despair, he has proposed Penitency unto them, the gate
whereof is open to all those that repent; and to terrify the presumptuous, who
through their delays despise his mercy, he has made the day of death
uncertain, and has reduced them to a necessity of fearing a moment, which as
being unknown, may surprise the whole world.

THE FOURTH TREATISE OF Audacity and Fear.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Audacity and
Fear.
IF Virtues be the more to be valued by reason of the difficulties which
accompany them; if such as are most painful, be most beautiful; we must confess
that among Passions, Audacity ought to be esteemed the most glorious, since it
is the most difficult; and that it undertakes to fight against whatsoever is
most terrible in the world; for though Hope be generous, and that she be not
pleased with what is good, unless it be auster; yet does the beauty thereof
invite her to seek after it, and the charms thereof endue her with strength to
overcome the difficulties which surround it; but Audacity wants this
assistance, and considers an object which has nothing in it of lovely, she
sets upon evil, and coming in to the aid of Hope, she denounces war to her
enemies, and proposes no other recompense in the combat, but glory; she is of
the humor of Conquerors, who leave all the booty to their Soldiers, reserving
only the honor to themselves.

For all those that describe her nature, agree in this, that she is a Passion
of the Soul which goes in quest of dangers, to grapple with them; and overcome
them; she may therefore be termed a natural Fortitude, and a disposition to
that generous Virtue which triumphs in sorrow, and in death; as she undertakes
nothing but what is difficult, she is more severe than pleasing; a certain
severity may be seen in their countenances whom she inanimates, which
sufficiently shows, that her delight lies in troubles, and that she has no
other pastime, than what she takes in overcoming Sorrows; nothing comforts her
but Glory; nor does any thing nourish her but Hope; with this weak succor she
assails all her enemies, and gains almost as many victories as she fights
battles.

But to afford this Discourse more light, we must know, that good and Evil are
the two objects of all our Passions; Love considers Good, and employs Desire
and Hope, to obtain it: sometimes the Good proves so hard to be come by, that
Love through Despair forgoes it, thinking it a piece of wisdom, to renounce a
happiness which cannot be obtained. Hatred detests Evil, and to withstand an
enemy which declares perpetual war with it, she employs such Passions as hold
of her Empire; she makes use of Fear, and of Eschewing, to keep from it; and
sometimes she employs Boldness and Choler, to fight with it and overcome it;
but as Despair would never forgo a difficult good, did not Fear persuade that
the difficulties which attend it cannot be overcome; Quid sunt benae spei, sunt
audaces Arist. lib. Ethic c. 8.
Audacity would never undertake to set upon a dreadful evil, did not Hope
promise her the victory; so as these two Passions cease not to be of one mind,
though they have different objects: though the one seek after what is good, and
the other provoke what is evil, they both labor for the quiet of the mind, and
by several ways endeavor the same end. The truth is, the condition of the one
is much more sweet than is that of the other; for Hope has only a respect to
the good which she desires; if sometimes she cast her eye upon the difficulties
which surround it, it is rather out of necessity than inclination; and if she
hazard her self upon some danger, it is not so much out of glory, as out of
profit; but boldness considers only what is evil, and by a certain confidence
which accompanies her in all her designs, promises her self to overcome it by
her own strength. Hope does easily engage her self; and being as light as vain,
she undertakes all enterprises which she judges to be glorious and feasible;
but she would thereby reap nothing but Confusion, did not Audacity come in to
her aid; and by the greatness of that Courage which is natural to her, happily
execute that which her companion had rashly undertaken: Hope resembles the
Trumpets which sound the Charge, but never enter into the scuffle: Audacity
contrariwise, is of the nature of those Soldiers who are silent, and keep all
their forces to fight with the enemy: Hope promises all things, and gives
nothing, and abuses men with fair words, which are not always followed by good
effects; but Audacity promises nothing, and performs much; she attempts even
impossibilities to make good hopes promises; and endeavors to overcome the
difficulties which hinder the execution thereof. In fine, she is so generous,
that her designs, though they be difficult, cease not to be fortunate; and she
is so accustomed to overcome, as the Poets, to give some color to her
victories which she wins contrary to the Laws of war, have feigned that she
has a Divinity which encourages her, and that her Deeds are rather Miraculous
than Natural.

But to the end that these differing qualities may the more evidently appear, I
will add Examples to Reasons, and make it known by certain remarkable
Histories, how much Daring is more considerable than Hope. No Monarch was ever
more powerful than Xerxes, and his power never appeared more than when he
framed the design of conquering Greece: his Army was composed of two millions
of men, the fieldroom was too little to receive a Body of men, the parts
whereof were monstrous; the earth groaned under the weight of the Engines which
he caused to be carried about, to batt^r Towns which should resist him. Alius
ille vix rerum naturam sufficere, angusta esse classibus maria, militi castra,
explicandis equestribus copiis campestria, vix patet coelum ad emittenda omni
m^nu tela. Sen.
This dreadful number of Foot and Horse drained up rivers, the hail of Arrows
shot from so many hands darkened the Sun: those who would flatter this Prince,
said, that the Sea was not large enough to bear his shipping; and that Greece
was not great enough to quarter his Troops. This mean while Leonidas seized
upon the streights of Thermopilae, and intrenching himself in those mountains,
resolved to give him battle with three hundred men as he should pass by.
Laconas tibi oftendo in ipfis Thermopylarum angustiis positos, nec victoriam
sperantes, nec reditum: Ille locus istis se pulchrum suturus est Sen. Ep. 12.
Hope and Audacity enflamed the heart of this noble Captain, and those two
Passions enconraged him to an enterprise as difficult as glorious: Hope laid
before him the glory which he should receive in opposing the common enemy of
Greece, in preserving the liberties of his Country, in saving the Temples from
being burnt, in defending Towns from being pillaged, and in keeping the women
from the insolence of a victorious. Barbarian she forgot not to point out unto
him all the honors which the Lacedaemonians would give him; the Statues which
would be erected in memory of his name, the praises which should be given him
by all the people, and the magnifique titles which Historians would give him in
their Writings: it may be she would flatter him with an impossible Victory, and
persuade him that a disorder falling out in an Army wherein were many men, but
few Soldiers, he might easily defeat it. But Courage, fuller of Truth than
Hope, knew the greatness of the danger, and not abusing this Commander, laid
open before his eyes, that though his death were certain, he was not to quit
the passage which he had taken; that there was no need of conquering, but of
dying; and that he should do enough for the welfare of Greece, if, by losing
his life, he should make his enemies lose their resolution. He gave belief to
the advice of this generous Passion; Quam fortiter Leonidas milites allocutus
est? Sic commilitones prandete, tanquam apud inferos coenaturl. Sen. ibid.
he resolved to stand the shock of an Army which he could not stay, and invited
his soldiers to fight and die at the same time. By this example it is easy to
judge, that Hope considers only the good which does solicit her; and that
Andacity respects only the evil that threatens her; that the one entertains her
self only with the glory which she promises to her self; and that the other is
only taken up with the danger which she withstands: that the one feeds her self
with an imaginary pleasure, and that the other nourishes her self with real
pain: It Is true, the latter finds her contentment in her duty, and sings
triumphantly in the midst of her defeat; for though she bear not away the
victory over the Persians in the person of Leonidas, she carries it sheer away
over the fear of death; and she is sufficiently contented to have overcome the
violentest of all her enemies: Non est quod me victum, te victorem credas,
vicit fortuna tua fortunam meam. Sen. De cons. sap c. 6.
she is not troubled for being beaten by men, provided she may overcome
Fortune; and good success is to her indifferent, so she may vanquish the
apprehension of danger.

If it be permitted to add Fiction to History, we shall see the diverse motions
of those two Passions, in the person of Jason. The purchase of the golden
Fleece is the subject of his journey: Hope makes him put to sea, and promises
him fair winds, which shall fill his sails, and bring him in despite of
tempest, to the Coast of Colchis; she shows him how all Greece have their eyes
fixed upon him; and that she has no Commander who in this expedition will not
fight under his Ensign; that in so noble an enterprise profit is joined to
glory, and that the recompense which he may expect, is as rich as honorable;
but Audacity which cannot flatter, lays before him Soldiers which he has to
overcome, Monsters to tame, and a Serpent which always waketh, to surprise; yet
he accepts of all these conditions, and undertakes to assail all these enemies
upon confidence of his own forces; he is not sure to overcome the Bulls and
Serpents which he shall meet withal; but he is very well assured to overcome
Fear; he knows that success depends upon Fortune; but he knows also that
Boldness depends only upon Courage; it suffices him to set at naught all these
Monsters, which present themselves before him under such dreadful visages, and
without any further recompense, thinks himself glorious enough, if he can
triumph over Fear.

By these two examples, the advantages which Audacity has over Hope, are
easily discerned; but in their oppositions somewhat of resemblance may be
found; and the same Causes that make us hope for good, seem to make us despise
evil; for youth, which abounds in heat, imagines nothing impossible; and
because her vigor gives her assurance, she easily engages her self in
difficult and glorious designs; good success does likewise feed this Passion;
and when Fortune smiles upon Commanders, they do not greatly refuse to fight;
though their forces be inferior to those of the enemy, they persuade
themselves that their very name is able to affright them; and being accustomed
to overcome, they cannot fear a misfortune which has not yet befallen them.
Power contributes no less than good success to make men bold; for when a Prince
commands over a great State, when every Town furnishes him with an Army; when
the Revenues are such as will afford him to entertain them diverse years; when
his neighbors fear him, and that he has no more to do to make them his
subjects, but to march into the fields; he shuns not the undertakings of any
war, nor ever despairs of Victory. But of all things in the world, nothing
makes a man more bold than innocence; Qui been se habent ad divina, audaciores
sunt. Arist. l. 2. Rhetoric. cap 5.
for though the enemy that assails him be powerful, and that the earth fight in
favor of him, he imagines that God ought to take his part, and that he who
protects the innocent, being interessed in his Cause, is bound to defend him;
so as he marches undauntedly amidst dangers, dreads no ill success; and
expecting help from heaven, promises unto himself assured Victory. The one and
the other of these Passions may be mistaken; and as they become glorious
Virtues, when they are guided by Prudence; they may degenerate into shameful
vices, when they suffer themselves to be governed by Indiscretion: this is that
we will examine in the ensuing Discourses.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the bad use of Audacity or Boldness.
AUdacity having no other guide than Hope, we must not wonder if she undertake
enemies which she cannot vanquish; and if her desires have, for the most part,
ill success; it is not likely that rash enterprises should be fortunate, and
that actions which are not governed by Wisdom, should be accompanied by good
success: Fortune grows weary offavouring the Audacious; and having oft-times
kept them out of danger, wherein they had indiscreetly engaged themselves, she
forsakes them with some seeming Justice, and punishes their Fool-hardiness, to
remedy the like in others. All men are therefore bound to weigh well the
Counsels which Hope gives them, and to consider their strength, before they
follow the motions of Audacity; for though they be full of Gallantry, and that
most soldiers confound them with the motions of Valor, they cease not
notwithstanding to be fatal, and to be daily the cause of the loss of Armies,
and ruin of States. But to find the Springhead of this evil, we must know
that the Passions reside in the inferior part of the Soul, and cannot
discourse; they only consider their object, and by a blind impetuosity they
either draw near unto it, or keep far from it; they do not mark so much as the
Circumstances which accompany it; and not comparing the difficulties with their
strengths, Nec audacem quidem timoris absolvimus, nec prodigum quidem avaritia
liberamus Sen l. 4. Benefic. c. 25.
they engage themselves indiscreetly in a war, or shamefully run away; their
judgment is so ready, as it is almost precipitate; for after having listened to
what the senses say, they advise with their inclination; and not expecting
orders from Reason, they bear away the whole man, and enforce him to follow
their motions. Hence it comes, that he oft-times repents him of his designs,
condemns what he formerly approved, and cannot end what he had begun.

But of all Passions, none is more unfortunate than Audacity; for she betakes
her self to powerful enemies, and she grapples with Pain and Death: Fighting is
her ordinary exercise, and she oft-times bathes her self in tears or blood; she
is always encompassed with dangers; and on what side soever she turns, she sees
nothing but ghastly images, and fearful apparitions; this mean while she
borrows no aid, nor takes no counsel, save only of Hope; and the same that
hurries her into danger, is she that counsels her; she who sets her on work, is
she who puts weapons into her hands; and who under vain promises engages her
in extreme difficulties; she also often sees the greatest part of her designs
prove abortive, and reaps nothing of all her useless endeavors, but sorrow for
having followed evil counsel; oft-times she discourageth her self, Audaces
temeritate provecti, ante cupiunt adire pericula quam instant? cum adsunt, ea
defugiunt. Arist. l. 3. Eth. c. 2.
and seeing that her undertakings do exceed her strength, she suffers her self
to be astonished by Fear, beat down by Despair, and consumed by Sadness; for
these Passions do almost always succeed her; and experience teaches us that
those who at the beginning of a fight have been more courageous than men, have
at the end thereof been found more fearful than Woman. The fuel of Boldness
soon takes fire, but it is as soon extinguished; and as the fury of waves turns
into foam, the violence of the Audacious turns into Fearfulness; and for all
the confidence they showed in their designs, all that remains unto them, is
Weaknesses, as full of shame as of guilt.

It Is true, that Choler sometimes sides with Boldness, and furnishes it with
new forces, when the danger has made it lose its own: but this assistance is
not always sure: the soldier that engages himself in battle upon her weak
succors, is in as great danger of losing the victory, as he who puts his hope
in Despair; and is no more assured of conquest, than he that fights, only
because he cannot retire. Desperate men have been seen to die with their
weapons in their hands, and if sometimes they have revenged their deaths, they
have not always preserved their lives: Bold men have also often been seen, who
for being choleric, have not more luckily evaded the danger whereinto they had
precipitated themselves. Vides fortitudinis matrem esse prudentiam, nec
fortitudinem sed temeritatem esse quemlibet ausum quem non parturivit
prudentia. Bern. De consider. l. 1.
Cholers forces are as well limited as are those of Boldness; and unless the
one and the other^ of them be guided by Prudence, they ought^ not to expect any
thing but dreadful consequences: that which has happened upon one occasion,
will not happen upon many others; and the Heavens are not obliged to give the
same success to all rash enterprises. Alexanders example ought not to serve for
a rule to all Conquerors; he lived not long enough to be certainly imitated;
the fortune which followed him in his youth, would peradventure have forsaken
him in his age; his rashness would not always have been so fortunate; and if he
had begun his conquest in Europe, he might not perhaps, have carried them so
far as Asia; the birth of Rome would have staid the course of his victories;
and she that shut up Pyrrhus in his dominions, would have driven him back into
Macedonia.

For my part, I am of Seneca's opinion, Alexandro erat pro virtute soelix
temeritas. Sen. Benefic l. 1* c. 1 3.
and believe that this Prince had more courage than wisdom, and more rashness
than courage: in effect, his fortune did oftener preserve him than his valor;
and if the Heavens had not made choice of him to punish the pride of the
Persians, he had been stopped in the first battle; he would not take those
advantages which the greatest Commanders do commonly make use of, when their
forces are not equal to those of their enemy; he would not set upon Darius his
army whilst favored by the night, but with a piece of rashness, which deserved
more blame than it has received praises: he would tarry till it were day, and
have the Sun for witness of his victory; he though^ he should have stolen a
victory, if he should have won it by night; and though Parmen^ advised him to
prefer his Soldiers safet^ before the glory of Arms, he contemne^ that advice;
and to show that he owed a^ his advantages to Fortune, he rejected a^ the
Maxims of Prudence: I do also firml^ believe, that his confidence has been the
undoing of as many Princes as have imitated him, and that his guidance is more
fatal to Conquerors, -- Medias prorumpe procellas, Tutela secure mei. -- Lucan.
than rocks and tempes^ unto Mariners. I know very well, that Caesae adventured
much, and that he could not undertake the ruin of the Roman Common wealth
without having conceived a great good opinion of his good Fortune, which he was
able to guide by Wrath and Virtue and we are bound to acknowledge that (...)
Victories were no less the workmanship o^ his Wisdom, than of his Fortune, he
shewe^ no Audacity but upon such occasions where advice was useless; and he
boasted not o^ his good Fortune, but to conjure down the tempests, and put
confidence in his Pilot: I^ fine, he made use of Hope in all his enterprises,
he submitted it to Prudence, and taught all Commanders, that to be valiant a
man must be more wise than rash.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Audacity or Boldness.
THough Passions be more faulty than i^^ocent, and that, by reason of the
irregularity of our nature, they lean more to Vice than Virtue; yet with a
little help a man may make them virtuous; their inclinations are good, but
their judgments precipitate; they always seek for good, and withstand evil; but
this is most commonly with a little, too much ardency; they imitate such
Orators as defend a good Cause with bad Reasons; or are like those unfortunate
Innocents, who when tortured, and wanting perseverance, confess faults which
they never committed: for in effect, they become guilty through want of
Patience; and grow vicious by not being able to endure the absence of Good, nor
presence of Evil. Did not Hope pursue Honors which she cannot compass, never
would she bring the Ambitious to Despair; and did not Boldness engage her self
to fight against mischiefs which she cannon overcome, she would never be
accused o^ Rashness; but the fault is not without remedy; for, if she will
listen to Reason, i^ (after having calmed the fury of her first motion) she
will suffer her self to be guided by Wisdom, she will alter her nature; and of
a simple Passion, she will become a glorious Virtue: Audacity and Fortitude
consider the same object, and their inclinations are so like, as one may say,
that Fortitude is a rational Audacity, and that Audacity is a natural
Fortitude; their enemies are common, and they summon all their forces to fight
with them; they are agitated by the same motives, and seek the same end.

For, Fortitude, according to her truest definition, Fortitudo est scientia
periculorum excipiendorum, repellendorum, and provocandorum. Sen. Benesic. l.
2. c. 34.
is a Science which teaches us either to suffer, or to beat back, or to
provoke injuries: she constantly endures all the evils which Nature is subject
to; she will not be dispensed withal in general Rules; and knowing that the
necessity of death is a sentence pronounced against all men, she never appeals
from it; with calmness of spirit she sees sickness approach; the first remedy
which she applies to cure them, is to think that they arise from our
constitution, and that they make up a part of us; contagion does not astonish
her; and be it either for that ^he looks upon it as a punishment of sin, or
that she considers it as an effect of Nature, she accuses not the stars of it,
and pretends not to be exempt from an evil which does not pardon Princes: with
a noble neglect she beats back all such disasters as take all their strength
from error; and which do not offend our bodies, but as they hurt our
imagination: she defends her self against Poverty, by desiring only necessary
things; she despises Honors, considering that they are oftener the recompense
of Vice, than of Virtue; she laughs at Voluptuousness, knowing that it is
pleasing only in appearance, and that under a specious name it hides shameful
and real pains; she provokes sorrow, to try her courage; she seeks for
calamity, as an occasion to exercise her Virtue; and if she had not tasted the
disasters of life, she would think her self ignorant of the better half of what
she ought to know: Singula vicere jam multi. ignem Mutius, crucem Regulus,
venenum Socrates, exilium Camillus, mortem ferri adactam Cato: and nos vincamus
aliquid. Sen. F. p. 38.
she has rather a greediness than a desire after dangers, and since the evil
she undergoes contributes unto her glory, she fore runs it, thinking it a point
of baseness to tarry expecting it. In fine, she has overcome death in its most
ghastly hue; nor has the cruelty of tyrants invented punishments over which
Fortitude has not triumphed. Scoevola derided the flames, and witnessed more
constancy in seeing his hand burn, than his enemies did in beholding it:
Regulus was an honor to the Rack whereon he died; Socrates turned his Prison
into a School, his Executioners became his Disciples; and the poison which he
swallowed, made his innocence glorious: Camillus suffered banishment calmly;
and Rome had remained captive, had not this famons Exile restored unto her her
liberty. Cato slew himself, and though he suffered himself to be overcome by
impatience, he may at least boast of having preserved his liberty. But without
making use of profane examples, where Virtue is always mingled with Vice, we
have no Martyr which has not overcome some Tyrant, and in the severity of
their sufferings given many proofs of their courage. The Ignatii have provoked
wild beasts; and as if that Death had been a courtesy, they sought after it
with eagerness, and endured it with pleasure: the Laurences have vanquished the
flames, and while their bodies distilled drop by drop upon the firebrarnds
their tongues reproached their Judges, and gave praises to Jesus Christ: the
Clement^ and Agathaes have wearied their Executioners; their martyrdom endured
thirty years; the famousest Cities of the world have served for Theaters to
their sufferings; all the earth has been watered with their blood; and Heaven
has shown a thousand miracles to prolong their lives, and to make their
Triumphs more famous. But if Fortitude encouraged by Charity has held out all
these brunts, and had the better of all these enemies, Audacity may claim to a
great share in the glory; for it is she that makes Martyrs; and though Grace
be more powerful than Nature, yet does she not despise the assistance thereof:
as the soul and body conspire together to practice Virtue, Nature agrees with
Grace to beat down sin. Boldness is the ground work of all glorious actions;
and had not this noble Passion filled the heart of the first Christians,
Fortitude had not gotten such glorious victories; they have so much of affinity
between them, as they cannot subsist asunder: Fortitude languisheth without
Audacity; and Audacity without Fortitude is rash. Vir^^e would be succor'd by
Pasion, and Passi^^ guided by Virtue. Audacity is the beginning of Fortitude,
and Fortitude is Au^^cities perfection; or to speak more ^early, Audacity is an
imperfect Virtue, and Fortitude is an accomplished Passion.

But to arrive at this perfection she must have three or four remarkable
circumstances; the first is, that she be accompanied by Justice and Prudence;
for he that takes up arms to ruin his Country, deserves not to be styled
Courageous; his design dishonors his Passion, and his Audacity becomes faulty,
for his not having chosen a lawful end. Let Cataline take up arms, Catalina
praeditus fortitudine videbatur, sed fortitudo non erat; nam prudens non erat:
mala enim pro bonis eligebat; temperans non erat, corruptelis enim turpissimis
foedabatur justus non erat, nam contra patriam conjura^erat; ideo non
furtitudo, sed duritia, cui fortitudinis nomen, ut stultos falleret, imponebat
Aug. l De Sententia Iacobi ad Hi^rom.
let him encourage his soldiers to the battle by his examples, let him be
besmeared with his own blood mixed with that of his enemies, let him die with
his sword in his hand well advanced in the scuffle, and let fury and choler be
seen in his visage even after death; he shall never pass for a courageous man;
his Audacity was not discreet, since trespassing against all the laws of
Discretion, he had undertaken so pernicious a design: neither was it temperate,
since he won his soldiers good will, only by satisfying their Avarice, or
Uncleanness of life: it was not just, because he had conspired against his
Country; and it was rather an obdurateness than a greatness of courage; since
to compass glory, he committed Paricide. The second is, that the motive of
Audacity be generous, and that the daring man expose not his life upon a slight
consideration; for he very well knows his own worth, and not born away with
vainglory, he knows his life is precious: he has preserved it with much care,
and if he endanger it, it must be for a subject that deserves it.

There is a great deal of difference between a valiant man, Magrum est
discrim^n inter eum qui v^rtutem magni facit, aut qui vitam parvi aestimat: Nam
semet in vitae discrimen conjicere, aut in foelicium est aut belluarum. Cic. in
Caton.
and one that is desperate; the latter seeks out death to free himself from
misery; but the other pursues it only to discharge his duty, and content his
inclination: he will not then engage himself in danger to purchase a little
honor; he will not be guided by the example of the rash; he values not those
Maxims which are authorized by Folly and Indiscretion; but he will go
whithersoever the Trumpet summons him, and will throw himself, though single,
upon a Body of Horse, if he have order so to do; he will die a thousand times
rather than forgo the station given him in charge; and he will cover the place
with his body which he is not able to defend with his sword. The third is to
try his own strength, before he set upon the enemy; for Virtue is too rational
to engage us in an impossibility; she exacts nothing from us, but what is in
our power, and she will have us in all our enterprises, to observe whether our
means to be answerable to the end endeavored. There is nothing more glorious
than conquest of the Holy Land; and if the greatness of our Monarch might
beincreas'd by wishes, we would desire, that to his other August Titles, that
of The Deliverer of the Land of Palestine might be added; but he who should
engage himself in that Design would be more rash than courageous, if before
putting to Sea, he had not quieted all his own Dominions, if he had not raised
forces enough to fight with those of the Infidels; and if he had not by his
Intelligences caused an Insurrection in the Eastern parts, thereby to work a
powerful diversion. To boot with all these conditions, Christian Audacity ought
to have two more; Omnis fortitudo in humilitate sita est, quia fragilis est
omnis superbia Aug. in Ps 92.
the first is Humility, which agrees very well with greatness of Courage, since
her enemy Vainglory, is always accompanied with Faint-heartedness: The second
is Hatred of our selves, for he that has not overcome his own inclination, Re
vera fortis pugnat, qul contra se pugnat. Aug Sermon. 6. De Nativit. Domini.
must not expect to overcome his delights; and he who has not warred against
his own body, is but ill prepared to denounce war against Sorrow. Let us then
use our strength against our selves, that we may employ it to purpose against
our enemies, and let us vanquish Self-love, if we will overcome the fear of
death.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Fear.
THere are some Passions whose Names belie their Natures, and are nothing less
inwardly than what they outwardly appear to be. The name of Hope is pleasing,
but her humor is violent; and she is cause of as much evil as she promises
contentment: the name of Despair is odious, but her nature corresponds with
Reason; and we are obliged unto it, when it makes us forgo the pursuit of a
good which we cannot compass. The name of Boldness is glorious; we no sooner
hear thereof, but we conceive a greatness of courage, which despises Pain, and
seeks out Death; but the inclination thereof is Savage; and if it be not
withheld by Wisdom, it engages us in dangers which cause much mischief to us,
and little glory. The name of Fear is contemptible; and error has so cried
down this Passion, as it is taken for the mark of a Coward; but her humor is
wise, and if she warn us of our misfortunes, it is to free us from them. For
Nature seems to have given us two Passions to our Counselors in the diverse
adventures of our life; Hope and Fear; the first is doubtless the more
pleasing, but the second is the more faithful; the first flatters us to deceive
us; the second frightens us to secure us; the first imitates those inte^essed
Counselors, who in all their advices have respect rather to the Fortune than
Person of their Prince, Ne tum fortuna Principis potius loquantur quam cum inso
Tacit. 1. in Histor.
and who by a dangerous flattery prefer his contentment before the welfare of
his State; the second resembles those faithful State-Ministers which discover a
mischief that they may cure it, and who stick not to anger their King a little,
to purchase him a great deal of glory. In fine, the first is oft-times useless;
and the number of what is good being small enough, she has not many
employments; and if she undertakes any thing which belongs not to her, she
makes us lose our labor and our time; the second is almost always busied; and
the number of evils being infinite, she is never out of exercise; she looks far
into what is to come, and seeks out the evil which may happen, not to make us
miserable before the time, as she is unjustly accused, but to secure our
happiness, and to disperse all the disasters which may bereave us of it.

For Fear is a natural Wisdom which ofttimes frees us from danger, by making us
apprehensive thereof; she spreads her self over all the actions of our life,
and is no less useful to Religion than to a Commonwealth: if we will believe
profane Authors, it is she that made the gods; Primus in orb deos fecit timor
Stat.
and though there be some impiety in this Maxim, a man may notwithstanding
observe some shadow of Truth in it; for it is the fear of eternal punishment
which persuaded men they were to appease the incensed gods; it is she that has
made Sacrifices, builded Temples, set up Altars, and immolated Victimes; it is
she that keeps the Just within their duties, and which after a fault committed
makes them lift up their hands to heaven, and witness their sorrow for it.
Though men talk of generosity in Religion, and boast that they are won rather
by Promises than by Threats; yet it must be confessed, that Fear has saved more
guilty people than Hope; so is she termed in the holy Scripture, Male de nobis
actum erat quod multa scelera legem and judicem effugiunt, and scripta
supplicia, nisi illa naturalia and gravia de praesentibus soiverent, and in
locum poenitentiae timor cederet. Sen. Ep. 97.
the beginning of Wisdom; that is to say, the prop of Virtue, and the
foundation of Piety. Sin would grow insolent, were it not suppressed with this
Passion; and all laws would be unuseful, had not Nature imprinted Fear in the
soul of offenders; she is therein engraven in characters which Time cannot
deface; they apprehend the punishment of a secret sin; and though they know the
Judges can punish only such as they come to the knowledge of, they tremble in
the midst of their friends, they awake affrighted; and this faithful Minister
of Gods Justice suffers them not to find assurance, Epicuri argumentum, natura
nos a scelere abhorrere, quod omnibus malis etiam inter tuta timor est Sen. Ep.
98.
neither in Towns, nor yet in Deserts, It Is a proof that Nature is not wholly
corrupted, since there remains in it horror for sin, and dread for the
punishment thereof; for let a sinner hide himself in what part he pleases, he
carries Fear about with him; and this uncorruptible Passion teaches him, that
there is a Divinity which sees our secret faults, whilst we live, and punishes
them when we are dead. Often does she convert Libertines; and by an
unconceiveable miracle, she persuades them unto truths, which they would not
have believed, lest they should be obliged to fear them she stings even the
most opinionated; and of as many as acknowledge Jesus Christ, there are few that
owe not their Love to their Fear; they endeavor not to gain heaven, save to
free themselves from hell; and they love Gods goodness only because they fear
his Justice. I very well know that this resentment is not pure, and that a man
who should stop at Fear would be in danger never to acquire Charity; but it is
much that she opens the gate of Salvation to Infidels, and shows the way of
Virtue unto sinners.

If she be profitable to Religion, she is no less necessary to a Commonwealth;
which could not subsist by Recompenses, if it did not terrify the guilty with
Punishments: we ^^ve not now in those innocent times, wherein the people were
united by friendship, which renders the use of Laws boot^ess; every one loved
his Neighbor as himself; and Love banished Injustice from off the earth; there
was no need to inhibit Vice, nor to recommend Virtue; but since corruption has
crept into Nature, and that ^an, out of too much love to himself, be^an to hate
his Neighbor, it was necessary to ^ave recourse unto Laws, and to reduce ^^ose
by Fear, which were not to be gained by Love. Gallowses were erected to
frighten the guilty; punishments were invented to make death the more terrible;
and that which was a tribute due to Nature, was made the chastisement for sin.
All of innocence that remains in us, is an effect of Fear all inclination to
Good, and aversion from Evil, would be razed out of our Will, did not this
Passion by her threats detain them there; and all Rights, Divine and Humane,
would be violated, did not she preserve the Innocent by punishing the guilty;
In fine, she is the greatest occasioner of our quiet; Timor securitatis matter.
and though she be timorous, all Politicians acknowledge her for the Mother of
Security.

I know very well, that the Stoics have cried her down; but what Passion has
ever been able to defend it self against their calumnies? they will have us
banish Love from off the earth, because it makes some unclean; and consider
not, that being the ligament of Society, a man must cease to live, if he were
forbidden to love: Religion is preserved only by Charity, which is a kind of
love; and God would never have made men, had he not meant to make them lovers
of him. The same Philosophers will stifle Desires, because they cannot moderate
them; and are like to those who out of Despair, kill themselves to cure a
malady. They condemn Hope; and to persuade us that they possess all things,
they will hope for nothing; they are of the humor of that poor Athenian, who
was only rich in that ^e was foolish, and who cared not to heap (...) wealth,
because he thought all the Ships ^n the Haven belonged to him. They flatter
themselves with a vain Sovereignty, which ^he Wiseman claims over the world;
and as ^hey think to have gotten wisdom, they think that all her portion too
belongs to them. They laugh at Fear, and to their Reasons add Reproaches, to
make her contemptible or ridiculous; they make her the enemy of our quiet; and
to hear them speak of this harmless Passion, one would think they painted out a
Monster to us, so dreadful do they make her: they say, she is inge^uous for our
misery; that by nature she is ^mpatient, and that she will not tarry till the
evil do happen, that she may make us suffer ^t; that she has a malign
foresight, and which penetrates into the secrets of Futuri^y, only to make us
therein to meet with our torment; that she contents not her self with present
evils, but that, to oblige all the differences of Time to conspire mischief
against us, she calls to mind what is past, she vexes her self with what is to
come, an^ unites pains together, which all the cruelt^ of Tyrants could not
bring to a contrac^ They add, that as she labors to foresta^ our
misfortunes, she takes delight in increa^ sing them, and never represents
them un^ to us, but when she has made them greate^ than they are, to astonish
us; that if she threaten us with death, it is always with tha^ which is most
full of horror; that if she make us apprehend a malady, it is alway^ the most
cruel; and that, if she make us ex^pect any displeasure, it is always the mos^
angersom; so as we find, that she is more insupportable than the evil which she
fore^ sees; and that of all imaginable torments that which she makes us suffer
is always the most rigorous; that also there are not many that would not rather
once die, Nemo tam timidus est ut malit semper pendere quam semel cadere. Sen.
Ep. 22.
than always fear death, and who do not prefer a violent punishment before a
languishing apprehension.

I know not whether the Stoics Fear be so fierce as they make it, but I know
very well that there is a more moderate sort of Fear, and that this Passion in
the purity of its nature does more good than harm: it is true she seeks out
evil, but it is that she may shun^ it; and she is so far from delighting to
increase it, that on the contrary she qualifies ^t by anticipating it; and
lessens the rigor ^hereof by giving us notice of its arrival. Do not the
Stoics confefs with us that blows foreseen hurt not so much as do others? Tela
praevisa minus feriunt.
and that the greatest part of our sufferings comes from being surprised by
evil? wherefore do they then blame foresight in Fear? wherefore do they condemn
that in this Passion, which they approve of in Wisdom? and wherefore do they
make that pass for a fault which she has in common with so noble a Virtue?
Nature gives us to understand, that she has not endued us with Fear to torment
us, since her pleasure is not that the evil which Fear considers, be
inevitable; for those who have well pondered the humor of Fear, confess that
she is always accompanied by Hope, and that she never foresees other than such
great evils from which she may defend her self; if they be common, she is so
nobleminded as she deigns not to busy her self about them; but leaving them to
Eschewing, to be kept aloof from, she remains quiet: if they be inevitable, and
such as Wisdom it self knows not how to evade, she troubles not her self with
thinking how to withstand them; and knowing that useless means are blameable,
she advises Sadness to bea^ them, but if they be of such a nature, a^ they may
be overcome, she advertiseth u^ of them; and though Audacity entrench of^ upon
her rights, she forbears to awaken her, and to crave succor from her to beat
back the enemy which presents it self. Who will not judge by these conditions,
that Fear is a friend to our Quiet? that she labors for our security, that
being far from procuring what may dislike us, s^e takes notice of our
misfortunes, only to chase them away; and gives the alarm, only that we may
bear away the victory? I confess, there are evils which are so great and so
sudden, as they put the soul into disorder, and hinder Fear from foreseeing or
evading of them; the first raise astonishment, the second bring an agony upon
us; both the one and the other of them throw us into Despair, if they be not
readily repulsed; but since there are mischiefs which Wisdom cannot divine, and
which Valor it self cannot overcome, we must not wonder if there be some which
surprise Fear, and bear down a Passion, after having triumphed over two
Virtues. Man's power is limited, and though no disaster happen which he may not
make use of, yet his natural weakness needs the assistance of Grace; and she
must inanimate Passion, and Virtue, to make them victorious. But it may suffice
us, to know that Fear is not unprofitable; and it remains that we consider,
what sins she may favor in her disorder, and what Virtues she may be
serviceable unto, if well used.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Audacity or Boldness.
SInce the Nature of man is out of order, and that she stands in need of Grace
to recover the Innocence which she has lost, we must not wonder, if Passions,
not succored by Virtue, become criminal; and if by their proper inclination
they degenerate into some sins. Effects are always answerable to their Causes;
the fruit holds of the tree; and men, for all their freedom, draw their humors
from the Sun that lightens them, Sucque simillima coelo.
and from the earth that nourishes them; whatsoever can be taken to correct
their defaults, some marks thereof remain always; and education is never
powerful enough wholly to change Nature This is evidently seen in Fear; for she
lean^ so much toward disorder, as it is very hard to stay her; and she is so
giddy a humor, that she oftener sides with Vice than with Virtue; she is so
unconstant, that she produces rather contrary than different effects; and she
takes upon her so many several shapes, as it is hard to know her. Sometimes she
bereaves us of our strength, and brings us to a condition of not defending our
selves; Obstupui, steteruntque comae, vox faucibus haesit. Vir.
sometimes she infuseth a chilness throughout all our members; and detaining
the blood about the heart, she makes the image of Death appear in our faces;
anon she takes our speech away from us, and leaves us only sighs to implore aid
from our friends; -- Pedibus timor addidit alas.
sometimes she fastens wings to our feet, and makes us overcome them by our
swiftness, who overcame us by their courage: sometimes she imitates Despair,
and paints out the danger so hideous to us on all parts, Audacem fecerat ips^
timor.
as she makes us resolve to change a fearful flight into an honorable
resistance; she is sometimes so indiscreet, as thinking to shun an evil, she
runs headlong upon it; and oftentimes out of a strange fantasticalness, she
engages her self in a certain death, Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moriare,
mori? Mart.
to shun a doubtful one.

If her effects be extravagant, her inclinations are not more rational; for
unless she be guided by wisdom, she easily degenerates into hatred, despair or
loathfulness: we do not much love what we fear; and as love is so free that it
cannot endure constraint; it is so noble, as it cannot tolerate an outrage; all
that does affright it, irritates it; when men will by violence overcome it, it
turns to Aversion; and changes all its gentleness into choler; hence it is
that Tyrants have no Friends; for being bound to make themselves dreaded, they
cannot make themselves be beloved; and their government being grounded upon
rigor, Adjice nunc quod qui timetur timet; nemo potuit esse terribilis secure.
Sen. Ep. 109;
it cannot produce love; those who are nearest them, hate them; the praises
which men give them, are false; and of so many Passions which they endeavor to
excite, Fear and Hatred are the only true ones* likewise, seeing that the
mischief of their condition obliges them to cruelty, they renounce Love, and
care not though they be hated, so they be feared: God alone can accord the two
Passions; it is only he that can make himself to be feared of those that love
him, and loved of those that fear him; yet do Divines confess, that perfect
Charity banisheth Fear; and that those who love him best, are those who fear
him least. But though it be usual for this Passion to turn it self into Hatred,
yet is she not always permitted so to do, and this change is a sign of her ill
nature; there are some whom we ought to fear, and cannot hate, their greatness
obliges us to respect them, and their justice forbids us to hate them; that
Majesty which environs them, produces fear; but the protection which we draw
from thence, ought to make us love them; so as the propensity to Hatred is a
disorder in Fear; and to follow her irrational inclination, is to abuse this
Passion.

She also easily changes her self into Despair; and though she march differing
ways, she falls into the same praecipice; for she paints out dangers in so
horrid a manner unto Hope, as she makes her ^ose all her courage; and this
generous Passion suffers her self to be so far persuaded by ^er enemy, that
keeping aloof from the g^od which she did pursue, they both of them turn to an
infamous Faint-heartedness. But of all the monsters which fear does produce,
none is more dangerous than Slothfulness; for though this vice be not so active
as others, and that her nature, which is remiss, suffers her not to frame any
great designs against Virtue, yet is it guilty of all the outrages that are
done thereunto, and seems to be found in all the counsels which are plotted to
her prejudice; it has such an aversion to labor, as it cannot endure
Innocence, because she is laborious; and we may say, that if it be not one of
her most violent enemies, it is the most dangerous and most opinionated enemy,
that Innocence has; it produces all the sins which cover themselves with
darkness; and to make them cease, it would be only requisite to kill this their
Father, which gives them their birth; it is this that nourishes uncleanness;
and Love would have no vigor, were it not for it; it is this that entertains
Voluptuousness; and who to amuse her, does furnish her with shameful
entertainments; it is this that authorizeth Poormindedness, and which diverts it
from those glorious labors that make men famous. It Is this, in fine, which
loses States, which corrupts Manners, which banisheth Virtues, and is the
cause of all Vices; mean while, it assumes to it self a venerable name; and to
color its laziness, it causes it self to be called honest Vacancy; but
certainly there is a great deal of difference between the rest of Philosophers,
and the idleness of the Voluptuous; the former are always a doing; Multum
prodest qui docet quid sit justitia, quid fortitudo, quid mortis contemptus,
quid Deorum intellectus, quantum bonum sit bona conscientia. Ergo si tempus ad
studia con^er as non deserueris, nec manus detractaveris. Sen. De Tranqui^.
anim. c. 3.
when they seem to do least, they are most busied; and when men think they are
unserviceable, they oblige the whole world to their labors. For they make
Panegyricks on Virtue, they compose Invectives against Vice, they discover the
secrets of Nature, or they describe the perfections of her Author; but the
later are always languishing; if their mind labor, it is for the service of the
body; if they keep from the noise of the world, it is that they may taste
pleasure with the more freedom; and if they banish themselves from the company
of men, it is that they may be with lewd women: these wretches know how to
conceal themselves, Otium sine literis mois est, and hominis viva sepultura,
Sen. Ep. 83.
but they know not how to live; their Palaces are their Sepulchers, and their
useless rest is a shameful death. The leisure-times of good men must be
rational, they must not withdraw themselves to solitariness, but when they can
be no longer serviceable to the State; they must leave the world, but not
abandon it; they must remember that they make a part of it; and that whither
soever they retire themselves, the Public has always a right in them: those
are not solitary, but savage, who forgo Society, because they cannot endure it;
who keep far from the Court, because they cannot endure to see their enemies
prosperity; or that hide themselves in obscurity, Nam' qui re and homines
fugit, quem cupiditatum suarum infelicitas relegavit, qui alios feliciores
videre non potuit, qui v^lut timidum atque iners animal metu oblituit, ille non
sibi vivit, sed ven* tri, somno, libidini. Sen. Ep. 59.
because they cannot tolerate the brightness of Virtue. Rest, that it may be
laudable, ought to have a just motive; and he that has neither Occupation, nor
studious employment, is the Tomb of a living man. Now Fear out of a natural
propensity turns her self into this infamous sin, and becomes lazy if she be
not moderated: she apprehends labor; and excusing her self upon her weakness,
she perswads her self there is no exercise which does not exceed her strength;
she imagines difficulties in the easiest things; and to be released from an
honest occupation, she makes it pass for a punishment; she finds nothing that
does not astonish her; and the holy Scripture which knows very well the humor
of fearful men, Dicit piger leo est in ieon^ in itineribus; sicut ostium
vertitur in cardine suo, ita piger in lectulo suo. Prove. 26.
teaches us that when they want pretenses to hide themselves, they go to seek
them out in the Forests, and to feign to themselves that Lions will come out
of their Dens to surprise them by the way; she never parts timorousness from
Sloth; and knowing what Affinity there is between these two Vices, she makes
one and the same picture of them, Pigrum dejicit timor. Pro. 18.
and sets them forth in the same colors.

To all these defects we may add Imprudence, which is not much less natural to
Fear, than Sloth; for though Natures intention was, to make her serviceable
unto Prudence, and by her care to prevent the evils which threaten us; yet it
so falls out by a mischievous irregularity, as she that ought to free us from
evil, engages us therein; and that the Passion which ought to give us counsel,
hinders us from taking it; for Reason wills, that we consult as often as any
important affair happens, the success whereof depends not absolutely upon our
power; and the evils which Fear considers being of this nature, it seems she
would move us maturely to deliberate, and to seek out the means how to defend
our selves from the enemies that assail us; Pavor sapientiam omnem mihi
expectorat. Terent.
and yet she puts so much confusion into our mind, that she makes us incapable
of consultation; and she deciphers forth dangers so dreadful to us, as
banishing wisdom, she hurries us into Despair: so by two contrary effects, she
obliges us to ask counsel, and will not suffer us to receive it; she makes us
know our indigence, and will not permit us to seek out a remedy. We must
therefore be careful, how we make use of so strange a Passion, and which
contrary to the design of Nature, offers us her light to discover the evils
that are to come, and yet refuses it us to shun them: Wisdom will amend this
fault, and the following Discourse will show us what means we must use to deal
with Fear.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Fear.
WE must not think it strange, that Passion may be criminal since she is
indifferent; and we ought not to complain that she neighbors upon Vice, since
Virtues self is thereby besieged; for all morality confesses, that there is no
virtue which is not environed by sins, and which sees not an enemy threatening
her on either side. Clemency, which may be termed the ornament of Princes, and
happiness of States, stands in the midst between Indulgence and Severity; let
her step never so little awry, she lights upon one of these two Monsters; and
assuming some one of their qualities, she unluckily loses all her own.
Fortitude, or that Valor which encourages Conquerors to glorious Enterprises,
is placed between Rashness and Remisness; if she expose her self unadvisedly,
she becomes Rash; and if she too carefully preserve her self, she is suspected
to be cowardly: Liberality which wins the heart, after Power has conquered the
Body; is quartered between Avarice and Profuseness; if she husband her goods
more carefully than decency permits, she is accused of Avariciousness; if she
indiscreetly lavish them, of Prodigality; but the Passions seem to me to be
more happily quartered; for if they be assailed by a Vice, they have a Virtue
to defend them; and if they prove faulty, they may also prove Innocent: this is
evidently seen in Fear, which being serviceable to Sloth and Despair, may be
the like to Wisdom and Shamefastness; and by means of these two may preserve
all other Virtues.

Though Fear be shy, and affrightned with the evils which she discovers, yet
does she much resemble Wisdom, that a little aid may make her take her nature
upon her: this Virtues chief employment, according to the judgment of all
Philosophers, Prudentia praesentia ordinat, futura praevidet, praeterita
recordatur. Vi^ruv.
is to consider things past, to govern things present, and to foresee things
Future; but she is more taken up with what is to come, than with what is
present, or what is past: for to boot, that the present is but a Moment, and
that it comprehends but a small number of Accidents, it is sensible, and our
eyes are only requisi^e to judge thereof; the time that is past is no longer in
our power; all the wisdom of the world has no jurisdiction over it; it is not
hard to be known, and our memory (if it be not very faithless) represents unto
us the events which it has produced; but the time to come is as doubtful as
concealed; it is environed with darkness which cannot be dissipated; it draws
along with it a prodigious train of Adventures, which cause a thousand
alterations in Individual men, and in Commonwealths; so as Futurity is the
chief object of Wisdom, which considers the other differences of time, only
that she may the better judge of this: she studies not what is past, save only
to know what is to come; and she governs the present time, only to assure her
self of the Future. Consiliari quoddam divinum est. Arist.
Great Politicians have therefore believed, that Wisdom was a Divine Virtue;
that one could not consult the event of things without assistance from heaven;
and that to be a happy Counselor, a man must be a true Prophet: now Fear is
of the nature of Wisdom; for though she call to mind past evils, though she
busy her self about the present, her particular entertainment is in future
evils, and she uses all her best means, either to keep them far off, or to
withstand them; it is true, she implores help of Hope, and makes use of the
courage thereof to rid her of her enemies; but she more resembles Wisdom, which
after having foreseen a danger, uses the valor of Soldiers to repel it; for
men are not so happy, as to possess these two Virtues both together; they
require different tempers; and though they mutually assist one another, they
seem to have protested never to meet in one and the same person: Wisdom is the
portion of those old men that are grown white-hair'd in business, and who have
spent all their lives in observing the Humors of People, the revolutions of
States, and the diverse changes of Fortune; Valor on the contrary, is the
Portion of young men, who having more Vigor than Experience, are fitter to
execute than to deliberate; and succeed better in Combats, than in Counsels. It
appertains only to the eternal Word, to be at once both Wisdom and Power; the
Arm and the Idaea of his Father: but amongst the creatures these qualities are
separated; and who has much strength, has but little knowledge; to make these
two incompatible advantages meet, Heaven must do a miracle; and it is not more
difficult to agree Fire and Water, than to unite Wisdom and Fortitude: It must
also be confessed, that as Fear is fuller of Advisedness than of Generosity,
she has likewise more Light than Heat, and is far fitter for Counsel than for
Combat. In fine, she is accused in taking things always in the worst sense, and
of making evils greater than they are; She resembles (say they) those
faint-hearted Spies, which Moses sent to discover the Land of Palestine; who
thought by their false reports to have turned the Jews from so noble a
conquest: she makes a Mountain of a Molehill; all beasts appear Monsters to
her, and she thinks all dangers which she sees, inevitable. It Is true, she does
almost always judge the worst; and that she may be abused, does paint out evil
in its proper deformity; but surely, in so doing, she remembers Wisdom the
more, which never advises of what is to come, without fore-casting all the
difficulties that may arrive, and without preparing forces to fight with such
enemies as may assail her: she does not consider only what is done, but what
may be done; when she sees an evil, she will know the progress thereof; and
takes some little trouble to procure assured quiet. Si vis omnem solicitudinem
exuere, quicquid vereris ne eveniat, eventurum utique propone; and quodcunque
illud malum est, tecum metire. Sen. Ep. 24
The Stoics have no better expedient to defend themselves against an evil that
threatens them, than to imagine it will happen, and to withstand it in their
minds, that they may have the better of it in effect; so as by the judgment of
our enemies, wisdom has no other Maxim than Fear; and this faithful servant
moves not, but as her Sovereign does.

It Is true that as she neighbors upon the Senses, and resides in that part of
the Soul wherein combustions are framed, she always apprehends trouble; and her
judgments are almost always accompanied with commotion; but the understanding
may easily disabuse her; and by the brightness of its fire, may dissipate the
Fogs which rise from the Imagination; it must bind her to consider such objects
as she is afraid of, Toll istam pompam sub qua lates, and stultos territas:
Mors es quam nuper servus meus, quam ancilla contempsit.
and make her the bolder by making her view the cause of her astonishment at a
nearer distance; she must take away that Solemnity from Punishments which makes
them so dreadful, and those complaints from Grief which make her so eloquent;
it must teach her, that under those deceitful appearances, there is but a
common death which Children have endured, which Soldiers have overcome, and
which Slaves have contemned; the most appearing torments are not always the
most violent; a stopping of the Urine is more painful than being broken on the
wheel; one troubled with the Gout, suffers many times more pain in his bed,
than an offender does on the Rack; and a man whose head is cut off, endures not
so much as he that dies of a Fever; it belongs then to the understanding to
persuade fear that all those things which affright us, are not those which harm
us; that the greatest appearing evils are not the most sensible, and that those
which appear least, are ofttimes cause of greatest pain. Thus will she be fixed
against evils; and suffering her self to be guided by Reason, she will have no
more apprehensions, than what shall be necessary to keep her from being
surprised.

But if Fear may be serviceable to us in withstanding Vice, she may be made use
of to defend Virtue; and this seems to be the chief end for which Nature has
ordained her: for Shame is nothing but a Fear of Infamy; and this innocent
Passion is the protectress of all Virtues: it is to her that Judges owe their
Integrities, Soldiers their Courage, and Women their Chastity: it is by her
care that Piety is preserved; and all the world must confess, that not any
Affection of our soul is more delectable, or useful, than is Shame. Since we
owe so much unto her, it is reason that we acknowledge it, and that we give her
the honor she deserves; she carries the color of Virtue, and that blush which
spreads it self over her face, is a mark of her Innocence; but she is so very
nice, that the least thing in the world may corrupt her; she is like those
Fruits new gathered, whose verdure is lost as soon as they are handled; she her
self destroys her self; she is offended at the praises that are given her; and
women are made to lose her by being reproached for her: If she be easy to be
lost, she is as hard to be regained; for though she be of a mild nature, yet
she is Stately; and being once banished, she is very hardly recalled. Hope does
ofttimes succeed Despair; Et qui redire nescit ut periit pudor. Sen in Agamemn.
Joy resumes the place which Sorrow had possessed, and sometimes Hatred turns to
Love; but Shame never appears upon a Face, when once it is driven thence by
Insolence and Impudence: as this Passion is a companion to Purity, so is she of
her Disposition; the loss of either is irreparable; she so loathes Sin, as she
cannot endure the sight thereof; she blushes at the very name of it, and she
summons in all the blood of her heart, to succor her in defense of her self
against her enemy. But she is never of more might than when she fights in the
defense of Virtue; for she does such mighty things in her behalf, as she always
procures her glorious victories; she obliges all the Passions to second her;
she sets out guiltiness in so ghastly a manner to them, as she augments their
hatred thereof; and so presents Innocence to them so beautiful as she augments
their love thereof: she awakens Hope, encourages Audacity, irritates Desire,
and enflames Choler; so as it is a Passion that disperseth it self into all
other Passions, and which endueth them with new strength to maintain Virtues
quarrel: though she be timorous, she encourages Soldiers; they are only
valiant in being Ashamed; and if they despise Danger, it is only because they
fear Infamy, one fear drives out another; and those who give not way to Valor,
suffer themselves to be overcome by Shame: Though she be indulgent, she makes
Judges severe; and when men go about to corrupt them with bribes, or to
frighten them with threats, she keeps them within their bounds by fear of
Dishonor; though she be Weak, she makes women courageous; Quam peccare pudet
Cy'nthia, tuta sat est. Propert.
and whilst she displays her blush upon their visages, she seatters a secret
virtue into their hearts, which makes them triumph over those dangerous enemies
that pursue them. This Sex has no other strength than what it borrows from
this innocent Passion; it preserves it self only by the fear of Infamy; and who
should take this defense from it, would easily bereave it of all its other
advantages. Nature it self, which very well knows it loves Beauty as well as
Virtue, has persuaded it, that Shame makes it more approved of: in effect,
Shamefastness is an innocent paint; women never seem fairer than when they are
somewhat shamefaced; and there is no face, how taking soever, which receives
not a fresh luster from the innocent blush which accompanies Shamefastness; she
is so appropriated to Virtue, as men have a good opinion of all them that have
her; and she defends the interests of Reason with so much fervency, that the
Empire thereof would ere this have been overthrown, if this Passion had been
banished from off the earth.

For experience teaches us, that more men abstain from sin for Shame, than for
Duty; and that the Fear of Infamy has more power over men's minds than the love
of Innocence. The Devil therefore very well knowing that this Passion is averse
to his designs; and that to make us lose it, our nature must be destroyed,
endeavors to persuade us that Virtue is criminal, to the end that it being
thought infamous by us, Shame, which always defends her, may be enforced to
abandon her: He thought it was easier to take from Virtue her estimation, than
Innocence from Shame: not being able to corrupt Shame, she has gone about to
deceive her; and to make her lose her aversion to sin, he has made her believe
sin to be glorious. This Error is so generally dispersed throughout the whole
world, as there are now adays some Virtues which are esteemed Infamous, and
some Vices Honorable; Revenge passes for greatness of Courage, and forgetting
of Injuries for meanness of Spirit; Ambition is illustrious; and because it
sets upon Crowns, means to be no longer ashamed; Modesty and Humility are
despised; and because they delight in Solitariness and Silence, they have lost
all their glory. Opiniatricy in a fault, is the mark of a stout spirit;
Penitence and Change of life, an argument of Weakness; thus all Things are
confounded, and Shame suffering her self to be seduced by opinion, sides with
Vice, not thinking of it, and forgoes Virtue: Itaque quod unum habebant in
malis, honum perdunt, peccandi verecundiam: laudant enim ea quibus
erubescebant, and vitio gloriantur: ideoque nec resurgere quidam adolescentiae
licet, cum honestus turpi desidiae titulus accessit. Sen De vita beata. c 12.
wicked men who hid themselves, now show themselves upon the Stage; and being
no more ashamed (which was the only good that remained among all their evils)
they become Insolent, and boast of their misdemeanors; the way of salvation is
blocked up unto them; and since they have given Titles of Honor to infamous
things, we cannot hope that Shame should convert them, or reduce them to their
duties. To shun this evil, this innocent Passion must be disabused, and giving
to every Object the name that it deserves, she must be withdrawn from the error
wherein she has indiscreetly engaged her self; she must be persuaded that the
humblest Virtues are most profitable; and that those Vices which are the most
Honorable, are the most dangerous: upon these good Maxims she will side with
Innocence again; and repenting for having suffered her self to be deceived, she
will so much the more hotly pursue her enemies, by how much her hatred is
augmented by their injurious dealing: and for that by defending Virtues
interests, she shall likewise revenge her self of her own particular Injuries.

THE FIFTH TREATISE, OF CHOLER.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of CHOLER.
THe Virtues are so straightly united one to another, as they are not to be
parted without using of violence: oft-times also they mingle one with another;
and these noble habitudes are blended together, that they may make up one
single Virtue. Clemency, which makes Kings reign happily, borrows her beauties
from two or three of her companions; she ows her good Government to Prudence;
her Mildness to Mercy; and her Glory to Generosity. Valor, which makes
Conquerors triumph, holds all her riches from the liberality of all other
Virtues; and he that should take from her the stateliness which she derives
from Magnanimity, the address which she takes from Discretion, and the
Moderation which she receives from Justice, would leave her but a vain shadow
of all her real greatness. Though the passions hold not so good Intelligence as
do the Virtues, yet are there some of them which never forsake one another; and
there are some others which live wholly upon borrowing; and which would be
poor, should the rest forgo them. Hope is of this nature, for she has no other
goods than what are given her; and were she forsaken by Desire, which eggs her
on, by Fear, which holds her in, and by Audacity, which encourages her,
nothing but a bare name would remain unto her.

Choler is of the same condition; though she make so much noise, she draws all
her force from the Passions which compose her; and she appears not to be
courageous, ^^ve only that she is well accompanied; she is never raised in our
souls uncalled by Sorrow; she endeavors not satisfaction for injuries done
unto her, Ira, sicut and ultio, doloris confessio est. Sen. De Ira. l. 3. c. 5.
unless solicited by Desire, provoked by Hope, and encouraged by Audacity; for
he that is irritated, promises himself revenge of his enemy; but when he is so
weak, as he cannot hope for it, his Choler turns to Sadness; and wanting the
Passions which did feed it, it loses both Name and Nature.

From all this Discourse it is easy to gather, that Choler is nothing else but
a Motion of the Sensitive Appetite, which seeks Revenge for an Injury.
Aristotle therefore thought she was Rational, and that even in her Fury, she
had some shadow of Justice; Nulli irascenti sua ira videtur injusta. Aug. l. De
vera Innocent. c. 3.19.
the truth is, she is never moved, but when she imagines she has received some
injury; and if she take up Arms, it is to revenge wrongs which she thinks have
been done unto her; herein she is much less faulty, than Hatred; for this later
wishes evil directly unto its enemy; and without seeking any pretense or
excuse for its fury, desires the ruin of the party persecuted; but the other
wishes him only punishment for his fault, and looks not upon Revenge, as an
irrational Excess, but as a just chastisement: the later is hardly ever
pacified, but discharges its cruelty upon the Innocent, and pursues the dead
even to their graves: if we may believe Poets, it descends into Hell, to
torment the damned there; and would mount into Heaven, if it could, there to
afflict the blessed; but the other is satisfied when she is Revenged; when she
thinks that the punishment equals or exceeds the Injury, she is appeased, Iram
saepe misericordia retroegit. Sen. l. 1 De Ira. c. 16.
and by a providence of Nature, turns to Pity; she spares the faultless, and
when even the faulty become distressed, she loses her desire of Revenge: I
confess she grows greater when withstood; and that when she has the better of
her enemies, Haec non est ira, feritas est; nec illi verbera, in ultionem
petuntur, sed in voluptatem. Sen. l. 1. De Ira. c. 5.
she delights in their defeat; but she seeks not that infamous content which
Tyrants feel in the death of their subjects; for they seek not so much to
revenge themselves of an Injury, as to content their brutish Cruelty; and in
punishing Innocents, are guided more by the motions of Fury, than of Choler: In
fine, all the Philosophers have had so good an opinion of Choler, as Aristotle
was persuaded, Calcar est virtutis, hac erepta, inermis, animus, and ad conatus
magnos piger, inersque. Ar. in Sen. l. 3. De Ira. c. 3.
she sided always with Virtue against Vice; that it was she that encouraged us
to gallant actions; and that the high enterprises of Princes were no less the
effects of this Passion, than of Virtue; he believed, that all the disorders of
our soul, which contributed to Voluptuousness, were not to be tamed but by
Choler; and that the concupiscible appetite would pervert Reason, were it not
withstood by the Irascible; one would think to hear him speak that all great
men are Choleric; that this Passion is not only the mark of a good Nature, but
of an excellent Courage; and that a man's mind can conceive nothing of Generous,
if it be not a little irritated.

I believe, with him, that this resentment of our soul may be profitably
employed in the service of Virtue, when it is moderated by Reason and Grace,
but certainly it stands in more need of their guidance, than do the rest; and
as it is extremely violent, so causes it great disorders, if it be not
carefully suppressed; for let it have what inclination it pleases to Good, it
is too sudden to be regulated; and though it seem to love Justice and Reason,
yet is yet too furious to be just or reasonable; Naturae curis debemus quod
hanc furorem contraxerit, actum esset de hominibus si pertinax ira fuisset:
adhuc cum brevi duret, quid pejus?
we should be undon, were Choler as opinionated, as it is sudden; and the earth
would be but one desert, if Passion were as lasting, as it is hot: Nature could
not better show her care she has of our preservation, than in giving narrow
bounds to the wildest of our Passions; and since the love she bears us, has
obliged her to make Monsters barren, and to allot but short lives to the most
furious Beasts, she was bound to affix brevity to Choler, and to allow a short
term of time to so dangerous a Passion: nor does her short time of duration
keep her from causing much mischief; she employs to her utmost those moments
which Nature has given her, and in a few hours commits many outrages: for to
boot, that she troubles the minds of men, that she changes their color, that
she seems to play with their blood, (making it sometimes withdraw it self to
the Heart, sometimes disperse it self over the Face) that she sets the Eyes on
fire, and she fills the mouth with Threats, and that she arms the Hands of as
many as she meets withal, she produces much more strange effects in the world;
she has, since its birth, changed the face thereof a thousand times; there is
no Province wherein she has not committed some spoils; nor is there any
Kingdom which does not bewail her violence: those ruins which have formerly
been the foundations of some goodly City, are the remainders of Choler; those
Monarchies that whilome gave Laws to all the earth, and which we know only by
Story, Aspice nobilissimarum Civitatum fundamenta vix notabilia, has ira
dejecit. Alpice solitudines per multa millia sine habitatione desertas: has ira
exhausit. Aspice tot memoriae proditos duces, mali exempla fati, alium ira in
c^bili suo confodit, alium inter sacra mensae percussit, alium filii paricidio
dare sanguinem jussit. Son. lib. 1. De Ira. c. 2.
complain not so much of Fortune, as of Choler: those great Princes, whose
pride is reduced to ashes, sigh in their graves; and accuse only Choler for the
loss of their Lives, and ruin of their States; some of them have been
assassinated in their Beds, others like Sacrifices offered up at the Altars;
some have unfortunately ended their days in the midst of their Armies, when all
their soldiers that environed them could not defend them from death: others
have lost their lives in their Thrones; the Majesty that shines in the faces of
Kings, not being able to frighten their Murderers; some have seen their own
Children make attempts upon their persons; others have seen their Blood shed by
the hands of their Slaves: but not complaining of the Paricides, they complain
only of Choler; and forgetting all their particular disasters, they only
condemn this Passion, which is the plentiful and the unfortunate Springhead
thereof.

And certainly, they have reason for their complaining, since of all the
disorders of our soul, there is none more savage, nor more irrational than
this. I know not why Aristotle imagined it was serviceable to reason, and that
it always moved as she did, unless it be that it had a design to teach us that
this Passion being more Ambitiou^ than the rest, would seem Rational in he^
Excess; and by an execrable attempt oblige Reason her Sovereign, to defend he^
Slaves injustice; for she always seeks Excu* ses for her faults; though she
shed human^ blood, though she offer up Innocents in sac* crifice, beat down
whole Towns, and bur^ their Inhabitants under their ruins; she will be thought
to be Rational: she some* times knows well enough the vanity of he^
resentments, yet she without reason perseveres in them, lest men should think
she had no reason to begin; Her injustice makes he^ opinionated; Perseveramus
ne videamur coepisse sine causa; pertinaciores nos facit iniquitas irae, and
augemus; quasi argumentum sit just irascendi graviter irasci. Sen. l 3. De
Ira. c. 29.
she grows hot upon design she will have her Excess to be an argumen^ of her
Injustice, and all the world to imagine, that she has punished her enemie^
justly, because she has punished them severely. See then what she borrows of
Reason, and how much more insolent she is in other Passions, which are blind in
their un^ ruliness, and only offend their Soveraign^ because they know not his
Authority; bu^ this Passion does impudently abuse her, and by a fearful tyranny
employes her Sovereign to excuse her faults, after having made use of her to
commit them.

I therefore think, Seneca had great reason to say that she is more faulty than
the vices themselves, and that she commits injustice, whereof they are not
guilty. Avarice heapeth goods together, and Choler dissipateth them; the former
only hurts her self, and obliges her heirs that are to succeed her; Ira patri
luctum, marito divortium attulit, magistratui odium, candidato repulsum. Sen.
3. De Ira. cap.
but the latter hurts all the world; and as if she were a public contagion,
she puts divisions in Families, divorceth Marriages, and engages Kingdoms in
War: Uncleanness seeks a shameful delight, but such as only hurts the parties
in fault; and Choler seeks an unjust one, which is prejudicial to Innocents:
Envy, as malicious as she is, contents her self in wishing ill unto another;
she leaves the execution thereof to Fortune; and remits to her the
accomplishing of her desire, but Choler is so impatient, she cannot attend this
blind Power, but preventing the rigor thereof, she takes delight in making men
miserable. In fine, she is the cause of all evils, Nihil est simultatibus
gravius: has ira conciliat. Nihil est bello funestius: in hoc potentium ira
prorumpit. Sen. 3. De Ira. c. 5.
and there is no fault committed, wherein she has not a hand: there is nothing
more obnoxious than Duels; it is Choler that entertains them: there is nothing
more cruel than Murder; it is Choler that advises to it; there is nothing more
fatal than war; it is Choler that causes it: when she reigns in a soul, she
stifles all other Passions, and is so absolute in her tyranny, as she turns
Love into Hatred, and Pity into Fury; for there have been Lovers, who in the
height of their Choler have buried the same Dagger in their own bosoms, which
they had just before plunged in their Mistresses bosom, committing two real
murders to revenge one imaginary injury; Avaritious men have been seen to
betray their own inclinations, to content their Choler, throwing all their
riches into the water, or into the fire, to obey the impetuosity thereof;
Ambitious have been known who have refused proffered Honors, trampled Diadems
under foot, because Choler, which wholly possessed their souls, had driven
thence the desire of Glory.

Nullam transit aetatem, nullum hominum genus excipit, tam inter Graios quam
Barbaros potens: non minus pernitiosa leges metuentibus, quam quibus jura
distiguit modus virium. Sen. 3. De Ira. c. 2.
Nevertheless, though she be so pernicious, yet there is no Passion more common;
and it seems that Nature, to punish all our faults, has intended that she
should persecute all men, as a revengeful Fury; there is no Nation which has
not felt her Rage; and of as many people as there are, differing in Customs,
Apparel, and Language, there has not as yet been any found exempt from this
cruel Passion: We have seen whole Nations that have defended themselves against
Riot, favored by Poverty; and who have preserved their Innocence through their
never knowing riches: we have seen of them that having no abiding place, have
kept in perpetual motion; and banished Sloth, for not having known the art of
building houses; we have seen others, who have gone naked, and whom neither
Shame, nor Necessity has been able to instruct, to make themselves Clothes; we
see some which possessing all in common, cannot dispute for a part; and who not
having lost all their natural purity, are ignorant of the injustice which
Avarice causes to arise amongst us; but there has not yet any been known
which have been exempt from Choler; she reigns as well among people that are
civilized, as among Barbarians; she commands in all parts of the earth; and
where she has not yet introduced the use of Musket and Sword, she employs Bows
and Arrows in her revenge.

In fine, Caetera viri^ singulos homines corrip^^^ ^ Hic unus a^^^ctus est qui
interdum pu^^lice coucipitu^. Sen. 3. De Ira. cap. 2.
one only Passion has never been seen to agitate a whole Province, or to
possess a whole Army: Love, though it be the master of Passions, was never able
to make a whole Town in love with one Woman; Helena had but a few Lovers; and
of so many Captains as fought for her at the siege of Troy, none but her
Adulterer and her Husband were taken with her beauty: Avarice makes not all men
sordid; and if some heap up riches, other-some squander them away; all men are
not troubled with Ambition; if some seek after Honors, others shun them as
much; if some are forward to show themselves, others will hide themselves; and
amongst so many guilty people, some are always found that are Innocent; Envy is
no public Malady; and if Virtue has her enemies, she has also her admirers:
but Choler is a Contagion which spreads it self through a whole Town in a
moment; one Oration has made a whole Nation take up Arms, and Men, Women, and
Children, agitated with this Passion, have been seen confusedly to kill their
own Citizens, or declare war against their enemies; Subjects have revolted
against their Princes, Soldiers have conspired against their Commanders; the
common people have bandied against the Nobility, Children have risen up against
their Parents, and all the rights of Nature have been violated at the
solicitation of Choler.

But that which is most vexatious in this so strange malady, is, that it takes
its beginning from all things; for though it be so great, and that it enlarges
it self like fire, a very small spark is sufficient to kindle it; it is so easy
to be moved, as that which ought to appease it, does oft-times provoke it, and
what might satisfy it, offends it; a servants negligence sets it on foot, the
freedom of a friend makes it stark mad, and the scoffing of an enemy engages
it in a Combat. Notwithstanding all these mischiefs, Choler would be to be born
withal, if it were capable of counsel; Non paulatim procedit, sed dum incipit
tota est: caetera vitia impellunt animos, ira praecipitat. Sen. 3. De ira. cap.
1.
but she is so violent even in her birth, as she cannot receive the advice that
is given her; for she grows not by degrees like other passions; she does not
increase with Time, she needs not months to get root in our hearts, a moment
suffers her to form her self; she marches not a slow pace, as does envy, or
sorrow; she is of full force at the beginning; at her birth she is at her full
growth; and if other passions in their heat thrust us forward, this in her ftry
does precipitate us. As she is so sudden, we must not wonder if she be
inconsiderate; and if she make us hazard our lives to revenge an injury; for
she listens only to her own desires, she only follows her own motions, and she
acknowledges no other Laws but those of her own violence; she never sets upon
her enemy without discovery of her self; she gives him never a blow without
running the hazard to receive a greater; she loses the victory, by being too
eager in the pursuit thereof, In armis ira obliviscitur Martem esse communem,
venitque in alienam potestatem dum non est in sua. Sen. 3. De Ira. cap. 1.
and falls into the power of her enemy, because she is not in her own. Though
all these evil qualities make us see clear enough, how easy it is to abuse
Choler, and how hard it is to make good use thereof, yet will I not forbear to
pursue the order I have prescribed unto my self, and to employ the two
remaining Discourses, in making appear what Vices, and what Virtues she may
take part withal; but for the present I confess, that so violent a Passion does
not yield much to Reason, and that if we be not the more strongly assisted by
Grace, to resist her, she is very hardly to be overcome.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the evil use of Choler.
SInce Choler is nothing else but a Natural Revenge, and that the one and the
other of these do boast of Justice, and greatness of Courage, I can find no
better way to discover the evil use thereof, than by making the Injustice and
Pusillanimity thereof appear. For most men persist not in their disorders; but
for the esteem they have thereof, and those who are incensed, continue their
desire of Revenge, only because they think it reasonable: the Incontinent
excuse themselves upon their weakness; and if they be not blind, they approve
not of a sin, which Reason and Nature do condemn; the Envious, and Detractors
seek pretenses for their calumnies; and knowing that their fault is accompanied
with unworthiness, they cunningly disguise it, and strive to give it some
color of Justice; but Revenge and Choler believing themselves to be grounded
upon Reason, demean themselves insolently, and would persuade us that all their
excesses are as just as courageous; mean while they have nothing of what they
think they have; Ne illud quidem judicandum est, aliquid iram ad animi
magnitudinem confer, non est enim illa magnitudo, tumor est: tantumque abest
a magnitudine animi, quantu^ a fortitudine audacia a fiducia insolentia, a
severitate crudelitas. Sen. l. 1. De Ira. c. 16.
and of all the motions of our soul, there is none more unjust, nor more
pusillanimous. Men imagine it is Generous, because it is useful among great
ones; and persuade themselves it is Noble, because it takes up its abode in the
hearts of Kings; but certainly Choler is not so much a proof of their
Greatness, as of their Weakness: had not Voluptuousness mollified them, and had
not that tenderness which accompanies good successes made them so sensible of
the least injuries they would not so easily fly out into Passion, they would
contemn Outrages; and knowing that their own dignity raised them out of the
reach of Storms, Nulla res magis iracundiam alit quam luxuria. Sen. 2 De Ira.
c. 26.
the^ would laugh at the vain endeavors of thos^ that go about to offend them;
but the slave^ry they require of their subjects, and the shameful
obsequiousness rendered to a^ their desires, makes them be offended wit^ a just
liberty. They take good advice for neglect, and rational Counsels for an
un^dermining of their Authority: they cannon endure a Truth: and Fortune has
mad^ them so tender, as suspicions serve them for proofs to condemn the
innocent: they are like to those that having not a perfect health, cannot
endure a clear air, nor the light of the Sun, the least exercise disquieteth
them; and what would be but a Diversion to one in health, does trouble and
incommodate them: thus the most part of great personages cannot bear with
Fidelity in their Domestics; Truth must be corrupted, if you will have them to
receive it; and the temper of their minds is so weak, that sincerity in a
servant is able to offend them: the remedies which men present unto them seem
to them poisons; they think men aim at their Honor, while they reprehend their
Faults; and let them express themselves therein, in never so mild terms, they
always take it for an injury. Who sees not, that this greatness is mere
weakness; and that the Choler which transports them, is a mark of the infirmity
which accompanies them?

Thus the holy Scripture, Non est caput nequius super caput colubri, and non
est ira supra ira^ mulieris. Eccl. 35.
which very well knows the original of all our disorders, teaches us, that the
malice of Women is not more violent than that of men, save only because their
nature is more infirm, and that they have not strength enough to sustain the
impetuosity of this Passion: for when she finds resistance, or cannot easily
work her end, she presently slackens, and losing her rage, suffers her self to
be guided by Reason; but when she meets with any one that gives himself over to
her power, who suffers himself to be born away by her motions; and who has not
strength enough to oppose her violence, she takes the freedom to fly at all;
and believes that she may promise her self any thing from a slave, who can
refuse her nothing: if she possess the soul of a King, Perierunt omnia, ubi
quantum suadet ira, fortuna permittit. Sen. 3. De Ira. c. 16.
who has not courage enough to defend himself against her tyranny, she makes
use of the weakness of his mind, and of the strength of his Fortune to execute
all her designs; she persuades him that Revenge is glorious; that a Prince is
never more absolute than when he is dreaded; and that of all the marks of
Sovereignty, there is none more certain than the death of Enemies: then States
become Tyrannies, Towns are overflown with the blood of Subjects, the number of
Executioners is greater than that of the Offenders; and all things are in a
deplorable condition, because Choler abuses the power of a Prince, who cannot
resist her. What has not she undertaken, when she has had Kings for her
slaves, and made use of their power to execute her Fury? What marks of Cruelty
has she left in the world, when she has reigned in the hearts of Monarchs?
What Champaigns has she strewn over with dead Garkases? And what Provinces
has she made desolate?

Cambyses, to satisfy his Choler, made the noses of all the Inhabitants of
Syria be cut off; and judging that Death was too common, and too honorable a
punishment, Pepercisse illum judicas quod non tota capita praecidit novo genere
poenae delectatus est. Sen 3. De Ira. c. 20.
he would invent another which should be as strange as shameful. He had dealt
more ignominiously with all the people of Ethiopia, had not a happy accident
withstood the execution of so damnable a design; for he was surpised by a
Famine in the Deserts, which forced him to return to his own State; but before
he put on this resolution, he followed the mad counsel of his Choler, and
suffered the best part of his Army to perish by Famine; when his soldiers
wanted Victuals, they fed upon the leaves of trees, and such Herbs as the
uncultivated Earth brought forth; when they were engaged in the Deserts, and
that the scorching Sands afforded them no further nourishment, they ate the
Leather of their Bucklers, and all such other things as necessity enforces men
to make ^ood of; but when they could see no end of this their forlorn
condition, this unnatural Prince provided them a food more cruel than the
Famine; he made them be decimated, and forced them to eat one another; his
Passion governed in him amidst so many misfortunes; Agebat adhuc ira regem
praecipitem; cum partem exercitus amisisset, partem cotredisset; donec timuit,
ne and ipse vocaretur in sortem, tum demum signum receptui dedit. Sen. 3. De
Ira. c. 20.
and after he had lost one part of his forces, and eaten up another, he had not
resolved to retreat, had he not feared that the lot might at last have fallen
upon himself, and so have made him try the excess of that cruelty which he had
commanded: but, to show that Unworthiness is inseparable from Choler; this
savage monster made exquisite Cates be carried upon the backs of his Camels,
whilst his miserable soldiers committed murders to defend themselves from
famine; and left posterity in dispute, who were the most to be commiserated,
those who lived in so much misery, or those who died with so much cruelty. In
fine, Choler never goes unaccompanied with weakness; and it sometimes a
generous word escape her mouth, it always proceeds from a base soul; and which
affects Greatness, only to cover its Baseness.

Caligula is reported to have been offended with the Heavens, when their
Thunder hindered his Sports; that he challenged his gods to fight with him; and
that using the words of a Poet; he said to them, Either take me out of the
world, or I will take you out of it. Into what degree of madness had his Choler
thrown him? For he must not only imagine, that his gods could not hurt him, but
that their fortune, as well as that of men, depended upon his will. Ultimae enim
patientiae vi sum est, eum far, qui Jovem, non ferret. Sen. De Ira. l. 1. c.
ult.
Seneca was of opinion, that this insolence cost him his life, and made his
Subjects conspire against him; for they thought it past Patience, to tolerate a
man that could not tolerate the gods. Choler then has nothing in it of
Greatness; and even then when she seems to contemn both Heaven and Earth, she
discovers her unworthiness; or if you take her Excesses for marks of her
Greatness, confess, that Riot is magnificent, because it builds Thrones of
Gold, decks it self with purple, cuts through mountains, turns the Channels of
streams, encloses Rivers within Parks, makes Gardens in the Air, and finds
inventions to remove Forests: confess, that Avarice is a glorious crime, since
it rolleth it self on Mountains of gold, it possesses Territories as large as
Provinces; and that her Earmers have more ground to cultivate, than the first
Consuls of Rome had to manage; acknowledge, that Incontinence is Courageous,
since she passes the seas to seek out what she loves, that she fights either
to come by it, or to keep it; since women who are possessed with this passion,
despise death, to satisfy their desires; and expose themselves to the fury of
their Husbands, to please their Adulterers: Lastly, confess, that Ambition is
generous, since she finds not any honor that contents her, will have all years
bear her name, and that all Pens be employed in writing her praises; but
certainly all these passions are pusillanimous, what shadow soever they have of
Greatness, they are in truth mean and poor; and there is nothing great which
bears not reason with it: or, to speak more like a Christian, there is nothing
August but what is enlivened by the Grace of Jesus Christ.

But to the end you may not believe, I seek out hateful examples, to take from
Choler that greatness of courage which she boasts of, I will examine the
reasons that are alleged in her defense, and consider her in a condition
wherein she may challenge either praises or excuses. Ought we not to be angry
when all Laws, Divine as Humane, are violated? may not one give himself over to
Choler, when she persuades us to revenge our Parents? and is it not an action
of Piety to be incensed against an impious ^retch who prophanes Altars, and
disho^ors Churches? I confess, this Passion cannot have fairer pretexts; and
that she is in her glory, when she is irritated for so rational subjects; but
you will find, that those who have been moved for the defense of their
Country, will have the same resentments for the preservation of their
pleasures; that they will be as angry for the loss of a horse, as for the loss
of a friend; and that they will make it as great as business to correct a
servant, as to beat back an enemy; Non pietas Iram movet, sed infirmitas; sicut
pueri, qui tam parentibus amissis flebunt, quam nucibus: irasci pro suis non
est pii animi, sed infirmi. Sen. 1. De Ira. cap. 12.
it is not Piety, but Weakness, that excites this Choler; and since she is
highly moved as well for a word as for a murder, we must conclude, ^he is
neither Courageous nor Rational: the greatest part, likewise, of our Revenges,
are Injuries; and we run hazard of committing a fault, as often as we will be
Judges in our own cause: our Interests blind us, and our Self-love persuades
us, that the slightest injuries cannot be repaired, but by the death of the
guilty: we are of the humor of Kings, though we be not of their condition; and
imagine that all the wrongs that are done to us, are as many High-treasons: we
would have neither Fire nor Gallows used, save to punish our enemies; and are
unjust enough, to desire to engage the Justice of God in our Interests: we
could wish she would let no, Thunder fall, but upon the heads of such as have
offended us; and ou^ of a height of impiety, we would that the Heavens were
always in Arms in our quarrel.

In humarum verbum est and quidem pro justo receptum ustio; and a contumelia
non differt nisi ordine; qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusatius peccat. Sen. 2.
De Ira. cap. 32.
But though we made no such wishes, ye^ would our Revenge be still irrational;
he^ very name shows us, that she is faulty; and though she seem so pleasing
to those that cherish her, there is nothing more cruel, nor more pusillanimous;
for she differs from Injury, only in Time, and if he that provokes be Faulty,
he that Revengeth is not Innocent; the one begins the fault, the other ends it;
the one makes the Challenge, the other Accepts of it: and the second is not more
just than the first; save that the injury he has received, serves for a
pretense to do another. Therefore is it, that our Religion forbids Revenge, as
well as Injury; and very well knowing, we cannot keep the Rules of Justice in
punishing our wrongs, she commands us to remit them into the hands of God; and
to leave the punishment thereof to him, whose judgments are never unjust: she
teaches us, that to revenge Affronts done unto us, is to entrench upon his
Rights; and that, as all glory is due to him, because he is our Sovereign Lord;
so all Re^enge belongs to him, because he is our edge: but that which is yet
more admira^e in her Doctrine, and which surpasses as ^ell the weakness of our
Virtue, as of our ^ind, is, that she will have us lose the de^re of Revenge;
and that stifling this re^entment which Nature thinks so just, we ^ange our
Hatred into Love, Orandum est pro inimicis, ut aut obtineatur ipsorum
conversio, aut in nobis divinae bonitatis inveniatur imitatio Aug. l. De vera
Innocent.
and our Fury Mercy: he will have us imitate His Goodness; and that, raised to
a more than ^ortal condition, we wish well to those that do us mischief; he
will have us pray to (...) for their Conversion; and that (accor^ing to the
example of his only Son, who ^btained Salvation for those that butchered ^im)
we ask p^rdon of him for our enemies: he reserves his highest rewards for
Charity; and teaches us, that we cannot ^ope for forgiveness, unless we show
mercy; (...) raises this Virtue above all others; and ^eversing the worlds
Maxims, he will have (...) to believe, that greatness of Courage consists
only in the forgetting of injuries; all his endeavors are to blot out of our
^ouls the memory of offenses, and hatred of our enemies: to hear him speak, you
would ^hink his State were grounded on this Law only; and that we cannot claim
share in his Glory, if we do not imitate his Clemen^cy.

Humane Philosophy has not been abl^ to attain to this degree of perfection;
yet she has observed, that Hatred was unjust, an^ that Revenge was poorly
conditioned; she has made use of weak reasons, to perswad^ us to rare Virtues;
and when she has no^ been able to quite to abolish Choler, she hat^
endeavored to assuage it: she has shew'^ us, that the world is a Republique,
where^^ all men are Citizens; Sanctae parts sunt, si universum venerabile est:
Ergo and homo homini sacer est, nam hic in majore tibi urbe civis est. Sen. 2.
De Ira. cap. 31.
that if the body were holy, the members thereof were sacred and that, if it
were forbidden to conspire a^gainst the State, it was not lawful to at^tempt
any thing against a man, who mad^ a part thereof; that it would be a strang^
disorder, if the Eyes should fight against the Hands, or that the Hands should
declar^ war against the Eyes; that Nature, which had united them in one and the
same body had inanimated them with one and the same spirit; and that,
contributing to the public good, they should mutually assi^^ one another, lest
the ruin of one part might draw on that of the whole: that, thus (...) were
bound reciprocally to preserve themselves for the welfare of the State, knowing
that Society subsists only by Love, and tha^ body cannot live, when the members
^hereof are at discord. All these maxims codemn Revenge; Nature, as corrupt as
she (...) teaches us by the mouths of Philoso^hers, that Jesus Christ has
commanded us nothing which is not reasonable; and if we ^eed his Grace to keep
his Commandments, it is not so much an argument of their difficulty, as a mark
of our unruliness: as we ^aught to adore his Justice, that punishes (...), we
ought to adore his Mercy, which for^ifieth our weakness, and acknowledge, that
^he imposes no Laws upon us, but that at the same time he gives us strength to
observe them.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of CHOLER.
THe Poet had reason to say, That the way to Hell lay open to all the world,
and that all men were indifferently permitted to descend thither: but that to
get from thence when one was once entered there, and to see the light again
after one had been in darkness, was a favou^ which the Heavens granted only to
tho^^ Grandees that had merited it by their glorious labors: In voluptates and
vitia descenditur; in res asperas and duras subeundum est, hic impellamus
animos, illic refraenemus. Sen. Ep. 123.
there is nothing more eas^ than to abuse Choler, and engage on^ self in the
unjust resentments of Re^venge; corrupt Nature has taught u^ these disorders;
and without other instru^cters than our own desires, we find mean^ every day
how to content this Passion; bu^ assuredly, there is nothing more difficul^^
than to make good use thereof, and she i^ so hair-brained, as it is easier,
totally to extinguish her, than to regulate her, and to banish her out of our
soul, than to moderate her. For she is so violent, that she is not to be
withheld, and so sudden, that she cannon be prevented; her first motions are
not in our power, and being once on the wing, she has already acted most part
of her outrages^ the other passions are to be dreaded in their Progress; like
Scorpions which carry their poison in their tayls, they reserve all their fury
to the last; and are never more dangerous, than when oldest: a budding hatred
may be cured; but, being increased with time, it is past remedy: an Envy which
is not yet thoroughly shaped, may be effaced; but when it has gotten all its
strength, the Heavens must work wonders, to stifle it; a love which has not
yet past from the Eyes to the Heart, and which is rather a Complacency than a
Passion, is as soon quenched as set on fire; but when it is once gotten into the
bottom of our soul, that it has brought its flames into our Will, a long time
is required to mortify it; and unless Hatred, Despite, and Jealousy come in
to the aid of Reason, she will be perplexed to triumph over so puissant an
enemy; but Choler has all her forces in her Cradle, she is at full growth as
soon as formed; and as if she were of the nature of Spirits, she stands not in
need of Time to grow in; so as she is hard to overcome, even from the time she
begins to fight; and contrary to the humor of other Passions, she is more to
be feared in her Cradle, than in her Saddle: she carries her poison in her
Head, as Vipers do; if you think to stifle her when she is once on foot, you
augment her fury; and this monster is so wild, that the next way to appease her
violence, is, to resolve to bear with her.

I should therefore counsel all those that would make her serviceable to
Virtue, to prevent her birth, and to allay her before she be formed: It must be
considered, that whatsoever it be that puts us in Choler, it ought not so much
as to disquiet us; Nihil ex his quae tristes agimus, serium est, nihil magnum:
Inde vobis ira and insania est, quod exigua magni aestimatis. Sen 3. De Ira. c.
34.
that we take offense at things, only because we know them not; that Riches and
Honor attract their greatness from our ignorance; that the chances of Fortune,
and our enemies injuries take their strength from our weakness; as for such
things which waken our desires, we must persuade our selves that they are not
worth the wishing for; that their loss is more advantageous to us, than their
possession; that they are not what they appear to be; and that under a false
show of pleasure, they hide real griefs; we cannot yet give them the names they
deserve; and out of a strange blindness we term our punishments Felicities: our
Troubles proceed only from our Ignorance; and we should never be surprised by
Choler, if we did know, that it is Virtue which makes us rich and honorable;
all the good things that Fortune can bereave us of, are not ours; though she
suffer us to make use of them, she keeps the Sovereignty thereof to her self;
and oft-times she takes them from us, to teach us, that she does but lend, not
give us them: as they are rather favors of her Liberality, than effects of our
Industry; it is fit, that after her prodigality, she should be covetous of them.
In fine, all things that she disposes of, are too mean for us to busy our
selves about; and we must not think it strange, Quod vinculum amoris esse
debebat, seditionis atque odii causa est, idem velle. Sen. 3. De Ira. c. 34.
that they put division between people who desire to enjoy them, and cannot
endure the dividing of them.

As for unthought of Accidents, we must remember, that being in the world, we
are subject to the Laws thereof: that we should be too nice, to pretend to
dispensations which Kings have not obtained; that nothing has happened in former
ages which may not happen in this; that our fortune is not better grounded,
than that of so many Monarchs who have lost their Lives and their Kingdoms in
one and the same day; that our Health is no more settled than other men's; and
that being compounded of the same Element, others suffer no Maladies which may
not happen unto us; that our riches are not in safety, for their being well
come by; that Fire may devour them, Thieves may rob us of them, Strangers may
purloin them; that the power of a great Man, the Malice of a Judge, and
violence of an Enemy, are accidents which may well be foreseen, but cannot
always be shunned.

As for Injuries, if they be slight ones, we must despise them; if bitter ones,
we must sweeten them; Non est magnus animus, quem incurvat injuria: Aut
potentior te, ant imbecilior Jaesit, si imbecillior, parce illi, si potentior,
parce tibi. Sen. l. 3. De Ira. c. 5. in fine.
they will never do us much harm as they do their Authors; an^ if they be
unjust, they will be glorious (...) us: nothing does exalt Innocence so much
(...) Injustice; had not Socrates and Regulus ha^ their Persecutors, they never
had bee^ praised; they are only Famous, for tha^ they have been unfortunate;
and they ow^ the greatest part of their Glory to their Enemies Cruelty: Tyrants
are requisite for the making of Martyrs; and the ones rigou^ is no less
necessary than the others constan^cie; we must not be troubled if our enemie^
intention be unjust, Dat Joseph sr^tribus munera* quasi vellet solvere
beneficium venditionis, proditionis, ejectionis in cisternam: non enim
regnasset nisi veniisset. Philo Iudae.
so that their action may be advantageous to us: Joseph was obliged to his
Brethren, their hatred made him glorious; had he not lost his liberty* he had
never reigned in Egypt and had he not been imprisoned, he had never sat upon
the Throne: what imports it us, that men^ designs be evil, so long as he that
manageth them by his Providence makes them serviceable to us? And if we would
not refuse to lose our Liberty to purchase a Kingdom; wherefore should we not
bear with an Injury, to gain an eternal Crown? When these Reasons often thought
upon, shall have made any impression in us, it will be very hard for Choler to
surprise us; she will be tractable in her birth, if we be prepared against her
assaults; for her violence proceeds rather from our weakness, than her own
strength; and methinks, we are fuller of Remissness, than she of Impetuosity.

With these precautions, I suppose, we may make some good use of Choler; and
that Kings and Judges may advantage themselves thereby, in the behalf of
Justice: she should banish out of their hearts, Fear, and Lenity, when they
indiscreetly oppose themselves against the severity of the Laws: she should
fill with her noble fire their minds, which suffer themselves to be corrupted
by Promises, or terrified with Threats: In fine, she should succeed Clemency,
and fill the mouths of Kings with such awful words, as keep Subjects in
obedience. Thus we see, the ingenious Poet gives Jupiter some Choler,
Precibusque minas regaliter addit. Ovid. 2. Metam.
as often as he puts Thunder into his hand; teaching Sovereigns, by this example,
to have recourse to to this generous Passion, when they have in vain employed
Mercy: it is true, that this argument is not convincing; and we must not wonder,
if this profane Poet attribute the motions of our souls to his gods, since he
imputes its disorders to them; and that, after having described to us their
Murders, he acquaints us with their Adulteries; bu^ the holy Scripture, which
was dictated b^ the Spirit of Truth, teaches us, that the true God grows
angry; and that there (...) some faults which cannot be sufficientl^ punished,
unless Justice borrow heart from Choler. Therefore it is, that the Wiseman when
he represents unto us that dreadfu^ day, Accipietarmaturam zelus illius, induet
pro thorace justitiam, and accipiet pro galea judicium certum: sumet scutum
inexpugnabile aequitatem, acuet autem duram iram in lanceam, and pugnabit cum
illo orbis terrarum contra insensatos. Sap. cap. 5.
wherein God shall revenge himself o^ his Enemies, he gives him weapons, where
with to terrify and punish them; he stin^ him up with Zeal and Jealousy; he
clothe^ him with Justice, as with a Curass; he put Judgment upon his head, as a
Corslet; h^ puts Severity in his left hand, as a Buck^ler; and Choler in his
right, as a Lance; an^ makes him descend upon the earth in thi^ furious
equipage, to punish the Rebels o^ his Kingdom. I very well know, that the
Prophet in this eloquent description fit^ himself to our weakness, and his
meaning (...) not to persuade us, that Gods Choler is o^ the same nature, as is
ours; nor that this passion does trouble his rest; which is not interrupted in
hell it self, by the chastisements o^ Devils: but we must confess, that Jesus
Christ made use thereof, to revenge himself of the wrongs done to his Father,
that he armed with whips and cords, those adored ^ands which were to be pierced
with nails; that he suffered his just anger to be seen in his Countenance; and
did, in this condition, whatsoever Wise men use to do when they ^unish Crimes,
or defend Innocence.

In fine, the wisest of Kings does not be^^eve, that Kingdoms can be well
governed without Choler; he will have Princes sensible of their Injuries, that
the Sword which they bear be as well employed in punishing Offenders, as in
defeating Enemies; and that they show as much indignation when their Subjects
violate their Laws, as when their Frontiers are seized on by their Neighbors:
he is of opinion, that the Choler and Mildness of a King ought to maintain the
peace of his Kingdom; and using an excellent comparison, says, The one is as
the roaring of a Lion, whereat all the wild beasts of the Forests tremble;
Sicut sremitus leonis, ita and Regis ira, and sicutros super herbam, ita and
hilaritas ejus. Prove. 19.
the other, as the dew upon the Grass, which defends it from the heat of the
Sun. But in all these just Commotions which accompany the correction of
Offenders, the Prince must remember, that Punishments are Remedies, and that
the Death it self which he ordains, Interim optimum est misericordiae genus,
occidere. Sen. 1. De Ira. c. 16.
is a kind of mercy which he shows to the Faulty: he banisheth some, lest their
conversation may augment the number of the wicked: from others he takes their
wealth left they abuse it; he deprives others of their liberty, for fear they
would employ it against the State; he takes their life from them, when he
thinks their mischief in^curable; and he thinks to do them a favor when he
condemns them to death. H^ therefore is obliged to divide himself, be^tween the
relation of a Judge and a Physi^tian, to deal with the same person, as with one
that is guilty and sick; and to mingle Mildness with Severity, left his Chole^
prove more pernicious than profitable to his State.

If Kings are bound to be so cautious in the punishing of Rebels, private men
may judge, what a hand they ought to hold over their Passions, and how mild
their Choler ought to be, that it may be reasonable; for their power is not
equal to that of Kings; they cannot be so highly injured, Salobrius est irae
etiam just pulsanti non aperire penetrale cordis, quam admittere non facie
recessuram, and perventuram de surculo in trabem. Aug. Ep. ad Profutur.
and their resentment is not so excusable. I will likewise advise them to
stifle a passion, the use whereof is so dangerous; and to dry up the Spring,
that they may drain the Current: when it is natural to us, and makes up the
chief part of our temperature, it is very hard to subdue it; and it is not in
our power to change the Elements whereof we are compounded, or to mend the
faults which Nature has committed; yet this mischief is not without its
Remedy; and if (...) cannot be totally cured, it may at least be much
qualified; wine which sets it on fire must be cut off; and as Plato says, One
fire must not be added to another: Plato vetat igne ignem excitare. Sen. l. 2.
De Ira. c. 20.
Choler must not be nourished with delicious viands, left the mind swell
according as the body is strengthened; it must be held in Exercise by moderate
labor, which may diminish the heat thereof without extinguishing it, and which
may turn all the fervency into scum: Pastimes will be of good use to her,
provided they be not excessive; and harmless pleasures, provided they be
moderate, will allay her fury; but when she is more Accidental, than Natural,
and that she proceeds either from Sickness, which may have changed our
Constitution, or from immoderate watchings which may have heated it, or from
Debauchery which may have dried it up; or from those other disorders which
wound both soul and body, it will be no hard matto drive out an enemy, which
holds no Intelligence in the place; and which is only entertained in our
hearts, by reason of our wretchedness.

But without seeking for so many remedies; we may boldly use Choler against our
selves; and suffer this passion to punish those faults whereof we alone are
guilty Self-love will hinder the excess thereon well enough; and without
consulting with so many Masters, the care we have of preserving our selves,
Volo vos irasci ut non peccetis; quibus habetis irasci nisi vobis. Aug. Horn.
4. Ex. 20
will sense us from the violence of this passion; it is against our selves,
that we may with Reason use her, since we have so many just motives that invite
us to it; we must make use of her fury to satisfy Jesus Christ, who demands of
us reparation for injuries done unto him, and revenge for his death: we may
lawfully employ her in our Repentance, without any fear, that her excess may
make us lose Mildness, or her Violence make us forget Charity: for this Virtue
which punishes faults, seems to be but Choler allayed; and the Penitent, who
makes war upon Himself, is but a man incensed; Love and Sorrow encourage him to
Revenge; he cannot behold his sins without vexation; and believes, that without
violating the Laws of Nature, or of Grace, he may be his own Judge, and his own
Client, his own Witness, and his own Executioner; and that without offense to
Justice, he may execute the sentence which he has pronounced against Himself:
Thrice happy Choler, which only offends man, to appease God; whlch by her Tears
washes away her sins; which by Self-accusing gets Absolution; and which by
slight punishments, frees her self from the pains of Hell, and prepares for her
self the Joys of Heaven.

THE SIXTH TREATISE, OF Delight and Sorrow.
The FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Delight or
Pleasure.
THough Hope be so much praised by men, and that of all the Passions which
flatter the Sense, she is one of the most Taking; yet must she give place to
Pleasure, and confess that Pleasure is a Sun, whose presence defaces all her
beuty: for if she promises ought that is good, this other gives it us; if the
one has Flowers, the other bears Fruit; and if the one content us in Word, the
other makes us happy in effect. Delight is the period of all the motions of our
soul; Ad summa pervenit, qui scit quo gaudeat, and qui foelicitaten^ suam in
aliena potestate non posuit. Sen. Ep. 23.
and as Love is the beginning thereof, Pleasure is the end; it stops the
violence of our desires, and forces those fickle Passions to taste rest, to
which they seem to profess Enmity: it sweetens Choler, and takes from her that
forward humor which accompanies her in all her designs; it pays Boldness for
all her good services; and is it self the recompense of those glorious labors
which she has undergone to compass it; it drives away Fear, and banishes all
those vain terrors which disquiet us; it kills Despair, which seems to have
conspired the death of it; it banisheth Sadness at first sight, and if it
retain Tears and Sighs, they are the spoils which publish the Victory, and
honor the Triumph thereof. Love is content, when after having taken so much
pains, it can rest in Pleasure: of as many shapes as Love puts on, Non est
oblectamentum super cordis gaudium. Eccl. c. 30.
this is that it most delights in, and does not forgo it to assume another,
without violence: Love is unquiet when it Desires, and its wishes are shameful
and true proofs of its indigency; when it hopes, it is not without Fear; and
those two keep it so faithful company, as they never leave it but it costs them
their life; for Fear becomes Sadness when it is destitute of Hope; and Hope is
changed into Despair, when it is parted from Fear: Love is not satisfied with
Revenge; and though Revenge be sweet, yet it is accompanied with pain: In
Boldness, it is covered with Sweat and Dirt; Glory flatters it, and threatening
danger astonisheth it; in Hatred, it is tormented; and the evil which it
wishes to its enemy, is a Viper that lies gnawing upon it: in Eschewing, it
wants strength; and it shuns not him that pursues it, save only because it
cannot defend it self from him: in Despair, it is vanquished; and yielding up
its weapons to the Conqueror, suffers it self to be led in Triumph: in Sadness
it is miserable; and the remembrance of its fore-past happiness, serves only to
augment its present sorrow: but in pleasure, it is at once both Victorious,
Triumphant, and Happy; all its Races are stopped, all its Desires are
accomplished, and all its designs at an end. And surely, we must not wonder if
it be in so deep a Tranquillity, since it enjoyes the happiness it sought for,
and is luckily arrived at the end of all its labors: for Pleasure is nothing
else, but the enjoying of a pleasing Good, which renders the soul content, and
which interdicts it the use of Desire, as well as that of Sadness and Fear.

This definition excludes all such delights as spring only from Remembrance, or
from Hope, and which make us happy only in that which we have been, or hope to
be: Memory does not always entertain us with our misfortunes; though she be
more faithful in retaining a Displeasure than a contentment; Habet praeteriti
doloris recordatio delectationem Cic. l. 5. Ep.
and busies her self oftener about things which offend us, than about such as we
are well pleased withal; yet does not she forbear to represent unto us past
felicities; and by a pleasing Remembrance thereof, sweeten our present
miseries; to serve us, she triumphs over the Laws of Time; to favor us, she
recalls what is no more; and seeks out in by-gon ages divertisments to recreate
us; but let her do her utmost endeavor, she cannot beguile our soul, nor give
it true contentment in entertaining it only with a Falsehood; things that are
past are but so many shadows; and if they make any Impression in us, it is
rather of Sorrow than of Joy; Good, when far distant from us, makes it self be
desired; but when past, it makes it self to be bewailed: its Presence ingenders
our Happiness, and its Absence causes our Desires, or our Regret: Loss, and
Fruition, of one and the same thing, cannot be pleasing; and let Memory use
what cunning she can, she cannot call to our minds a good which has no more a
being, without awakening our Wishes, Omne opus leve fieri solet, cum ejus
pretium cogitatur, and spes proemii solatium fit laboris. Hieron. in Ep.
and refreshing our Sorrows. Hope is not much more favorable to us; for though
she fore-run our good fortune, that she anticipate the birth thereof, and that
she feeds us with a contentment which is not yet happened; though by an
impatience which is advantageous to us, she seeks out present felicities in
Futurity, and that, precipitating the course of years, she advances our
Contentment; yet a man need not be over-wise, to observe that she deceives us;
and that she often makes us miserable, out of a desire of making us too soon
Happy: she is found false in her Promises; and after having long expected their
effects, all we reap thereby, is Shame, for having been too credulous; and
Sorrow, for having grounded our happiness upon an uncertain good: Solid
pleasure requires the presence of its object; and though, in Morality, the end
has so much power over our Wills, yet can it not make them happy, but by
possession; therefore is it, that the Covetous and Ambitious, who forgo a
present good, only to entertain themselves with a Future; and who consider not
so much what they have, as what they want, cannot be esteemed happy; since in
the very Fruition of honor or riches, they are languishing; and contrary to
the nature of Pleasure, they seek for what they have not, and value not what
they have.

By the same definition, we exclude all those sensualities, Ipsae voluptates in
tormenta vertuntur. Sen. Ep. 24.
which spring from Indigence, or which produce Sorrow; for to boot, that they
are desired with so much Anxiety as does exceed the Pleasure which they promise
us; they are such enemies to our quiet, as it is impossible to taste thereof,
without becoming miserable and faulty, they wound at once both the soul and the
body; they weaken the one, and corrupt the other; they are Remedies worse than
the Evils which they would cure; their disorder causes always the like in our
health; and their excess is so pernicious thereunto, Voluptas vergit ad dolorem
nisi modum teneat, very autem boni aviditas tuta est. Sen. Ep. 23.
that we must take them moderately, if we intend to receive satisfaction
thereby; true Delight is never more pleasing, than when in extremes; the
greater it is the more it does ravish us; and being agreeable to our nature, it
never makes us more happy than when it most abundantly communicates it self;
but Sensualities are poisons, which must be prepared, if we will reap profit
thereby; and since the irregularity of Sin, we had need of Grace to fence our
selves against their disorder: whatever Pleasure they promise us, they have so
great Affinity with Sorrow, In profoso gaudio lachrymae erumpunt. Tert.
that their words and effects resemble each other: they have their Groans and
their Sighs, as well as Sorrow; when they are extreme, they dissolve into
tears; and to show us that they are enemies to our Nature, their excess does
oftentimes cause our death; but say they should not produce all these
mischiefs? 'Twil be sufficient to undeceive us, to know that they are always
followed by Repentance, Voluptas fragilis est and brevis, cujus subinde necesse
est, aut nos poeniteat aut pudeat. Sen. Benif. l 7. c. 2.
Sorrow, and Shame; they dare not appear in public; and very well perceiving
that they contribute not to the Glory of man, they seek out Shade,
Solitariness, and Silence: they would blush, were they enforced to show
themselves; and the confusion which would cover their faces, would trouble
their contentment: Maladies are the penance of their excess; and Physicians
would be useless, could pleasure be regulated; as long as man was content with
such fruits as the earth yielded him; and that without provoking his appetite
with much-sought for Viands, he did only eat to satisfy his hunger; he had no
superfluous humors to dry up, no Defluctions to divert, nor Fevers to cure.
Abstinence was all his remedy; and the Diet that he used dreined off the source
of all his diseases: but, since he has dispeopled both Sea and Land, to
nourish him; that he has made the monsters of Nature his food; that he would
know what taste Tortoises, and other creeping things had, which the simplicity
of our Ancestors confounded with Serpents* since he would refresh Wine with
Snow, accord those elements in his Body, which wage war with one another in the
world; mingle Fishes with Birds, and place in one and the same Stomach, Nunc
vero quam long processerunt mala valetudinis? has usuras voluptatum pendimus,
ultra modum fasque concupitarum Innumerabiles esse ^ morbos miraris? coquos
numera. Sen. Ep. 95.
things to which Nature has appointed such different habitations; sicknesses
have assailed him in crowds; and the unruliness of his mind has caused the
disorders of his Body* the: Gout has stung his Nerve; the Stone is formed in
his Reins, the Winds have committed a thousand Outrages in his Bowels, and as
if the Elements were sensible of the confusion he makes of their qualities in
his debaucheries, they for revenge have corrupted themselves, and (as the
utmost which hate can produce) they ruin themselves, to kill their Enemy.

In fine, by this definition, we condemn all such pleasures as Nature requires
not, unless seduced by Opinion; for her contentments are as regular as her
Desires; and without looking after things unprofitable, she is contented with
what is necessary; she wishes for such good things only, as she cannot be
without: as Necessity serves her for a Law, so does she consult with it in all
her occasions, and makes no wishes without the approbation thereof; hence is
it, that they are not many; and that she is contented with a little: water of
the Fountain suffices to quench her thirst; fruits of the earth satisfy her
hunger; Sheeps Wool furnishes her clothing; and before Luxury bound him to
make war upon all the Creatures. I know not but that the trees did furnish her
with Apparel; and those that fed her with their fruits, clothed her with their
barks; but this at least I know, that in those innocent times men committed no
Murders, to adorn themselves, neither acted any pranks of Injustice, to enrich
themselves; nor did they violate Nature, to procure to themselves sinful
delicacies, their houses were built without Curiosity, -- Tunc juvat aut amnis
vagi pressisse ^ipas, cespite aut ^udo leves duxisse somnos Excussa sylvis poma
compescunt famem, Et fraga parvis vulsa dumetis cibos Faciles ^^^inistrant.
Sen. in Hipol.
and he that was the Contriver of them, was also the Carpenter and the Mason;
the earth covered with Moss served him for a Bed; and, as he never lay down
uninvited by sleep, he slept without disturbance, and awaked with content; he
knew no other Perfume than that of Flowers, which being more pure than ours,
was more pleasing; he was not acquainted with the use of Coaches, his Journeys
not being long, he made use only of such aids as Nature had given him: War
being hateful to him, and trafique useless, he permitted horses to enjoy their
liberty, and employed not that noble Creature, which Fury and Avarice have
rendered necessary to us; whithersoever he went, the earth was sufficiently
fruitful to nourish and to cloth him; he found in the Deserts wherewith to
satisfy his desires; and that which we want in Cities, he wanted not in places
uninhabited. In his happy age all delights were innocent, and no man tasted any
pleasure which was not true; but now, since they are no longer Natural, they
are no longer Rational; they weaken the Body, and destroy the Soul: and
experience teaches us, that the use of them is as pernicious as the want of
them is profitable.

But lest I be accused to be an enemy to Pleasure, and that I would bereave man
of the remedies which Nature has given him to sweeten his misfortunes; I will
say, that the solid contentments are those of the Mind; and that man cannot be
satisfied, unless the noblest part, Quaeris quid sit hominis bonum? animus, and
ratio in animo perfecta. Rationale enim animal est homo^consummatur itaque ejus
bonum, si id adimplevit cui natus est. Sen. Ep. 41.
whereof he is composed, be happy; the knowledge of Truth, and practice of
Virtue ought to be his chiefest Diversions; he must follow his holiest
inclinations, and be more careful, in his own person, to please an Angel than a
Beast; he must remember that the body is but the souls slave: and that in the
choice of Pleasures, it is just that the Sovereign keep her precedence;
besides, those which the soul relisheth, are the truest; and if any man be of
another opinion, we must believe, that sin which has berest him of Grace, has
likewise berest him of Reason. For the pleasures of the Senses are limited,
whereas those of the soul have no bounds; the pleasures of the body are
strangers, those of the soul are natural; the former may be taken from us
without any great ado, Death it self cannot bereave us of the latter; which
though it rob us of our riches, cannot rob us of our virtues: the one sort are
in a perpetual succession; as they hold of Time, they cannot hold together;
Quid ex Idae Platonicis traham, quod cupiditates meas comprimat? vel ho^ ipsum,
quod omnia ^sta quae sensibus serv^unt, quae nos accendunt ac irritant, negat
Plato ex iis esse quae vere sint. Igitur ista imaginaria sunt, and ad tempus
aliqua^ faciem ferunt, nihil horu^ stabile nec solidum est. Son. Ep. 58.
and by a necessary law, those that are past, give place to them that are
present; and the present to the future; so as the body never enjoys its
contentment, but in part; it is poor amidst its riches, whilst it thrives well
on the one side, it languisheth on the other; and by a misfortune which is
inseparable from its condition, it finds no contentment, which gives
satisfaction to all its senses; but those of the soul are never divided, they
present themselves all at once; and the same thought which enlightens the
Understanding, heats the Will, and fills the Memory: her joy is universal; one
faculty is never sad whilst the other are satisfied; and, as if there were a
community amongst them in their contentments; that which pleases the one,
delights all the rest. In fine, Spiritual pleasures are much more intimate
than those of the Senses; for the soul is wholly filled therewithal; the
blessing she eujoys, penetrates her Essence; as she changes into her Self that
which she knows, so she transformeth her Self into that which she loves; and by
an admirable Metamorphosis she becomes her own Felicity; but the Senses are
joined to their objects only by Accident; they see the colors of things, and
know not their Essences; they understand the sound of words, and conceive not
the meaning of them; so as the body is only content in Effigy; its Bliss is
but a shadow, and its Felicity is but a false appearance; but the mind is
really happy, the contentment thereof is solid, and the goods it possesses,
essential.

The SECOND DISCOURSE. Of the bad use of Pleasure.
OF so many several ways that Sin has invented to abuse Pleasure; there are
four which I undertake to discover, and enter combat with, because they have
been approved of by famous men; and some honest men have taken upon them their
defense. The first is, Voluptuousness, which seems to derive her name from
Pleasures Self, and pretends to be enemy to Virtue; for though there be great
difference between them, and that to preserve the one, we are oft-times
enforced to abandon the other; yet heretofore there arose up a Sect of
Philosophers that would reconcile them, and who out of a good intent did much
injure Virtue, for finding, Apud Epicureos ^virtus voluptatum ministra est,
illis paret, illis deservit, illas supra se videt. Primae autem parts ejus
sunt ducere debet, imperare, summo loco stare; hi vero jubent illam signum
petere. Sen. Benif. 1.4 c 2.
that the Difficulty which did accompany her, made her odious to faint and lazy
souls; and that the labor that went to the acquisition thereof, made them lose
the longing after her, they strove to persuade them that she was delightsom;
and that under a severe countenance she did hide a pleasing humor: upon their
word, men began to court her, and thinking to find Voluptuousness in her train,
they made love to the Mistress, hoping to enjoy her Waitingwoman; but when they
were aware that this Pleasure was as severe as Virtues Self; and that,
remaining in the bottom of the soul, it made no impression upon the Senses;
they changed their design, and made open love to Voluptuousness: In fine, a
height of impudency, they would make use of Philosophy to authorize their
Injustice; and gave a glorious name to a base Rebellion; they endeavored to
make men believe, that Virtue did never forgo Voluptuousness, and that they
were not to be parted without Violence: their cousenage was soon discovered,
and the true Philosophers loaded them with so many Reproaches, that poor
Epicurus could never acquit himself of; for though his design was excusable,
and that he never would have proposed Voluptuousness to men, but to make them
in love with Virtue; yet because the success was unhappy, he could not avoid
Calumny; and the zeal of his adversaries confounded his Opinion with his
Disciples Error: yet was not he in fault, save only in seeming to endeavor to
equal Voluptuousness to Virtue; and to make the Sovereign and the Slave fit
upon the same Throne; he deserved public indignation, Qui Epicuret^^ sequitur
bonum, malae rei quaerit authorem, and dum ille renit blando nomine inductus,
sequitur voluptatem, non quem andit, sed quam a^ulit, and vitia su a cum coepit
putare similia praeceptis, indulget illis nontimide nec obscure. Sen De vita
beata. ^ap. 13.
only for distrusting the power of Virtue; and because, to procure her Lovers,
he had adorned her with the trims of Voluptuousness; if his Opinion, innocent
as it is, has not escaped blame, that of his Disciples is too guilty to keep
me from arguing against it; it is enough that it is condemned by the whole
world; and that the abettors thereof dare not publicly defend it; it is
sufficiently punished since it is ashamed, and seeks out Obscurity, as well to
hide it self, as to take its pastime: it may suffice to know, that no honest
man did ever take upon him to defend it; and that even the most shameless
amongst men took not its part, till they had forgot Reason.

The Devil perceiving that this piece of ^unning was smelt out, and that it
would ^educe none but such souls, as not staying for Suggestions, would lose
themselves of their own proper motions; bethought himself of a wile, which was
so much the more dangerous, as being covered with a Fair Pretense: For he would
persuade men, Qui virtutem suam publicari vult, non virtuti laborat, sed
gloriae. Non vis esse justus sine gloria? ac saepe justus esse debebas cum
infamia. Sen. Ep. 113.
that true pleasure consisted in Honor, and that there was nothing glorious,
which was not pleasing in Perfection; he made them believe, that Glory was the
recompense of Virtue; that the peoples approbation was the Kings Happiness;
that, if Conquerors did at any time endeavor to win upon the Liberty of
Strangers, it was to deserve praise; and if they did them any Mischief, it was
to get Honor thereby: All the great ones followed this Faction; and persuaded
by Reason, which had more of show, than of solidity, they courted Glory, they
became her Martyrs, and engaged their lives and liberties, to purchase
reputation. From this pernicious Maxim, arose a great mischief; for men
preferring Honor before Virtue, divided two things, which ought to be
inseparably united, and through the malice of the Devil, they became proud, and
ceased to be virtuous; they ran after glorious sins, they neglected Bashful
Virtues, and with an injustice which merited exemplary chastisement, they for
sook a Sovereign, to court her slave: assuredly, they were ignorant of her
height of merit, since they sought after another recompense, than what they
find that enjoy her and they differ much from the humor of her true lovers,
who forgo Glory to preserve Virtue; and who are never more faithful to her,
than when they are proffered preferment, to corrupt them, or laden with
reproaches, to affrighten them: But not to engage my self, in the defense of a
party so reasonable; I will argue with them that gainsay it, out of their own
interests: I will make them confess, that that which men call Honor, cannot
cause a true pleasure; Male agit qui Famae, non Conscientiae gratus est. Sen.
Benefic. c. 42.
and that he who is Rich in Glory, is Poor in Contentment: For how can he find
his Happiness, in a thing he possesses not? How can he build his Felicity upon
a Good which is distributed with so much injustice; and which is often^ given
to Vice, than to Virtue: What satisfaction shall he enjoy, when his Conscience
shall give the lie to his Reputation? And that he shall blame those actions,
which the world does not approve of, save only because it knows not their
motives? How ^an he find rest in the diversity of men's opinions which do not
agree, even in those things that are most certain; and who, according to the
Passions wherewith their minds are agitated, condemn a Virtue which they have
formerly valued, and value a vice which they have formerly condemned? Pleasure,
to be Solid, ought to be constant; and, if any glory can be the reward of a
good action, it is not that which we expect from the people; but what we
receive from our own Conscience: It Is then an abuse to Virtue, to place her in
so frail a thing; Gloriam qui spreverit vera^ habebit. Livius Dec. 3. lib. 2.
and to seek a happiness in Men's Mouths, which ought to reside in our Heart, is
to prefer an Appearance before a Truth.

Philosophers, who thought to find her in Science, seem to have gone upon
better Ground; for besides, that the desire of Knowledge is more natural to us,
than is that of Glory; and, that truth makes much stronger impression on our
soul, than does Honor; it is a benefit we cannot be robbed of, as being
Intrinsecal to us: Tyrants, who take our lives from us, cannot bereave us of
our Knowledge; and Calumny, which may stain our Reputation, cannot obscure our
Understanding: We are learned i^ despite of our enemies; these precious riches
accompany us in prison, follow u^ in Exile, and leave us not till death: We
carry them with us, wherever we go; and Fortune, which ravisheth Honor from
Conquerors, which bereaves the Incontinent of their Voluptuosness, cannot rob^
Philosophers of their Science. Sunt qui scire volunt tantum ut sciant; and
turpis curiositas est. Sunt qui scire volunt, ut Scientiam suam vendant, and
turpis quaestus est. Et sunt qui scire volunt ut sciantur ipsi, and turpis
vanitas est. Et sunt qui scire volunt, ut aedificent, and charitas est. Et sunt
qui scire volunt ut aedisicentur, and prudentia est. Bern. in Cant. Hom. 35.
But let her pretend what advantage she can over her Rivals, man's Felicity
cannot consist therein: For to boot, that she is mixed with ignorance, that her
lights are mingled with obscurities, that there is more of doubt, than of
certainty, more of error than of truth in her; she is oftentimes either
unprofitable or faulty, in the most part of her employments; for as S. Bernard
says, some study out of a delight to be knowing; and this is a frivolous
curiosity; others, that men may know, that they are knowing; and this is a
shameful Vainglory: Others, out of a desire to sell their knowledge; and this
is a Sordid Commerce: It Is true, there are some that study, that they may
edify, and this is a laudable Charity; and others study to edify themselves,
and this is a discreet point of wisdom. Of all these, there are only the two
last, who do not abuse Knowledge; since they procure her only, to employ her in
the service of virtue; but in this very occasion, she has her troubles, and
her defects; and if she be not accompanied with Humility, she puffes us up with
Vainglory, and Self-love. Infelix homo qui ista scit omnia, te autem nescit;
beatus autem qui te scit, etiamsi illa nesciat; qui vero te and illa novit, non
propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatus est. Aug 5. Confess. cap. 4.
After all, we must acknowledge, with the wise man, that it is a troublesome
occupation, which God has given men for their punishment: and that it is
rather an effect of his Justice, than a mark of his Love. If the use of all
these pleasures be not innocent, that of Riches is more Faulty; for let us give
them what praises we please, they are enemies to Virtue; and if they be
serviceable to magnificence and liberality, they are prejudicial to Continence
and Justice: all vices employ them, to satisfy their unjust desires; and he
that would take them from Avarice, Pride, and Obscenity, would reduce them to a
happy incapacity of doing harm: The greatest Philosophers have likewise
acknowledged, that they were the Ruin of Families, and loss of Estates; that
the despising of them, was safer than their Possession; and that, from the time
they enter into a house, they drive thence all virtue; they irritate our
desires, awaken our hopes, increase our fears, and oblige us to confess, that
there is more anxiety in keeping^ them, than in acquiring of them. In fi^e Rich
men are of so unhappy a condition that if they will therein taste any delight
they must imitate the condition of poo^ men, Majore tormento pecunia possidetur
quam quaeritur. Sen. Ep. 116.
and seek for that in poverty, which they could not find out in abundance.

But where then will you place Pleasure if it be neither to be found in
Voluptuousness nor in Glory? And where will you lodg^ her, if she agree not
well neither with knowledge nor riches? I confess, there are Rational Delights,
Lawful Honors, Modest Sciences, and Innocent Riches; but certainly, the common
use thereof is out of order, and by a just judgment of God, every one finds his
Trouble, where he seeks his Felicity: The Incontinent are sad amidst their
Contentments: Jealousy and Suspicion revenge violated Chastity, and Diseases
make them pay use for their infamous pleasures; the Ambitious are the Victimes
of Vanity; they have this of evil in their best Fortune; Laborat invidia, and
quidem duplici; vides autem quam fit miser is cui invidetur, and qui invidet.
Sen. Ep. 4.
that they are tormented with a twofold Envy; for they cannot endure their
Equals, and their Inferiors cannot abide them; They despise Honors, as soon
as they enjoy them; and valuing none, but such as they have not, ^ they mingle
disquiet with enjoying; and molest ^n Assured Happiness, with desire of an
Uncertain Contentment: the learned are not much more Happy; they are tormented
with the Passions, which lost the first man; The Fathers fault is made the
Childrens punishment; and the same knowledge which thrust him out of Paradise,
persecutes them in the world; they consume all their days in learning things,
either Ridiculous or Unprofitable: They fight for defaced Letters; and the
Inscription of Tombs, which is also the reward of Conquerors, causes almost
all the Dispute of Critics; they boast themselves, that it is by these glorious
Paths, that men mount up to Heaven; they seek for Immortality, and they treat
with the dead, that they may reign with the Gods; they know how to Speak, not
how to live; they are Learned, and not Virtuous; and through a strange
blindness, Plus scire velle quam sit satis, intemperantiae genus est. Sen. Ep.
88.
they see not that their knowledge being Proud, is as Boundless as Ambition;
and that her desires being irregular, she is as Inperate as Voluptuousness. The
Avaritious are in pain, for all their Riches; they possess them, they do not
enjoy them; they worship their wealth, and dare not touch it; they teach us,
that they are slaves thereunto, not masters thereof; and their only contentment
lies i^ hindering others from enjoying them. But left it be objected, that I
discover an evi^ without applying the remedy; I intend i^ my next Discourse, to
defend innocent and Lawful Pleasures.

The THIRD DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Pleasure.
Volupras natura divinum quiddam est infitum mortalibus. Arist. 1 7. Ethic.
cap. 13.
THose who condemn Pleasure, must consequently condemn Nature, and accuse her of
having committed faults in all her works; for this wise mother has dispersed
delight throughout all our actions; and by an admirable piece of wisdom has
ordered, that as those which are most necessary were the meanest, they should
be the most pleasing; and certainly, had she not found out this innocent
Slight, the world would have perished long ago; and men, who are the noblest
part thereof, neglecting their own preservation, would have left it for a prey
to wild Beasts; for who would trouble himself with Eating, were he not invited
thereunto, as well by Delight, as by Necessity? who would ever endure that
sleep should benum his senses, take from him the use of Reason, and make him
change life with the shadow of death, did not the sweetness of her poppies make
this remedy as charming, as it is shameful: as Pleasure is profitable to the
body, Perficit actionem voluptas, and in omni sensu quaedam delectatio
versatur. Arist. 1.10. Ethic. c. 41.
it is no less necessary for the mind; which as ambitious as it is, would never
undertake the achievement of Virtues, and the defeat of Vices, were not the
Glory mingled with Joy; and did not these two make up the recompense of her
Labors: who would toil to overcome shameful and sinful pleasures, were they
not thereunto incited by innocent delights? Who would dare to assail Death, and
to fight with a Monster, which triumphs over both the victorious and the
vanquished, were not his constancy animated by the contentment which the
victory promises him? Who were able to overcome the difficulties which
accompany all Sciences, were they not seasoned with Sweetness? and who would
ever contrive any famous design, were he not thereunto invited by the hope of
Pleasure? But though Nature has shed it abroad in all actions, whether
necessary or difficult; she will have it be rather a help, than a motive to us;
and that it serve us rather for a refreshing then for a recompense: she will
have us to look upon it as an Assistance which she has given us whereby to
acquire Virtue, and that we use it as a remedy found out by her to moderate our
discontents; for man's life is full of misery; and had not the heavens sweetened
them by Joy, all Passions would end in Grief or in Despair; we should be
pressed to death, under the burden of our misfortunes; and losing the hope of
vanquishing our enemies, we should lose the desire of fighting with them. Rerum
actiones undique absolutas, voluptas efficit, vitam etiam cajus cupiditate
incensi sumus omnes. Arist. 1.10. Ethic. c. 4.
To heighten our courage, this wise Mother solicites us by Pleasure; and
equally mingling it with things that are Difficult and Shameful, she obliges
us not to Despise the one, nor to Fear the other; but whatever Contentment she
propounds to us, it is always with this Caution, that it shall not be the end,
but that it shall serve us for a pleasing means to arrive the more contentedly
thereat; so that we are bound to taste of it with the same reservedness,
Docetur amare meliora per amaritudinem, ne viator tendens in patriam, stabulum
a^^et pro do^^ Aug.
as Travelers look upon the goodly Fields which lie in their way; they serve
to unweary them; they admire their largeness, praise their Fertility, value
their Riches, but they stay not to gather in the crop; and knowing it is not
lawful for them to enjoy them, they are contented with such Recreation as
thereby they receive, which whilst they do, they hasten their pace, and
continue on their journey: so earthly Pleasures may well solace us; Hoc me
docuisti ut quemadmodum medicamenta, sic alimenta sumpturus accedam. Aug. 10.
Confess. c. 31.
but they are not totally to possess us. When Nature intermingled them with our
actions, she meant them not for our Felicity, but our Consolation; and she
intends not, that they should stay us on Earth, but that they should raise us
to Heaven: It Is brutish to seek for nothing but Delight in Eating, and to make
that a Contentment, which is nothing but a Remedy: to love Sleep, because it is
accompanied with some sweetness; and to place the happiness of Life in the
Image of Death, is to be void of Reason: we must take it because it is
necessary, and thank divine Providence, Interrogas quid petam ex virtute?
ipsam: nihil enim est melius, ipsa predium fui est. Aun hoc parum magnum est?
Quad mihi voluptatem nominas? hominis bonum quaero, non pecoris. Sen. De vita
beatae cap. 9.
which being more lucky and powerful than Physic, has provided pleasing
Remedies for us, and cures our maladies without exercising our Patience: to
court Virtue only for Pleasures sake, is to be unjust, and not to value her,
she is too noble to be any thing but our end; to seek out any other motive, or
hope for any other recompense, than the possession of her, is to injure her:
Pleasure which acompanies her, is only for mean and poor souls, which have not
courage enough to follow her, and her Difficulties; she is never more glorious,
than when most difficult; and her faithful lovers never think her more
beautiful than when she is crowned with Thorns: yet does not Nature forbid us
to taste this sweetness, which accompanies the searching after her; provided,
we look upon it as a succor to our weakness; and that we take not that for a
consummated felicity, which is given us only for a refreshment: this is,
notwithstanding, the fault of all men; and so general is this disorder, that
there is hardly any one who does not seek after Pleasure, Cum salus sit causa
ed^ndi ac bibendi, adjungit se tanquam pedissequa periculosa jucunditas, and
plerumque praeire conatur, ut ejus causa siat quod salutis causa me facere vel
dico vel volo. Aug. 10. Conf. c. 31.
and despise Virtue: Every one will make his utmost end of a mean which is not
honorable, save only because necessary; and all the world will have that a
Passion which Nature has placed in our Soul, only to sweeten our misfortunes,
should be the height of our felicity; men now respect nothing but what
delights; Glory gives place to pleasure; and virtues self, by a high injustice,
has no more lovers, unless she promise them delight; insomuch as of all
Passions, not any one does more prejudice her, than joy does: For Desires are
Noble, Hopes are Generous, Audacity and Choler assail Vice; Hatred and Fear,
defend themselves from it; but Joy is of a soft Nature, and suffers it self to
be corrupted, when solicited by Delights: Other Passions are in perpetual
motion; and being always upon the Speed, they never fix themselves so strongly
on an Object, but they may be staved off, but Joy is at rest, and making the
good which she possesses, her Center; she must be fought withal, Modo gaudium
nostrum, fratres mei, in spe sit, ne^ro gaudeat quasi in re praesenti, ne
haereat in via: Totum gaudium de spe futura sit. Aug. Tract. in Joan.
before she will part with it. Therefore the Son of God, knowing how hard it is
to conquer this passion when it is grounded in a Soul, forbids us to give it
entertainment, and counsels us to reserve it for such contentments as never
shall have end: He distinguishes his Disciples from those of the world, as
well by Joy as by Love: he employs all his Reasons to persuade us, that
temporal Joy cannot agree with Joy eternal; and that to be happy in Heaven, a
man must be miserable on Earth; he mingles Pain with our Pleasures; sows Thorns
amongst our Roses, Miscet tribulationes gaudiis terrenis, ut sentientes
amaritudinem, discamus aeternam desiderare dulcedinem. Aug. in Psalm. 127.
and poures Bitterness upon our Delights, to make us distaste them. He
instructs us, that Pleasures are not only fading, but painful; and that they
are not only Unprofitable, but Faulty. In fine, they are the daughters and
mothers of Sorrow; and all those which promise us the greatest contentment,
subsist only by the Pain which precedes them. Monarchs triumph not till after
the victory; they had not defeated their enemies, Triumphat victor Imperator;
non vicisset nisi pugnasset, and quanto majus est gaudium in triumpho, Aug.
1.8. cap. 3.
had they not fought with them; and Joy measures it self so justly by Sorrow,
that the beauty of the Triumph depends upon the greatness of the Combat; when
it has not been thoroughly disputed, the pleasure is less, and the glory is not
so splendid: Mariners never taste the sweetness of life more than when they
have escaped Shipwreck; and they are never more sensible of contentment, than
when after despair of safety, a Tempest drives them upon the shore: an only Son
is never so dear to his Mother, as when he has run great hazards, and has
cost her many a Tear; she thinks she has been brought a bed with him, as many
times as she has wept for him; her joy arises from her sorrow; and the
contentment of enjoying him would not be so great, had she not feared to have
lost him: one must be hungry before he take delight in eating; and as nothing
sets forth Light better than Darkness; Edendi and bibendi voluptas nulla est.
nisi praecedat esuriendi and sitiendi molestia. I Would n Ibidem.
so there is nothing adds more to Pleasure than the Pain that has gone before
it. But out of another consequence, as necessary, and more vexatious, pleasure
turns to Sorrow; and that wherewith we were at first delighted, in process of
time, becomes painful: Too long sleep degenerates into a Lethargy; and the
remedy which nature had found out to repair our strength, when it is continual,
ruinates it. Excess of meat suffocates the natural heat; too violent exercise
weakens our vigor; and the innocentest Pleasures become Punishments, when they
are immoderate.

Temperance might cure us of these disorders, if they went no father; but
experience teaches us, that what passes for a Pleasure, in the world, is a
Sin before God; and that the greatest part of our joys cause sorrow in the
Saints. A Soldier rejoices in the murders he has committed; and men, in this
corrupt age, call that Valor, which, in more innocent times, would have been
termed Cruelty. A lustful person rejoices in having stolen away her that he
loves; and if he content his Ambition, by satisfying his Incontinence, the more
sins he commits, the more pleasures he tastes: A Tyrant rejoices in his
Usurpation; and if he reaps Glory by his Injustice, he thinks himself more
happy, than a Lawful Prince: A Choleric man rejoices in Revenge; though to
obey his Passion, he has violated all the Laws of Charity; he finds
Contentment in his Crime; and strangely blind, the more faulty he is, the more
happy he thinks himself; So that worldly joy is nothing else, but wickedness
unpunished, or a glorious Sin. Saeculi laetitia est impunita nequitia. Aug.
Therefore, when this passion becomes once faulty, no less than a Miracle is
required, to restore it to its innocence: For though such desires, as rise up
contrary to the Laws of God, are unjust; and that there are punishments
ordained in his kingdom, for the chastisement of irregular thoughts, yet are
these but begun offenses; and which have not, as yet, all their mischief;
though fond hopes be punishable, and entertain our vanity, yet are they not
always followed by effects; and oft-times by a fortunate Impotence, they do not
all the evil which they had promised unto themselves; our boldness is fuller of
inconsideration, than of wickedness; and an ill event makes it lose all its
Fervor: Our Sorrows and our Griefs are not obstinate; they are healed by any,
the least help, that is given them; and as they are not well pleased with
themselves, they are easily changed to their contraries: Our Fears are
slitting; the evil which caused them being once withdrawn, they leave us at
liberty; and to conclude, in a word, there is no passion incurable, but Joy:
But since it has mingled it self with sin, Nullum quodlibet scelus coram Deo
tam abominabile sit quam de peccat is gaudere, atque in eis semper jaceae. Aug.
lib. De Salutar. Docum, c. 12.
and that corrupting all the Faculties of Nature, it takes delight in evil;
Morality has no remedies more to cure it with; It Is a great disorder, when a
man glories in his sin; and that, as the Apostle says, he draws his Glory from
his own Confusion: It Is a deplorable mischief, when together with Shame, he
has lost Fear; and that the punishments, ordained by the Laws, cannot hold him
in to his duty; but a strange irregularity is it, when his sins have made him
blind; or that he knows them not, save only to defend them; but certainly, when
he takes delight in his sin, when he grounds his Felicity upon Injustice, and
that he thinks himself Happy, because he is Sinful; this is the height of evil:
To punish this impiety, it is, that the Heavens dart forth Thunders; The Earth
grows barren, for the punishment of this horrid disorder; Omnibus crimen suum
volupt ati est; laetatur ille adulterio, laetatur ille furto. Sen.
when war is kindled in a nation, or, that the Plague has dispeopled Cities,
and turned Kingdoms into desolate places, we ought to believe, that these
Judgments are the punishments of men, who place their contentment in their
offenses; and who, violating all the Laws of Nature, do unjustly mingle Joy
with Sin.

Now because this mischief, as great as it is, cease not to be common; Si
gaudes de nummo, times furem; si autem gaudes de Deo, quid times? ne tibi
quisquam auserat Deum? Deum tibi nemo ausert, si tu eum non dimiseris. Aug. in
Psalm. 37.
and that it is very hard to taste any innocent pleasure; Jesus Christ advises
us, to forsake all the pleasure of the world, and henceforth to ground our
felicity in Heaven: He bids us, by the mouth of his Apostle, not to open the
doors of our hearts, save to those pure consolations, whereof the Holy Ghost is
the Springhead; and arguing out of our own interests, he obliges us to seek
only after that Joy, which being founded on himself, cannot be molested by the
injuries of men, nor the insolence of Fortune; For if any think to place it in
our Riches, we are bound to fear the Loss thereof; if we lodge it in reputation,
we shall apprehend Calumny; and, if like Beasts we put it in those infamous
delights which slatter the Senses, and corrupt the Mind, we shall have as many
subjects of fear, as we shall see Chances that may bereave us of them.
Therefore, following St. Augustines counsel, (which we cannot suspect, since in
the slower of his age, he had tasted the delights of the world;) We should take
care to lessen all sinful pleasures, till such time as they may wholly end,
Vincat gaudium in Domino, donec siniatur gaudium in Saeculo; gaudium iu Domino
semper augeatur, gaudium in faeculo semper minuatur donec siniatur. Aug. 1.2.
De verb. Dom. Sermon. 14.
by our death; and to increase all innocent pleasure, till such time as they be
perfectly consummated in Glory. But you will peradventure say, that our Senses
are not capable of these holy delights; and that Joy, which is but a Passion of
the Soul, cannot raise it self up to such pure contentments; that it must have
some sensible thing to busy it self about; and that, whilst it is engaged in
the body, it is an unjust thing, to propound to it the felicity of Angels: This
exception is current, only, among such as think the passions of men to be no
nobler than those of Beasts: The affinity which they have with Reason, makes
them capable of all her Benefits; when they are illuminated by her Lights, they
may be set on fire by her Flames: When Grace sheddeth her influences into that
part of the soul where they reside, they labor after Eternity; and
forestalling the advantages of Glory, they elevate the body, and communicate
unto it Spiritual feelings: They make us say with the Prophet, My body and my
Soul rejoice in the living God; neglecting perishable delights, they long after
such only, as are Eternal.

The FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Nature, Proprieties and Effects of Grief and
Sorrow.
IF Nature could not extract good out of evil, and did not her Providence turn
our miseries into Felicities, we might with Reason blame her, for having made
the most troublesome of our Passions, the most Common: Homo animal querulum
eupido suis incumbens miseriis. Apul.
For, sadness seems to be Natural to us, and Joy a Stranger: All the parts of
our body may taste Sorrow and Pain; and but very few of them are Sensible of
pleasure; Pains come in throngs, and assail us by Troops; they agree to afflict
us; and though they be at discord among themselves, they join in a confederacy,
to conspire our undoing; but pleasures justle one another, when they meet, and,
as if they were jealous of good fortune, the one of them destroys the other;
Our Body is the Stage, whereon they fight; the miseries thereof arise from
their differences; and man is never more unhappy, than when he is divided by
his Delights: Griefs continue long; and as if nature took pleasure in
prolonging our punishment, she indues us with strength, to undergo them; and
makes us only so far Courageous, or so far patient, as may render us, so much
the more miserable. Voluptas tune cum maxim delectat extinguitur, nec multum
loci habet, it aque cito implet, and taedio est, and post primum impetum
marcet. Sen. De vita beata c 7.
Pleasures, especially those of the Body, endure but for a moment; their death
is never far off; and when a man will make them of longer durance, by art, they
occasion either torment, or loathing. But to make good all these reasons, and
to show that Grief is more familiar to man than Pleasure, we need only consider
the deplorable condition of our life; where for one vain contentment, we meet
with a thousand real sorrows: Scio rem non esse in nostra potestate, nec ulium
affectum servire, maxim vero eum qui ex dolor nascitur. Sen. Consol. ad
Helviam. c. 5.
For these come uncalled, they present themselves of their own proper motion,
they are linkt one to another; and like Hydra's heads, they either never die,
or after death, spring up again: But pleasures are sought for with pain; and we
are oft-times enforced to pay more for them, than they are worth: Sorrows are
sometimes entirely pure, and touch us to the quick, as they make us incapable
of consolation; but pleasures are never without some mixture of Sorrow: They
are always dipped in bitterness, and, as we see no Ro^es which are not environed
with Prickles; Proba istas quae voluptates vocantur, ubi transcenderint modum,
poenas esse. Sen. Ep. 8.
we taste no Delights, which are not accompanied with Torments; but that which
makes the misery of our condition evidently appear, is, that we are much more
sensible of Pain than of Pleasure; for a slight Malady troubles all our most
solid contentments; a Fever is able to make Conquerors forget their Victories;
and to blot out of their minds all the pomp of their Triumphs. Yet is it the
truest of all our Passions; and, if we believe Aristotle, it makes the greatest
alterations in our Souls; the rest subsist only by our imagination; and were it
not for the intelligence we hold with this Faculty, they would make no
impression upon our Senses: Desires and Hopes are but deceitful good things;
and he very well knew their nature, who termed them, the Dreams of Waking men:
Love and Hatred are the diversions of idle souls; Fear is but a shadow, and it
is hard for the Effect to be true, when the Cause is imaginary; Boldness and
Choler form Monsters to themselves, that they may defeat them; and we must not
wonder, if they so easily engage themselves in the Combat, Corpus hoe animi
pondus ac poena est * premente illo urgetur, in vinculis est. Sen. Ep. 65.
since their enemies weakness assures them of the victory; but grief is a real
evil, which sets upon the Soul and Body both at once, and makes two wounds at
one blow. I know there are some sorrows that wound only the mind, and exercise
all their might upon the noblest part of man; but if they be violent, they work
upon the body; and by a secret contagion, the pains of the Mistress become the
diseases of the Slave; the Chains that bind them together, are so straight,
that all their good and bad estate is shared between them; a contented Soul
cures her body; and a sick body afflicts its soul; this noble Captive patiently
endures all other incommodities which befall her; and, provided that her prison
be exempted from pain, she finds reasons enough to cheer up her self with: She
despises the loss of Riches; and bounding her Desires, she finds contentment in
Poverty; she neglects Honor, and knowing that it only depends upon Opinion,
she will not ground her happiness upon so frail a good; she passes by
Pleasures, and the shame which accompanies them, lesseneth the sorrow which
their loss brings her; as she is not tied to these adventious goods, she easily
forgoes them; and when Fortune has robbed her of them, she thinks her self
more at Liberty, and thinks her self not the poorer; but when the body is
assaulted, Quid faciet animus ut non doleat cum corpus vulneratur aut uritur,
cui tanto implicatur consortio ut pati possit, non dolere non possir. Aug. De
Gratia Nov. Test. quaest. 2.
and that it suffers either excessive heat, or the injuries of the Season, or
the rage of Sickness, she is constrained to sigh with it; and the Cords which
fasten them together, make their miseries common; she apprehends Death, though
she be Immortal; she fears wounds, though she be Invulnerable; and she resents
all the evils suffered by the prison which she gives life to, though she be
Spiritual.

The Stoics Philosophy, which valueth not a glorious enterprise, unless it be
impossible, would have inderdicted the commerce between the Soul and the Body;
and in a strange madness, has endeavored to separate two parts, whereof one
and the same whole are compounded; O Philosophia tyrannica sunt praecepta tua:
amare jubes, and fi quis amiserit quod amabat, dolere prohibes. Stob. Sermon. 97.
she forbad her Disciples the use of Tears; and breaking the holiest of all
Friendships, she would have the Soul to be insensible of the Bodies sufferings;
and that whilst the Body was burning in the midst of flames, the Soul should
mount up to Heaven, there to contemplate the Beauty of Virtue, or the wonders
of Nature. This Barbarous Philosophy had some Admirers, but she never had any
true Disciples: her Counsels made them despair; all that would follow her
Maxims suffered themselves to be miss-led by Vanity, and could not fence
themselves against Grief. Since the Soul has contracted so straight a society
with the Body, she must suffer with it; and since she is shed abroad into all
the parts thereof, she must complain with the mouth, weep with the eyes, Si
egregium est hostem dejicere, non minus tamen laudabile infelicis scire
misereri. Val. Max. lib. 5.
and sigh with the heart-Mercy was never forbidden but by tyrants; and this
Virtue will be praised, as long as there be any that are miserable; yet the
evils which afflict her are strangers to her; and those whom she assists, are,
for the most part, to her unknown: wherefore then shall we blame the Soul, if
she have compassion on her own body? Wherefore shall we accuse her of
Abjectness, if she share in the sorrows that assail it, and which, not being
able to hurt her in her own substance, set upon her in her Mansion House, and
revenge themselves on her, in that thing which, of all the world she loves
best? For while she is in the body, she seems to renounce her Nobility; and
that ceasing to be a pure spirit, she interesses her self in all the Delights,
and all the Vexations of her Host: his health causes contentment in her; and
his sickness is grievous to her; the most worthy part suffers in the less
worthy; and by a troublesome necessity, the Soul is unhappy in the miseries of
her body. Devovet absentes, simulachraque caerea fingit: Et miserum tenues in
jecur urget acus. Ovid. in E^ist.
They say, that Magic is so powerful, that it has found out a secret, how to
torment men in their absence, and to make them feel in their own persons all
the cruelties which she exercises upon their Images: these miserable men burn
with fire, which touches nothing but their Picture; they feel blows which they
do not receive; and the distance of place cannot free them from the fury of
their enemies: Love which is as powerful, and not much less cruel than Magic,
does this Miracle every day; when it joins two souls together, it finds a way
to make their sufferings common; men cannot offend the one, but the other
resents it, and each of them suffers as well in the body which it loves, as in
that which it inanimates: Dolores qui dicuntur carnis, animae sunt in carne and
ex carne: quid enim caro per feipsam sine anima vel dolet vel concupiseit? Aug.
1.14. De Civ. Dei. c. 19.
Since Love and Magic work these wonders, we must not marvel, if Nature,
having fastened the Soul to the Body, do make the miseries common; and if by one
only woe, she makes two Parties miserable; the participation of each others Good
and Bad, is a consequence of their Marriage; and the Heavens must do a miracle,
to give them a Dispensation from this necessity. The joy of Martyrs was no mere
effect of Reason; when they tasted any pleasure amidst their Torments, it must
needs be Grace that sweetened the rigor thereof; and he that in the fiery
Furnace changed Flames into pleasing gales of Wind, must have turned their
Torments into Delights; or if he did them not this favor, he did them a
greater; and by making the Soul not sensible of the Bodies sufferings, he
taught the whole world, that he was the Sovereign Lord of Nature. But
howsoever, all Philosophers agree, that the Soul cannot be happy in a miserable
body; and that she cannot endue it with life, without sharing in the miseries
thereof; if her noblest part be touched with Joy, while the body languisheth
with pain; that which inanimates it, must be sensible thereof; and to pay
interests for the services she gets thence, she must be miserable for company:
Even the Soul of Jesus Christ, thrice-happy as it was, failed not to be
afflicted; and a miracle was done in the order of Glory, that the society might
not be broken, which Nature has put between the Soul and the Body, it is then
agreed upon, that these two parts that compose man, cannot be separated in
their suffering; and that the torment of the one, must of necessity be the
others punishment: they love too well to forsake one another in their
afflictions; and unless the violence of pain break the chains wherewith they
are linked together, their miseries must be common: I should moreover think,
that the condition of the Soul is more deplorable, than that of the Body; for
besides, that to make her subject to sufferings, be to injure her worth, and
that it is a piece of Injustice to force her to feel evils, from which by
Nature she is exempted; she sentenceth her self to new sufferings; and the love
which she bears to her Body, Dolet anima cum corpore, cum co^oco dolet
ubilaeditur corpus; dolet fola in corpore cum tristis est; dol^t extra corpus,
ut anima divitis in inferno; corpus antem nee exanime dolet, nee animatum sine
anima do^. Aug. 1.21. De Civ. Dei. cap. 3.
obliges her to resent with sorrow the pains which it endures; she together
with it is sensible thereof, seeing that she is the Original of Sense; and as
if this torment were not sufficient, she draws another upon her self by
compassion, and afflicts her self with the Thought of all that which really
torments it; she makes much of its maladies after she has shared in the
suffering of them; she grows sad with the conceit of them; and of a single
grief makes double Martyrdom; true it is, that this Faculty has so much
commerce with the Senses, as she cannot resent their evils, without
communicating her pains unto them; her trouble disquieteth them: and as the
sufferings of the Body are cause of the like in the Soul, by a Law as just as
necessary, the pain of the Soul produces the like of the Body. This feeling is
in my Opinion, true Sadness, which is nothing else but a dislike which is
formed in the inferior part of the Soul, by the fight of Objects which are
displeasing to her.

Very strange are the effects of so Melancholic a Passion; for when she is but
in a mean, she makes them eloquent without Rhetoric; she teaches them
Figurative speeches, to exaggerate their Discontents: and to hear them speak,
the greatest pains seem to be less, Curae leves loquuntur in^entes stupent.
Sen. ^^aged.
than what they suffer: but when she is Extreme, by a clean contrary effect she
astonisheth the Spirit: she interdicts the use of the Senses; she dries up
Tears, stifles Sighs; and making men stupid, she affords Poets the liberty of
feigning, that she changes them into Rocks: when she is of long continuance,
she frees us from the earth, and raises us up to Heaven; for it is very hard
for a man in misery to covet life, when it is full of pain and Sorrow; and when
the Soul has great conflicts for a Body, which does continualy exercise her
patience. All men are not so poorly spirited, as was that Favorite of Augustus,
who did so much covet life, that Torments could not make him forgo the desire
thereof; (...) ci(...) de(...) e, (...) icos (...)res: (...)uper (...)ft,
(...), vel (...) ^ede^um ^^nce, sustine matter.
who gloried in his Verses, that he would have loved Life amidst Tortures, that
he would have been a Votary for the prolonging of it upon the Rack; and that
the cruellest sufferings that might be, would have seemed swift to him; so as
he might therein have found Life. I well believe, that excess of pain would
have made him be of another mind; and that he would have confessed, that to die
quickly, is better than to live long in pain; or had he persisted in his first
Opinion, we should be bound to confess, that poorly-spirited men are more
wilful, than are those that are courageous; and that the desire of Glory makes
not so great impression in us, as the desire of life. But to return to my
Subject, when Grief is violent, it loosneth the soul from the Body, and causes
the death of the man: for Sadness and Joy have this of resemblance in their
difference, that both of them attempt upon our lives, when they are in
extremes: The heart dilates it self by Joy; it opens it self to receive the
good which is offered, and tastes it with such excess of pleasure, as it faints
under the weight thereof, and meets with death in the midst of its Happiness:
It shuts it self up by Sorrow; claps to the door upon the evil that besieges
it; and very improvidently delivers it self into the hands of a Domestic
enemy, to free it self from one that is a stranger: for its Violence causes
its anguish, and the care he takes to defend it self, augments its pain, and
hastens its death. Oft-times also, its negligence makes it miserable; it
suffers it self to be surpised by Sorrow, for not having foreseen it; and
being no longer in a condition to defend it self, when Sorrow arriveth, it is
forced to give way thereunto. In fine, Sadness makes us weep, when it has
seized on our heart, it wageth war with our Eyes; -- Est quaeiam flere
voluptas: Expletur Lach^ymis, egeriturque dolor. Ovid. 4. Trist.
it evaporateth by Sighs; it glides down by Tears, and weakens it self in the
production thereof; for a man that weeps, eases himself, and comforts himself
whilst he complains; he finds somewhat of delight in his lamentations; and if
they be signs of his sufferings, they are likewise the cure thereof: As Choler
discharges it self by Railing, Sorrow being more innocent, drops away by
Tears, and abandons the Heart, when it gets up into the Face. Having seen its
effects, it remains that we consider what use may be made thereof, and in what
conditions it may become Innocent or Offensive.

The FIFTH DISCOURSE. Of the bad use of Pain and Sorrow.
THose who believe that Delight is Virtues most dangerous Enemy, will never
think that Sorrow can side with Vice, and we shall have much ado to persuade
them, that there be some Sadnesses which are faulty; yet we see but few of them
that are innocent; and most of those that draw tears from us, are either unjust
or unreasonable; Homo adest dolorisuo, nee ^antum quantum sentit, sed quantum
constituit, co afficitur Sen. Consol. ad Marc. c. 7.
for man is become so esseminate, that every thing hurts him. Sin has made him
so wretched, that he numbers the privation of pleasures amongst his pains; and
thinks he has just cause to afflict himself, when he possesses not all that
he desires; the number of his evils is increased by his abjectedness; and he
that in the first ages knew no other pain, but Sickness and Death, now vexes
himself for Disgrace and Poverty: The witness of his Conscience is not
sufficient, for his Virtue; and if he have not applause on Earth, joined to the
approbation of Heaven, he imagines himself to be infamous: the riches of
Nature do not satisfy his Desires; and though he have all things that are
Necessary, he thinks himself Poor if he have not somewhat that is Superfluous.
Thus every one finds his Misfortune, even in his Felicity; and the happiest are
so nice to please, as Fortune who tires her self out in their Service, cannot
take from them pretenses of Complaint: The best successes are accompanied with
circumstances which afflict them; they are displeased with a Victory, because
the Chief of the Enemy has saved himself by flight; Potest quidem cloquentia
tua quae parva funt approbare pro magnis, fed alio ista vires fervet fuas, nunc
se tota in solatium tuum confert. Noli contra te ingenio tuo uti, noli adesse
dolori tuo. Sen. ad Polyb. c. 37
and that together with his Honor, he has not lost both Life and Liberty:
They are not pleased with the taking in of a Town, because it has not drawn
along with it the Revolt of a whole Province; and they are so ingenious in
causing pain unto themselves, as their desires cannot be satisfied, nor can a
period be put to their complaints by the greatest Prosperity: Amongst such as
these, methinks Sorrow is a Slave to Pleasure; and that to revenge her self of
her Servitude, she makes her mistress sigh, and renders her miserable amidst
all her Delights: These men deserve no consolation, their sufferings are too
unjust to oblige Philosophy to find them a remedy; it is reasonable that their
wretchlesness should be their punishment, and that they should languish in
Misery, since they know not how to live happily. Plerique Lachrymas: fundunt ut
oftendant, and toties siccos oculos habent; quoties spectator desuit: Adeo
penitus hoc se malum fixit, ut in simulationem, etiam simplicissima res dolor
veniat. Sen. De Tranquil, c. 15.
There are others who glory in their Misfortunes, and make the sincerest of our
Passions serve their Ambition: they bewail the loss of their friends in
whatsoever Companies they come; they will have their Grief to be a mark of
their Love, and that men should believe that they know how to Love well, since
they know so well how to Lament; they never dry their eyes, but when they are
in their Closet; they think their Tears should not be well employed, if they
wanted Witnesses; and they teach us, that they are not sincere, since they seek
out such as may approve of them. Sorrow which is lodged in our hearts,
accompanies us in all places, and gives freedom to her Sighs, and comforts
her self in her Complaints in Solitary places, where nothing can divert her:
But the sincerity thereof, makes ^t not be the less unjust, since it oft-times
produces effects contrary to our desires, and makes us forget those which it
enforces us to bewail; Nulla res citius venit in odium, quam dolor. Sen. Ep.
63.
for there is nothing which we are sooner tired with, than Grief: Having
nothing lovely in it, it becomes quickly odious, it wearies them that serve it;
and to free themselves from it, they endeavor to quit themselves of the Love
that did occasion it; they blot out of their memory the Remembrance of their
friends, that they may be no longer bound to Lament them; and with an
Ingratitude which always follows Immoderate Grief, they renounce Friendship to
cure themselves of Sorrow. I know very well, we are permitted to bewail the loss
of our Friends; and that Tears are the prime duties that Nature has obliged us
to render them; Id agamus, ut jucunda fiat nobis amissorum recordatio. Nemo
libenter ad id redit, quod non sine tormento cogitaturus est. Sen. Ep. 63.
but the current thereof must be quickly stopped: and calling in Reason to our
assistance, we must make their memory delightful to us, if we will have it be
Immortal. Men do not willingly think much upon that which torments them; and
when once they have given over those sad delights which Nature has placed in
Tears, they look upon them as punishments, and shun all occasions which may
make them shed them.

But certainly of all Discontents which causelessly prejudice our Souls,
methinks there is none more infamous than that of Envy; for Sorrow caused by
the Privation of Pleasures, is not so unjust, but that it may have some
Pretenses to defend it self; if it exceed the bounds of Reason, it finds
Excuses; and we see some who find not so much trouble in withstanding Sorrow,
as in abstaining from Delight: They are better fitted for Fortitude, than for
Temperance; and may be sooner made Martyrs, than Continent. The death of
Friends is a loss sufficient to be lamented; and Friendship is a virtue
beautiful enough to have the glory thereof sought after, either by counterfeit
or real Tears. All these Sorrows have Evil for their Object; and if their
Excesses be unjust, their Causes may admit of Excuse; but Envy is a Sorrow as
unworthy as unjust; and look upon it on what side you please, it can neither
have Pretense nor Color: Virtut is comes invidia est, plerunque bonos
sectatur. Cic. 4. ad Heren.
It gives against all the Virtues, and maliciously declares war with all those
Noble Habits which make up the purest Glory of our Souls. I know that all Vices
are Enemies to Virtue, and that they are not to be reconciled by Morality.
Nature accords the Elements; and tempering their qualities, employs them in the
composure of all her Works; but humane Wisdom, with all its cunning, cannot
reconcile the differences between Vice and Virtue, nor lodge them together in
the same person; yet is the Hatred of other Virtues regulated; they only
undertake every one its contrary Virtue; and when by an unjust Victory, they
have triumphed over this noble Enemy, their fury is appeased, and they leave
the man in some sort of quiet. Mala caetera habent terminum: invidia aurem est
malum jugiter perseverans, and sine fine peccatum: Hinc vultus minax, pallor in
facie, stridor in dentibus, manus ad caedem prompta, etiamsi a gladio interim
vacua, odio tamen furiatae mentis armata. Cypr. ser. De Livore.
Avarice persecutes only Liberality; Ambition pursues only Modesty; and
Falsehood, for all its Impudence, opposes Truth only: but Envy, more furious
than all these Monsters, makes war against all the Virtues; and as if she were
a poison compounded of all the rest, she at the same time sets upon Charity,
Justice, Mercy and Humility: For if Charity make all things common, Envy
appropriates them; and takes not so much pleasure in the enjoying of them her
self, as in the bereaving others of them: if Justice give every one that which
appertains to him, Envy keeps all for her self, and not willing to acknowledge
any other merit than her own, she thinks all rewards are due to her; if Mercy
be afflicted at other men's harms, Envy rejoices at them; and out of an Excess
of Malice, makes them her Felicity; if Humility despise Nothing, Envy finds
fault with All things, and endeavors to raise her Reputation upon the Ruins
of Virtue, so that she is an Universal Evil: and this detestable Mischief is
composed all at once of Avarice, Nunquam eminentia invidia carent: Assidua est
eminentis fortunae comes invidia, altissimisque semper adhaeret, Vel. Peter
cul. lib. 1.
Pride, and Cruelty; But though she be animated against all Virtues, she keeps
her chief endeavors against the Noblest, and assails them with most Fervor,
which have most luster in them: she is like those troublesome Flies which
betake themselves to the fairest Flowers in the Garden; or is like Thunder
which chooses out the greatest Trees, and discharges its fury upon the fairest
Mountains: her courage appears only in the worth of the Enemy she undertakes;
she will be thought generous, because she is Insolent, and she glories in the
Greatness of her fault.

From this lewd quality proceeds another, which is not much less troublesome;
for as she hates Virtue, she cannot endure any Virtuous person: Her Hatred
persuades her to Revenge; when her Calumny cannot prevail over the Glory of the
Inno^ent, she attempts their Life; after having made a trial by Backbiting, she
makes Murder her main Work, and sheds their Blood, whose Reputation she could
not blemish: No Parricide was ever committed without her counsel; and of as
many Cruelties as are imputed to Hatred or Choler, the most Famous are the
Works of Envy.

In the beginning of the world, she armed Cains hand against his Brother; she
furnished him with weapons, before she had forced Iron from out the bowels of
the Earth. In the age which succeeded next to that of Innocence, Invidia
pestiferum malum, hominem in Daemonem convertit, per eam mors venit in mundum,
propter ipsam Abel est interemptus, David caedis periculum subiit, and Iudai
Christum interfecerunt. Chrysostom in Hom.
she taught him to commit the first Murder; and Death, which was but the
punishment of sin, through her Counsels, became a Crime: she stirred up the
Children of Jacob against their Brother Joseph; his future glory made them
Jealous; and that they might withstand the Designs of Heaven, they made him a
Slave, whom Heaven had ordained to be a King: she set on Saul against David,
and in a blind Fury persuaded him, That nothing is more pernicious to Kings,
than the Greatness of their Subjects; and that the Power of a Forreigner is not
so dreadful to them, as the Worth of a Domestic.

But to go higher yet, and come even to the rise of all mischief; Invidia
vitium diabolicum quo solo Diabolus reus est: Non enim ei dicitur ut da^netur,
adulterium commisisti, furtum ^fecisti, villam aliena^ rapuisti, sed homini
stanti invidisti. Aug. l. 1. De Doctrina Christi.
it was she that animated the Devil against men; that inspired him with the
means how to be their ruin before they were born, and to slay them in the
person of their Father. If she work thus much evil to her Enemies, she is cause
of no less to her self; and she is as well her own punishment, as Virtues; for
she sees no prosperity which does not afflict her: Her neighbors good fortune
causes her misery; she bewails their good success; and there needs but a happy
man, to make her eternally wretched: She confounds the nature of good and evil,
to augment her dislikes; and out of an irregularity, which is just only because
it is harmful to her, she rejoices at mischief, and afflicts her self at that
which is good: She sheds rivers of Tears, when others make Bonefires; and in
public calamities, finds occasions for her self to Rejoice, for her self to
Triumph: She is pleased with her own loss, so it draw along with it that of her
Enemy; Obirascens. Fortunae invidus, and de seculo querens, and in angulos se
retrahens, poenae incubat suae. Sen. De Tranquil. c. 2.
and it is so natural to her to do unjust things, as she buys the pleasure of
Revenge at the cost of her own life; she is angry with Fortune, complains of
her own times; and when she cannot hinder her Enemies good success, Despair
confines her to solitary places; or else entertaining her self with her own
Discontents, she suffers the punishment due to all the faults she has
committed. To comfort her self in her Misery, she flatters her self with
Nobleness; and would persuade the World, That if she blame other men's Virtues,
it is because she observes some Faults therein. To hear her speak, you would
think that she has derived her pedigree from Heaven; and that the Earth has
not Crowns nor Scepters enough to honor her: She believes that all honors are
due to her, and that she is robed of all the respects that are not given her.
In fine, she is as Insolent, as Virtue is Modest; and her Language is as
Impudent, as that of her Enemy is reserved: Invidia, quae semper sibi est
inimica: nam qui invidet sibi quidem ignominiam facit, illi autem qui invidet,
gloriam parit, Chrysostom. sup Matthew.
Nevertheless, there is nothing more poor and mean that her Courage; she is
always in the dust; and if blind Fortune sometimes raise her up, she
immediately abaseth her self, and humbles her self, even beneath those things
which she cries down: For it is an approved Maxim, that whatsoever causes
Envy, is above us: By our own judgment, we give the advantage to our Equals,
when their Merit raises Jealousy in us. A Prince becomes a slave to his
Subjects, when he begins to grow fearful of their Prosperity; he descends from
his Throne, and falls from his greatness, as soon as ever he wishes for what
they possess; when he conceives a Jealousy at their good Fortune, he judges
theirs, in his opinion, to be better than his own: Therefore it is, that that
famous man, who made himself Illustrious by his Misfortunes, Invidia parvulum
occidit. Job. c. 5. Sinon invideris, major eris: nam qui invidet, minor est.
Sen. in Proverb.
and whose Innocence was exercised by so many heavy Visitations, has observed,
that Envy was the Passion of Abject Souls; and that she consumes only such
poor-spirited men, as can undertake nothing of Generous: For had they a more
noble Heart, and had Virtue given them a share of that Satisfaction that she
always bears about her, they would be content with their Condition, and would
not frame such Wishes, as should discover their Misery: If they observed any
rare Perfection in their Equals, they would give it such Praises, as it
deserves; or in a noble Emulation, strive to attain thereunto: But as the Vice
which tyranniseth over them, creeps upon the Ground; they conceive none but
poor desires, nay, when they force themselves to look higher, they do the more
abase themselves; and we find by experience, that their appearing Greatness is
but an effect of their real misery.

To all these mischiefs we may yet add that of Poverty, which is not Envy's
least punishment; for she has this of Common with Avarice; That her riches
never content her: Nostra nos sine comparatione delectent: nunquam erit foelix,
quem torquebit foelicior. Sen. 1.3. de Ira c. 30.
She has a thousand eyes to see her Neighbors Prosperity, but is blind to see
her own; she only considers such Goods as may afflict her, and weighs not those
which may comfort her; she thinks she wants whatsoever another does possess;
and ingenious to her pain, she augments another felicity, to add unto her own
misery: So as to punish the Envious, you need only leave them to their own
Fury; without going about to chastise their Insolence, it will suffice to leave
them to themselves; and to suffer the Devil that possesses them, to take
vengeance for their fault. These are the Excesses which Grief is capable of,
when not well guided: Let us see now, to what Virtues it may be Serviceable,
when she is Obedient to Reason; and that following the motions of Grace, she is
afflicted for the Sins of the Wicked, or for the Miseries of Good men.

The SIXTH DISCOURSE. Of the good use of Grief.
WE must not wonder if the Stoics condemn grief, since they approve not of
those Virtues which it produces; and that they will have their wise man to
taste so pure a Joy, as shall not be mingled with the least dislike: For they
raise him above Storms, and endevor to persuade us, that he sees all Tempests
formed under his feet, and is not at all therewith agitated; they assure us
that upon the Sacking of a Town, or ruin of a State, he is no more moved, than
is their Jupiter at the Dissolution of the World; and that placing all his
Happiness in Himself, he looks upon all the bad events of Fortune with an equal
eye: If he shed some Tears upon the Tomb of his Ancestors, or chance to sigh
for his perishing Country, his Soul is no whit moved; -- Lachrymae volvuntur
inanes? Men's immota manet. Virg. AE^eid.
and he beholds all those disasters without any Disquiet. Let this severe
Philosophy say what it will, I do not believe that her doctrine can destroy
Nature; nor that she ever made a Wise man of one from whom she takes the
Feelings of man. Wisdom is no enemy to Nature; and Heaven had never united the
soul to the body, had it had a purpose to hinder their communication: In hoc
omnis hyperbole extenditur, ut ad verum mendacio veniat. Nunquam tantum sperat
quantum audet; sed incredib^lia ass^rmat, ut ad credibilia perveni^t. Sen
^enes. 1.7. c. 23.
These Philosophers when they made their proud boasts, have, in my opinion,
imitated those Orators, who making Hyperboles, lead us to Truth, by Falsehood;
and assure us of that which is Impossible, that they may persuade us of that
which is Difficult: They did (certainly) believe, that the mind ought to have
some commerce with the Body, and that the sufferings of the one ought to cause
Grief in the other; but lest the Nobler part should become slave to the less
Noble, they have endeavored to preserve her Liberty by Rigor; and to make her
insensible, to the end, that she might always keep up her Sovereignty: For who
could imagine that men so judicious in all things, should lose their Judgment
in this; and that to defend Virtue, they should abandon Reason? All the Glory
of their Discourse tended only to maintain the Soul in her Empire; and lest she
might faint under the Weaknesses of the Body, they have authorized her Power by
Terms, more Eloquent than True: They conceited, that to reduce us to Reason, we
must be raised a little above it; and that to afford nothing of Superfluous to
our Senses, we must deny them what is Necessary. They believe then, with us,
that Grief may accord with Reason, and that there are occasions, wherein not to
be afflicted is to be Impious: But I know not, whether or no; we can persuade
them, that Repentance and Mercy are glorious Virtues; and that after having
bewailed our own Offenses, we are bound to lament our Neighbors Miseries.

Maxima est peccati poena, fecisse: nec quisquam gravius afficitur, quam qui ad
supplicium poenitentiae traditur. Sen. 1.3. de Ira c. 26.
These Philosophers are austere, only because they are too Virtuous; they
condemn not Penitency, save only because they love Fidelity; and if they blame
Repentance, it is because it presupposes a Fault: they would have us never to
forsake Virtue, and that we should deal more severely with vicious men, than
with those who desert the Discipline of War: their zeal deserves some excuse;
but not being accompanied with Wisdom, it produces an effect contrary to their
intent; for it augmenteth the number of the Guilty, whilst it thinks to
diminish them: it makes the weak wilful; and taking away the Remedy, it
changes their Infirmities into incurable Diseases. Scit Deus noster non sempo^
hominem integrum stare, sed frequenter aut peccare corpore, aut vacillare
S^rmon^: [deo Poenitentia viam docuit, per quam possit and destructa corrigere,
and lapsa reparare. Aug. de Poenit.
Man is not so constant as the Angels, and when he loves what is good, he is
not so firmly fixed thereunto, but that he may be made to forgo it; neither is
he so opinionated as is the Devil; and when he affects evil, he is not so
strongly engaged thereto, but that he may be taken off from it. If this
Inconstancy be cause of his sin, it is also the Remedy thereof; and if it assist
to make him Guilty, it contributes also to the making of him Innocent: He is
nauseated with sin, he is weary of Impiety, and he ows these good effects to
the weakness of his Nature: Had he more Strength, he would be more Obstinate;
and Grace which converts him, would find more Resistance, were he more firm in
his Resolutions: Heaven makes this Defect serve for our Advantage; and its
Providence husbandeth our Weakness, to work our Welfare thereby; for when it
has touched the hearts of sinners, and that preventing their Will by its
Grace, it makes them detest their Wickedness; they end the work of their
Conversion, by the aid of Penitence; and in Sorrow seek out means to appease
divine Justice: they punish their Bodies to afflict their Souls; they sentence
the slave to bewail the sin of his Master, because he is accessory thereunto;
and knowing that all the harm, which either the Master or the Slave do to
themselves, proceeds from the too much Love they bear unto themselves; they
oblige them, Non separentur in mercede and in poena, anima and caro, quas opera
conjungit. Tert. 1. De Resurrect. carn. cap. 15.
for their own good, to hate themselves; they oft-times punish them both with
the same punishment, because their offenses are Reciprocal; and do justly
conjoyn those in the suffering, which were not separated in the Fault. Thus the
whole man satisfies God; and the two parts whereof he is composed, do by
Sorrow find pardon for their sins. I am not ignorant, that Libertines laugh at
these duties; and that they place repentance in the number of those remedies
which are as shameful as unprofitable; Nunquam sap^entem facti sui poenitere,
nunquam emendare quod fecerit, nec mutare consilium jactant Stoici. Sen. Benef.
1.4. c. 34.
for, wherefore (say they) do you afflict your self for an evil that has no
more a Being? wherefore do you revive it by your Sorrow? wherefore with a
greater piece of Imprudence would you change what is past, and wish in vain,
that what is already done, had not been done? These bad Reasons will not divert
sinners from Repentance; and if wicked men have no better weapons wherewithal
to fight against Piety, they will never have much advantage over her: Nature
authorizeth daily the tears we shed for misfortunes past; a sad remembrance
draws sighs from us; and we cannot think upon the evils which we have either
escaped or undergone, without some sense, either of Delight or Sorrow: As the
time that is past, makes the more certain part of our life, so does it likewise
awaken the truest Passions, and afford us the most sensible motions: Time to
come is too uncertain to vex ones self much about it; Calamitosus est animus
suturi anxius, and ante miserias miser qui futuro torquetur. Sen. Ep. 98.
and the events which it produces are too hidden to make any great Impression
upon our desires, Time past is the source of our Sorrows; and we have reason to
afflict our selves for a thing which we cannot help; if it did only threaten
us, we should endeavor to defend our selves from it; and if it hung over our
heads, we should employ our wisdom to divert it; but when it has once
happened, we have no more to do, but to be sorry for it; and of as many
Passions as may serve to comfort us in present evils, or such as are to come,
There is none but this, from whence we can draw consolation in our past
afflictions. Could we recall our friends from their Graves, and revive their
Ashes by our cares, we would not consume our selves in our bootless Sorrows;
but since there is no cure for Death, and that Physic which can preserve Life,
cannot restore it when it is lost; Quid luges quem suscitare non potes? non
lugerem, si suscitare possem. Cynic.
we have so much the more reason to complain, as our loss is more certain; and
our tears appear to be so much the more just, as the evil which we suffer, is
the less capable of Remedy. Thus Penitence is not to be blamed, if not being
able to remedy a fault already committed, she yield her self up to Sorrow; and
if finding no means how to repair her offense, she witness her sensibleness
thereof by sighs: she is the better grounded in this belief, for that she
knows, Tears are not unprofitable for her; and that mingled with the Blood of
Jesus Christ, they may wash away all her offenses: Upon other occasions, they
do no miracles; if they comfort the living, they do not raise up the dead
again; if they assure the afflicted of our love, they do not free them from
their troubles; by thinking to aid the miserable, they augment their number;
and instead of euring the Malady, they serve only to make it the more
contagious: But those of Repentance drown sins, save sinners, and appease Gods
just anger; for he is so good, as he is pacified with a little Sorrow: He takes
the dislike of of an offense for satisfaction; and knowing that we cannot alter
things that are past, he is contented with our repenting for them: As he reads
men's hearts, and understands the Tears which flow from a real Grief: he never
denies them pardon; and before his Throne it is sufficient, for an offender to
get absolution, if he confess his wickedness: At the Tribunal of Judges, men
oft-times confound Guilt with Innocence; they absolve a man who defends his sin
by a Falsehood; and let him but deny a Murder, of which there is no proof, he
forces the Judge to give sentence on his side; but if he yields under the
violence of tortures, or is surprised in his answers, his Tears do not blot out
his sins, nor will his confession preserve his life. Cum igitur poenitentia
provolvit hominem, magis relevat: cum squalidum facie, magis mundatum reddit:
cum accusat, excusat: cum condemnat, absolvit. Tert. de Paenit. c. 9.
In Repentance a man need but acknowledge his Fault, and he is sure to obtain
pardon for it; the Laws thereof are so mild, as God forgets all the injuries
done unto him, provided sinners mingle a little love with their Repentance, and
that the fear of punishment be not the only motive of their Sorrow. Our own
Interests do therefore oblige us to defend a Passion which is so advantageous
to us; and since the hope of our Salvation is grounded upon a Virtue, which ows
its Birth to Sorrow, we ought to uphold her cause, and to employ our best
Reasons to authorize her, who does help to justify us.

Mercy will find no less credit among men, than Repentance; and as there is
none so happy, but he may become miserable, I persuade my self, she will not
want Advocates: Misericordia vitium est animorum nimis miseriae faventium. Sen.
1.2. De Clem. c. 6.
The Stoics calumnies will not be able to banish her from off the Earth; the
weaknesses which men impute to her, will not stain her glory: If Injustice beat
down her Altars, Piety will erect others to her; and if her Temples of Stone
and Marble be thrown to the ground, men will build up living and reasonable
Temples to her. They accuse her of being unjust, and that she rather considers
the Misfortune, than the Sin of Offenders: they blame her for bestowing Tears
on persons that deserve them not; and that she would break open prisons, Bonum
est delere de malis aliorum, and pia est illa tristitia, and, si dici potest,
beata miseria. Aug. ad Sebast. Ep. 145
that she might confusedly let loose from thence, as well the Guilty as the
Innocent: But whatsoever these inhumane Philosophers say, it is the best
employment we can make of Sorrow; it is the most sanctified use of Grief; it is
that feeling of the Soul, which is most Universally approved of; and men must
have proceeded from Rocks, or lived amongst Tigers, if they condemn so
reasonable a Passion: She takes her Birth from Misery; she imitates her Mother;
and she is so like unto her, as she her self is another Misery: She makes her
self Master of the Heart by the Eyes; and coming forth by the way she entered
at, she disperseth her self in Tears, and evaporates in sighs: Though she be
accused of Weakness, she stirs our desires; and interessing us in the
afflictions of the miserable, she endues us with strength to assist them: After
she has witnessed her fellow-feeling of them by her Sorrow, she gives them
testimony of her power by the Effects; and giving out her Orders from the
Throne where she is seated, Quid est autem misericordia, nisi alienae miseriae
quaedam in nostro cord compassio, qua utique si possimus, subvenire
compellimur? Aug. 1. De Civ. Dei. c. 5.
she engages the Eyes to shed Tears for them, the Mouth to comfort them, and
the Hands to relieve them: She descends into Dungeons with Prisoners; she
mounts up to the Scaffold with Malefafactors; she assisteth the afflicted with
her Counsels; she distributes her Goods amongst the Poor; and not seeking any
other motive than Misery, it suffices her that a man be unfortunate, to take
him into her protection.

All these high endeavors proceed only from Sorrow; and were not Grief mingled
with Mercy, she would not operate with so much Vigor; for Self love has put us
so much out of order, that divine Providence has been fain to make us
miserable by Pity, so to interess us in the Miseries of others; did not she
touch us, we should not seek out a remedy for them; neither should we ever
dream of curing a malady, which were indifferent to us; Nihil ad misericordiam
sic inclinat, atque proprii periculi cogitatio. Aug. ad Gal.
but because Mercy is a sanctified Contagion, which makes us sensible of our
Neighbors sufferings; we aid him to comfort our selves: and we help him at his
need, to free our selves from the Grief we feel.

Thus Misery teaches us Mercy; and our own evil teaches us to cure that of
others: Who can condemn so just a Resentment? and who dares blame a Passion, to
which we owe our Innocence? Misericordia virtus tantaest, ut sine illa, caetera
etsi esse possint, prodesse tamen non possint: Quamvis enim aliquis sit castus
and sobrius, si misericors tamen non est, misericordiam non meretur. D. Leo. in
Ser.
If the miserable are sacred Persons, are the merciful profane? if we respect
them whom Fortune has set upon, shall we censure those that assist them? if we
admire Patience, shall we despise Compassion? if Misery draw Tears from our
Eyes, shall not Mercy draw Praises from our Mouths? and shall not we adore a
Virtue, which Jesus Christ has pleased to consecrate in his own Person? Before
the Mystery of the Incarnation, he had only that mercy which delivers the
unfortunate; without tasting their Misfortunes; which cures the Disease,
without taking it upon her; and which comforts the afflicted, without adding to
their number: He saw our Miseries, but had no Feeling of them; his goodness
making use of his Power, succored the miserable, and was not afflicted with
them: But since he has vouchsafed to make himself Man, he has mingled his
Tears with ours; he has suffered our Sorrows to wound his Soul; and was
willing to suffer our Miseries, that he might learn Mercy. We may then lawfully
exercise a Virtue which Jesus Christ has Practiced; and may well become
miserable, without any stain to our Honor; since the Son of God, in whose
Person the least shadow of Defect cannot be found, would be sensible of his
friends Afflictions, and shed Tears to bemoan them, before he would work
Miracles to relieve them.

All the Philosophers do also honor this Passion; and to exalt her merit which
the Stoics have in vain labored to debase, they give her a glorious Title,
and admit her into the company of the Virtues; they acknowledge, she may be
serviceable to Reason is all the chances of Life; Servit antem iste motus
rationi, quando ita praebetur Misericordia, ut Justitia conservetur: five cum
indigenti tribuitur, five cum ignoscitur poenitenti, Aug. 1 9. De Civ. Dei. c.
5.
and that, provided she agree with Justice, a man must be (...), not to
reverence her, when she helps the poor, and pardons the guilty.

From all these Discourses, it is easy to gather, that there is no Passion in
our Soul, which may not profitably be husbanded by Reason and by Grace: For to
sum up, in a few words, all which has been said in this Work; Love may be
changed into a Holy Friendship, and Hatred may become a Just Indignation,
Do^^^s moderated, are helps to acquit all the Virtues, and Eschewing is
Chastities chief Defense. Hope encourages (...) gallant Actions, and Despair
diverts us from Rash Enterprises; Fear is (...) to Wisdom, and Audacity to
(...) furious as it is, takes (...) with Justices, Innocent Joy is a fore^a
(...) of Felicity; and Grief is a short pain which frees us from
Eternal^orments; so as, but Welfare depends only upon the Use of the Passions;
and Virtue subsists only by the good employment of our Souls Motions.

FINIS.

