SENECA'S ANSWER, TO LVCILIVS HIS QVAERE; Why Good Men suffer misfortunes
seeing there is a Divine Providence?

Written Originally in Latin Prose, AND Now Translated into English Verse, BY
E. S. Esquire

Calamitas, Virtutis occasio. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to
be sold at his shop at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

TO His most Sacred MAJESTY.
SIR,
WHilst I contemplate Your Sufferings, see You (as it were) personating to the
life that sad K. James his Pattern of a Kings Inauguration.
Pattern, which from the Archetype of Royal Patience (the King of Heaven
himself,) the Pen of Your Great Father drew, behold You though under all the
Pressures of these times, yet still above them, and see even those Crosses
intended for Your Afflictions, stoop, and bow to You, paying You, (as it were)
that Homage which Your people should, and in acknowledgement of Your new
Acquest of passive Glory (a Glory, which till Your Majesty's sufferings
manifested the contrary, was held inconsistent with that of a Crown) saluting
You with the sad, yet sacred Title of the King of Sorrows; I from thence assume
the humble boldness to think that this Piece of Seneca of The Sufferings of
Good Men, might at this time be made a pardonable, (I durst not think it a
suitable) Present for Your Majesty's view; wherein as by a weak Reflex, Your
Majesty may perceive a glympse of Your own invincible Patience, and inimitable
Magnamity; in in bearing and ever-mastering Misfortunes. How far beyond what
now it has, had the Divine Pencill of Seneca set off this darke-shadowed
Tablet, had he lived in these Times to have heightened it with the luster of
Your Majesty's Example!

Sir, whilst the times are such, that they deny me according to my particular
Duty to serve the just Commands of Your Majesty's Will, I presume (though by so
mean a Demonstration) to show Your Majesty that yet I have a Will to serve You.
And if Your Majesty shall be pleased to pardon this humble Address, it shall
abundantly satisfy his Modesty who cherishes not in himself so proud a Hope
as to look for an Acceptance.

God who regards Your Majesty's Sufferings, for these Minutes of Afflictions,
send You Eternity of Joys, and Crown You with Glory on a Heavenly Throne;
which that he would be pleased (as in a Type) to shadow forth unto You in the
Happiness of a speedy and a glorious Restoration to This of Your Majesty's
Kingdoms; Is the truly zealous, and the justly-bounden Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject and Servant, EDW. SHERBURNE.

To the Reader.
THat Verse is no mis-becomming Attire for the grave Moralls of Seneca, is
manifest by the late His Consolation to Marci^ translated into Verse by Sr. R.
F.
Example of a Worthy Pen: That among all those Excellent Moral Tracts of his,
this is one of the Chief, we have the Testimony of the learned Lipsius: who
honors this with the Title of a Golden Work. Lastly, how suitable this Piece
may seem to the present Condition of diverse Good Men, honest and loyal
Sufferers in these bad Times. The subject matter thereof will clearly
evidence; To whom if at any time it shall prove in the Reading (as sometimes it
did to the Translatour in the doing thereof) not an unpleasing Divertisement,
it shall not only excuse, but Crown his Attempt; And warrant the Publication
above any License of an Imprimatur. All that on Seneca's behalf is desired by
his Interpreter is this; That in those Places where the Reader shall find him
speak like a Stoic and a Roman, he would bear with him; And for that, in
others, he shall make him a large Requital, teach him to do like a Christian.

Farewell.
SENECA'S ANSWER, TO LUCILIUS HIS QVAERE, etc.

PART. 1.
ARGUMENT.
To prove there is Providence were vain,
Since it is Effects We see so plain.
THou asks't of me (my Dear Lucilius!) whence,
(If this World governed be by Providence,)
So many Evils should good men befall?
This would, in our works Context, (where we
Prove, that a Providence does all things steare, (shall
And that God's present with us every where)
Be fitlier answered: but since pleased thou art,
That from the Whole I should divide this Part;
And clear this seeming Contradiction,
Letting the rest of the Dispute alone;
I willingly to this shall condescend,
And easily the Gods just Cause defend.
'Twill seem but needless to be here maintained,
That this great Fabric cannot be sustained
Without some Guardian, or that the set Dance,
And certain Motions of the Stars, by Chance
Are not incited, nor distracted run
In a wild, loose, Arietation.
Or that Heavens swift, un-interrupted Course
Moves b'an eternal Laws preord'red force.
Or that that Cause which constant Influence
To all things does, in Earth, and Seas dispense;
And those bright Sparks (like Gems in Rings of Gold)
We in their several Spheres inchac'd, behold;
Is not the Order of some wandering Power.
That if these things to some rash Coiture
Had their convention owed, they had not then
With such rare Artifice disposed been.
That heavy Earth unmoved should behold
The flying Heavens about her swiftly rolled.
That Seas through Valleys spread, moisten the ground.
That they t'admit increase are never found
By that Access their Watery Tribute brings
From all the Inland Rivers, and fresh Springs,
That from small Seeds such Mighty Bodies grow,
That none even of these things, which have least show
Of Certainty and most confused seem,
(As We, Clouds, Rain, and Thunderclaps esteem,
Fires which with Horror blaze from Mountalnes split,
Earthquakes, when she seems shook with a Cold fit.
And those tumultuous Motions, which appear
So often raised about this Earthly Sphere)
Without a reason, (though they are thought by some
The Births of sudden violence) do come.
But have their proper Causes, well as those
Which We, 'cause strange, Miraculous suppose.
As Warm Springs are which gellid streams surround,
And Islands from the Sea new rising, found.
Then if one mark how the retiring Maine
The shore discloses, and conceales again;
He Will think that the distracted Waters run
As 'twere, with a blind volutation,
In It one another, and again from thence
With a swift Course, and furious violence
Break forth, and with augmented Streams, retreat
Unto their wonted Home, and Proper Seat.
When they indeed do by degrees increase,
And to a day, or hour* grow more, or less,
As the Moons Influence does them despose;
Governed by which, the Ocean ebbs, and flows.
But these We leave until their due Time; since
Thou doubt'st not, but complaint'st of, Providence.
I Will reconcile thee to the Gods above,
Who best, unto the Best of M^rtalls prove.
For even by Natur's laws it is withstood
That good things should prove hurtful to the Good.
'Twixt God and Good men there is a friendship laid
Still Firm, by virtu's Mediation made.
Did I say Friendship? An inforcive Tie
Or likeness rather, and a Sympathy.
Since a Good man differs from God alone
In time; his amulous Scholar, and his own
Legittimate Issue: whom that Royal Sire
(Who virtuous Acts severely does require)
As Austere Parents (who make their's endure
Labor and toil) to hardship does inure.
If then the Good, (Men after Gods own will,)
Thou shall behold to toil, sweat, climb the Hill,
And see the bad to sport with Wanton Pride
Floating in Pleasures at a high Spring Tide.
Think with thy self, that We delight to have
A Modest Child, though a licencious slave.
That this, too severe disciplin's restrained,
Whilst that, in his bold liberti's maintained.
The self same course thou may observe God take,
He does no darling of a Good Man make;
But tryes, and hardens, makes him Proose' against Ill;
And brings him to the Bent of his own Will.
PART. II.
ARGUMENT.
God does good Men, (like a severe
Father,) Afflictions learn to bear.
Quest.
HOw comes it that Adversity does then
So often happen to the Best of Men?
Ans. No Ill te a good Man can r'ebefall,
Since Contraries can never mix at All.
For as the Land so many fresh Streams powers
Into the Sea, the Heaven so many showers,
And yet the Saltness of the Ocean
Can neither change, nor lessen: so, nor can
His fixed Resolutions alt'red be
Though stormed on All sides by Adversity,
He Is still the same, and whatsoever ensue
Be It good, or Bad, he brings to his own Huc.
Since he is above all outward Accidents;
Not that I mean of these he has no sense,
But that he masters them; and with a State
Composed, bears up against the Tide of Fate,
Counts Crosses Exercises of the Mind:
For where is that man, to honest things inclined,
Affects not lawful labor? And's not prone
To good Employments though with hazard, known?
And to a Soul industrious, what less
Then a tormenting Pain, is Idleness?
We see that Wrastlers least their strength impair,
T'incounter with the strongest still prepare.
Before the Combat craving from their Foes
That they would them with their whole strength oppose.
Enduring Strokes, and Gripes; and if too weak
One Foe they find, they more Opponents seek.
Virtue without an Adversary, pines.
Then she alone in her true greatness shines,
Then does her value, and her strength appear,
When she by suffering shows what she can bear.
And know from me, this is a Good Man's State,
Not to fear Crosses, nor complain of Fate,
Who should what ever happens to him, take
As sent for good, and his advantage make.
Not what, but how we suffer, is the thing.
See not how Fathers, unlike Mothers, bring
Their children up? they with an early care
Them for their studies, and their Books prepare,
Nor suffer them though on a Holy Day.
(A time for liberty and ease) to play;
But exercise in some laborious course,
Sweat from their Brows, Tears from their eyes, enforce.
When Mothers hug them in their Bosoms laid,
Nor suffer them to stir out of the shade,
Tears, sadness, toil, are things they must not know.
God to Good men a Fathers mind does show,
And loves with a more strong affection.
"Let them (says he) that would for mine be known,
"Be with grief labor, and with Crosses tried,
"That so they may be truly fortified.
Full Bodies languish through dull Idleness;
Whom toil, and their own weight alike oppress,
Unhurt Felicity, no wound can bide;
When with her Crosses she has been used to chide;
Then through all Injuries that Chance does lay
l'obstruct her Passage she does force her way;
Yields to no ills, though overpowered by might,
But on her knees, though down, maintains the fight.
Obj. Thou wondrest God that so the Good does love,
Who would they should the best of Mortals prove,
And the most excellent, should yet by's will
Make them the Exercise of Fortune ^^ill.
Answ. I wonder not, if Gods with pleased eyes
See great men combat with Calamities.
It Is to ourselves sometimes a pleasing sight
To see a Youth with an undaunted sprite,
The rough assault of some fierce Beast oppose,
Or fearelesse with a raging Lion close.
And so much more delightful is the sight,
As the Youth's comely, who performs the fight.
These are not spectacles for Gods to see,
But childish Scones of humane vanity.
Behold a sight, on which as if intent
On its chief work, Heavens eye may well be bent.
A sight worth Heaven indeed; to see a mind
Firmly resolved to adverse Fortune joined;
As that he scorned Fury, seemed to brave.
What nobler spectacle great Jove could have
On Earth, I know not, would he daigne to look,
Then to see Cato all his Party broke,
Upright yet amidst the Public Ruins stand.
"Though All (says he) now stoop to ones Command,
"Though Legions guard the Land, Navies the Sea,
"And before out Ports Caesar entrenched be,
" Cato has yet an Exit from all These.
"And with one Hand can wheresoever he please,
"Make his rode Way to liberty. This Blade,
"With blood of Civil War never guilty made,
"A brave and Noble Act at length shall do;
"On Cato now that Liberty bestow
"It could not on his Country. Now the Fact
"My Soul! So long premeditated act.
"And snatch thy self out of Humanity.
"By this time Juba and Petreius be
"Dispatched; and lie, slain by each others Hand.
"A brave, and valiant End! Yet does not stand
"With our great-sould resolves: Cato his Death
"As much from any scorns to ask, as Breath.
Sure no small joy it in the Gods did move,
Whilst they beheld him his own Rescue prove,
And as it were for others safety lay
The ground, and trace for their Escapes the Way.
Whilst that last Night his studies he pursued.
And in his sacred Breast his Sword imbrued.
Whilst h'his extracted Bowels threw about,
And with his own undaunted Hand, drew out
His pious Soul, too worthy far to feel,
Or be contaminated by rude Steel.
And therefore I imagine that the Wound
No cure, nor Efficacious Issue found,
Cato but once to see, could not suffice
The high Immortal Powers. His Faculties,
And virtue therefore, still retained were,
That in the hardest part they might appear.
For it is an Act less high, and great, our Breath
At once to fo^ce, then to repeat our Death,
Nor with unwilling Eyes, do I suppose
They saw their Son so gloriously close
His Memorable Tragedy; Death then,
Is but the Consecration of good Men.
Whose brave and gallant Exit, justly draws
From those that tremble at it, as Applause.
PART. III.
ARGUMENT.
Ills are not Ills to good Men meant.
But are by God as Trials sent.
NOw shall the Progress of our Work make clear
Those are no Ills at All that so appear.
For those things you, harsh, cruel, horrid call,
Were first ordained for them on whom they fall,
And next for all Mankind, which is Heavens Care
Far more than any Individualls are.
Next, that these things falls not against their Wills,
That, did they, they deserved to suffer Ills,
To these I Will add that they from Fate do flow,
And to the good, by the same Rule they are so,
Do happen; therefore I persuade thee shall
Never to pity a good Man at All.
He miserable sometimes may be said,
But never can be miserable made.
But that which We did at the first propose,
Of All the rest, to prove, the Hardest shows,
Which is; That for those Men, even that is by Fate
Ordained, which We abhor, and tremble at.
But thou will say, was it for their sakes ordaln'd
They should be banished? be to want constrained?
Of Children be deprived, and of Wife?
Slandered? debarred the Means to strengthen life?
If thou think strange this should appointed be
For any; thou will wonder then to see
Lancings, and Fire, Famine, and Thurst, to some
The Instruments, and Means of Cure become.
But when thou shall consider that t'obtaine
A Remedy; some do endure the Pain
To have their Bones be scaled, their veins pulled out,
And limbs lopt off, when the whole Frame's in doubt;
Thou then wilt easily to this Assent,
That Ills for those, on whom they fall are meant.
And are for them as fit, and proper thought,
As those things, which with eager longing sought,
Are contrary to those they do delight.
As the raw, drunken sursets of the Night,
And such like Like Luxuries, which while W'injoy
Our Ruin prove* and while they please, destroy.
Amongst All those high Expressions of his Mind
Which by our good Demetrius left I find,
This voice above the rest, me thinks I hear
Still fresh, and smartly founding in my Ear.
"Naught then that Man can more unhappy be
"Who never tasted Infelicitie.
He never could come to try himself, though All
Even at his Wish, nay before his wish befall,
Yet the Impartial Gods, of him esteemed
But hardly: that Man was never worthy deemed
That he should vanguish Fortune, which still flies
From the most dull unactive Enemies.
As though sh'had said; make him m' Antagonist,
Will straight throw down his Arms, and quit the List?
We need not use our strength; Our threats shall chase
Him hence; He dares not look us in the face.
Let Us with some other Combatant join Hands,
With one who ready to be vanquished stands,
It Is shame t'incounter. Gladiators will
Think it a scorn, with those in strength and skill
To them Inferior, to contend, who know
That Is held but an Inglorious Overthrow
Is without danger given: Fortune the same
Does do; and seeks out Combatants of Name.
Passes by others in a Scorn, and slight,
And the most resolute, and most upright
Incounters with. On Mucius fire does try,
Upon the stayed Fabricius Poverty.
By Exile against Rutilius would prevail,
And Regulus with Tortures does assail.
Upon wise Socrates the Poison tryes,
And against Cato Death it self imployes.
All Great Examples, are b'Ill Fortune sought.
Shall therefore Mucius be unhappy thought.
'Cause middst the Hostile Flames his hand he thrust?
And his own Error did conceive it just
Himself should punish? What? 'Cause with that Hand
He could not armed with Steel, when burnt t'a Brand,
He made Porsenna fly? Or should he be
Thought happier in his Mistress Breast if he
His hand had cherist? Is Fabricios found
E're the less happy, 'cause he dug his ground
When free from State Affairs* Doubly ingga'd,
Who war at once with wealth, and Pyrrbus waged.
And supped upon those Roots his Weeded Field
Did him an aged Triumphator yield.
Or had he more Felicity enjoyed
If with strange Fish, or foreign Foul he had cloyed
And stufft his Emprie belly? Or, if t'excite
The Dullness of his queasie Appetite
He Had raked the upper, and the lower Sea
For Shellfish? Or, if in large Hortyards, he
Beasts of the Noblest kind had closed, were taken
With loss of many a bold Hunter slain?
Or is Rutilius unhappy? 'Cause
He was condemned by the unjust Laws
And Power of those, who for that Act shall be
Condemned themselves to all Eternity;
'Cause with an ev'ner Mind he underwent
His Doom, then Freedom from his Banishment?
'Cause he alone great Sylla durst deny,
And when called home again, did farther fly?
"Let those (says he) whom thy Felicity
"Inslaves at Rome, a bloody Deluge see
"In The Forum; and, 'bove the Servilian Lake,
"(For in that Place they used the Spoil to take
"Of those whom Sylla had proscribed) behold
"The Heads of Senators; and Troops of bold,
"Desperate Assassinates, run everywhere
"Along the streets; and thousand Romans there
"After Faith given, and Pledge of thy right Hand,
'Nay, against Faith, butchered at thy Command.
"Let those that cannot endure Banishment,
"Be with such horrid Spectacles content.
What then? Is Sylla e're the happier thought,
Cause to the Roman Forum he was brought,
Guarded with Swords? and Heads of Consulls slain
He caused to be suspended? and the Gain
And Price of his dire Massacres he took
By Public Tables, and the Questors Book?
Yet All these things unquestioned does that Man
Who first brought in the Law Cornelian.
Come We to Regulus; what hurt had he
By Fortune* that, him wh'of Fidelity
^h^ Great Examp^e was before, she now
Has made the Arche type of Patience too*
Nails pierce his skin, and though he turn him round,
His wearied Body rests upon a Wound.
Nor can his Eyes in sleep be ever closed
But to perpetual Wakefulnesse exposed.
How much the greater Torture he sustained,
So much the greater Glory thence he gained.
Would be assured he nor repents his Fate,
To have prized Virtue at so high a Rate?
Refresh him, send him to the Senate, there,
You Will still from him the same Opinion hear.
Now, does the great M^c^n^^ therefore seem
The happier of the two in they esteem,
'Cause, Vexed with jealous love, grieved at the life
Of his Imperious and fantastic Wife,
(Which ^v'^y day threatened to leave him) he
With Musicks most delicious Harmony,
Echoed from far, in soft, and melting Strains,
In pleasing slumbers sought to charm his Brains?
Though he in ^owing Bowls his senses steep,
And with the Fall of Waters, court his sleep,
As far ^^om r^^^ yet on his Down he lies,
As he in Amidst of all his Agonies,
This, from his Miseries a Comfo^t draws,
In that he suffered for an honest caus^.
Whi^st the other, with his lusts, and Pleasures spent,
Sick of a Surfeit of ^o much content,
The Cause and Reason of his sufferings pains
Farremore, then All that he for that sustaines.
Men are not yet to much inthrall'd to Vice,
But if the Gods should put them to their Choice
The^e would be more with R^g^'^^ his Fate
Then to be borne unto M^^e^as state.
If there be any yet dares say that he,
Rather then Reg'lus, would Macends be,
That Man, (though to confess it he be loath)
Had rather be Terrentia, then them both.
Do Socvates but hardly used, suppose,
'Cause he took off his publique-mixed Doze
As 'twere a Cup of Immortality?
And with a firm unmoved Con^^ancy
Of Mind, disputed, and discourt of Death
Until that came, and stopped his learned Breath?
Was he ill dealt with 'cause his Ice-turn'd Blood
Unactive in it it is frozen Channells stood?
How much more to be envied is his State
Then their's who served are in Jewel'd Plate,
To whom some old, and ou^-worne slave, that is brought
To be at all Turns, to bear All things taught,
Poures melted Snow from our a Golden Ewre
That may A Fres^^ to their Wine procure.
Those what they drink shall vomit up at last,
And against their Wills their bitter Choler raste.
When he to no such surfetings inclined,
Shall take down Poison with a willing Mind.
Enough of Cat^; whom all Men confess
^o have attained the hight of Happiness.
A Man whom Nature seemed to choose, by whom
She might the Worst of Terrors overcome.
Of powerful Men, heavy's the Enmitic.
Yet he would to Pompey Caesar, Crassus be
Opposed: it is a sad thing, to see Men go
'Bove us in Honors, in deserts below.
Yet can he see Vatinius preferred,
To be engaged in Civil wars, is hard
And grievous: Yet over the whole World for Right
Stoutly, though sure of Ill success, be'd fight.
To part with life seems grievous to most Men,
Yet should he do it: By this what would I then?
That All might know, these are not to b'esteem'd
^lls, of which, Catos self I worthy deemed.
PART. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Virtue by being oppressed, is shown,
Those We think Miseries, are None.
PRo^peritie, and happy Fortune, finds
Out base, Plebean, and ungenerous Minds:
But it is the Property of a Great Sou^e
Crosses and humane Terrors to control.
To liv^ still happy, and ^e're f^^le no Smart,
Is not to k^^w of life the other Part.
Thou'^t a stout Man: But how shall this be known,
It by some Chance thy Valor be not shown?
But thou will say, thou went to play thy Prize
And were at the Olimpicke Exercise;
But none besides thy self. The Garland gained
Thou ^a^, but not the Victory obtained.
Not as a strong Man thee I gratulate,
But as if one to the Pretorian State;
Or Consulship, that is arrived at length;
Thou are increast in Honor, not in strength.
The like to a good Man may be applied,
If by no Crosses, no^ Afflictions ^^y'd.
I count thee wretched, that thou ^e're were so.
If ^e're in all thy life thou knew'st a Foe,
None thy Abilities can judge; nor you
Your self, can tell what it is your self can do.
Man to the knowledge of himself, must bring
Experiment all Prooses; Triall's the Thing
By which w^e learnt our Strength. Some have ^in know^
Of their own selves to have sought Affliction;
That so their Virtues, without Exercise
Obscuring, might with renewed splendor rise.
For in Adversity Great Minds delight
No less, then Valiant Soldiers do in Fight.
I'h've heard a Fencer in Great Caijus Reign
Thus of the scarceness of Rewards complain.
^^ How fair an Age, says he, is lost and gone!
Vertu's with greediness to Pe^i ls prone.
Her Race, not sufferings, it is she minds: since those
The Accomplishments of Glory ar^ she k^^^ves.
Wo^^ds are the Soldiers praise; who take a Pr^de
To show their Arms in their own Bloods bedy'd,
In some successful Fight; And though perchance
That man as much might do, as far advance
Received no hurt, yet We the Wounded prize,
And he it is on whom We fix Our Eyes.
God as it were studies the good of those
To whom he some fit matter does oppose
To try their Valors on. TO which we with pain
And difficulty sometimes scarce attain.
A Pilot is in storms and Tempests shown,
A General is in a Battle known.
How shall I know thou can bear Poverty
When thou still flow'st with Riches? Whence shall I
Know with how constant, and composed a state
Thou can brook slanders, and the Peoples Hate,
If in the General Plaudit thou grow old?
If an affection not to be controlled
And popular opinion, and good Will
Inclined to favor thee, attend thee still?
How shall I know with what an even mind
Thou Childrens loss can bear, if none thou find
Of all thy Race impaired? I h've heard thee, when
Thou comfort'st others; but would gladly then
Have seen thee to thy self like comfort give
Or heard thee then forbid thy self to grieve.
Be not possessed with Terror of those things,
Which Gods apply as the Minds spurs, not stings.
Misfortune's virtues Opportunity.
All men those wretched think deservedly,
Who languish on the bed of Happiness,
Benumbed with the Torpedo of Excess.
Whom dull Tranquillity, and stupid ease,
Detain like Vessels in becalmed Seas.
What e're to such befalls, will strange appear;
Men unexperienced, Crosses hardly bear.
With pain the Yoke the tender neck does brook;
Pale at the thought of wounds raw Tyro's look.
When the old Soldier with a dauntlesse eye
Viewes his own Wounds, nor turns his Head awry.
As one, by whom that Maxime's understood
He often proves Victor who resists to blood.
Those then, whom God approves, and loves, he tries,
Chastens, and hardens in Adversities.
Whilst others; whom he seems t'indulge and spare
For future Miseries reserved are (...)
Thou err'st to think there is an exemption;
Even the long happy has his Portion:
Who seems dismissed, is but deferred. Object.
You Will say
Why yet does God still on the best Men lay
Sickness and Crosses? Answ.
Why in Camps are put
Most dangers still, on the most resolute?
To beat up Quarters, Scout, or Enemies
By nightly Ambuscadoes to surprise,
The choicest still are sent; nor of those, one,
Thinks himself less in the Opinion
Of his Commander; or by that debased;
But that his Merits are more highly graced.
So may those say, who are those Ills designed
TO endure, seem horrors to a timorous Mind;
"Worthy the love of Heaven we now are meant,
"Which by our sufferings would experiment
"How much it is humane Nature can sustain.
Fly from enerv'd Felicity, and vain
Delight^s which as it were dissolve, and steep
The inebriated Mind in a long sleep.
Unless by chance some intervening Fate
A monitory give of h^mane state.
Whom still glass Windows skreen from cold and wind,
Whose feet still warmed are kept; whose rooms are lined
With the stoves subtle circumfused Heat*
To such, the aires least breath does danger threat.
Though all extremes do hurt, there is no excess
So dangerous as that of happiness.
This soyles the understanding, and with vain
Delusive Fancies does distract the Brain;
And before our blinded eyes a mist does send,
They cannot Truths from Falsehoods apprehend.
Is it not then far better to abide
Perpetual Crosses which to virtue guide,
Then to be broken with the excessive weight
Of a too great, and a too happy state?
To leave, spare Bodies, Death scarce seems a pain;
Tormenting Crudities the the Gross sustain.
Heaven with good men, observes the self same rule
As Masters do with Sthollers in the School;
Who greater Pains, and harder Taskes on those
That are the hopefullest esteemed, impose.
Think thou the Spartans less their children love
'Cause they by public stripes do use to prove
Their youthful dispositions? Parents there
Their Sons exhort with courage blows to bear
Of lashing whips; and though half dead with pain,
To persevere, and wounds on wounds sustain.
(...) God then, Generous spirits with severe
Rough Trialls proves, why should it strange appear?
In all the Book of virtue there is not one
Soft Document, or easy lesson known.
With Fortunes whips though we be lasht, and rent,
Let Us bear't; it is our Trial, not our Punishment.
Which the more often it is we undergo
The more prepared, and barier still we grow.
Of all the body, that part's most obdur'd
And sollid, is to constant Toil inured.
We should to Fortune be exposed, that we
Against her self, armed by her self might be.
To be her equals us in time the brings,
Contempt of dangers from tried dangers springs.
So Mariners endure the Sea, and so
The Plow-mans hands with labor hardened grow.
So Soldiers learn to throw their Darts with force;
So Racers prove the nimbler for the Course:
Perfection and Solidity does rise
From constant and assiduous exercise.
So is the Mind by Patience brought at last
Contempt upon the Power of Fate to cast.
Whose force we well may guess upon the mind,
When how much labor can perform, we find
In poor, and naked people, whom we see
Assuming strength even from their poverty.
Do but consider all those Nations round,
Which to the Roman Peace, prescribe a bound;
I mean the Germans, and those People spread
Along the Banks of Ister to his Head.
To lowering skies, and Winters lasting cold
Subjected still; to whom the barren Mold
Scarce Food affords? to whom a Shed of Boughs,
A homely shelter from the Rain allows.
Who on the frozen Ister, or the Rhine
Do slide, and on the hunted Quarry dine.
Do count these men wretched in thy esteem?
No Natu'rall Habit can e're wretched seem:
Time by degrees does those things pleasant make,
Which from Necessity their Births did take.
No Houses there, no resting Place to those
But such as toil, and weariness impose.
No food though vile, but what their Hands procure;
Though horrid be their Climes intemperature,
Yet they go naked; and this you suppose
A Misery, is yet the Life of those.
Why do thou wonder if thou good men see
Shook with the storms of Fortune? since that Tree
But weakly rooted is, nor solid grown,
Has not the frequent shocks of Tempests known:
Which firmer still, and deeper rooting finds,
The more it is tossed and vexed with the winds;
Whilst those which in the Sunny Valley grow
Are weak and brittle. Good men therefore, so
Are exercised in matters full of sear,
That they might terrors without terror bear:
And with calm Minds, those things might undergo
No Ills are, but to those endure them so.
PART. V.
ARGUMENT.
For good of others, sufferers be
The Good; All stoop to Destiny.
ANd now, it is for the General end, the Best
Should war, and by their Deeds their lives attest.
Since it is God's aim, and a Wise-mans, to prove
That those things which the vulgar fear, or love
Are in themselves nor good, nor Ill at all:
For if by Heaven's Decree they do befall
To a good man, their good; but bad they are,
If they are allotted to a bad man's share*
Blindness were detestable, did we find
None lost their eyes, but those the Law made blind,
Then Appius and Metellus may want eyes.
We do not Riches as a true good prize;
Ellius the Bawd may then be rich, and we,
When in the Temples sacred Treasury
We Have offered up our consecrated gold,
The same in the Burdello may behold.
God cannot more men's longings vilisie
Then those, the basest grant, the best deny.
Obj. But you will say it seems to you unjust
The good should be oppressed, imprisoned, trust.
When you behold the Bad still living free
In all Delights, and Sensuality.
Answ. Is it not yet as much unjust, and hard,
That valiant men in Arms should nightly guard
The Camp? and for defense thereof, decline
No wounds, but with their Bloods make good the Line,
Whilst safe i'th'Citie the spruce Gallant lies*
Glor'ing in his professed Adulteries?
Is It not unjust that noblest Virgins rise
At Midnight, to their sacred Exercise,
Whilst dissolute, and inquinated Minds,
Soft, pleasing sleep, in silken Fetters binds?
Labor and Travel, ^ill the Best assayes:
The Senate often in Council sit whole days.
Whilst in the Fields the meanest Groom does please
Himself, or in the Tavern takes his Ease,
Or insome other Pass time spends his Hours.
It Is the same in the Worlds Common Wealth, as ours.
Good Men there toil, and labor still, nor by
Fortune are hall'd, but follow willingly.
And keep pace with her, and if they had known
Her mind, perhaps they had before her gone.
That gallant Speech I here to Mind recall,
Did once from the great-Sould' Demetrius fall.
"Of this, (you Gods!) Do I complain alone,
"That I before, your pleasures had not known;
"For sooner then should I have made m'Appeare,
"Unto those things, which now I Am called to bear,
"Would you my Children have? they are your due,
"They were b^^ot, and bread by me for you.
"Would you some Limb? (what here my ^ow assures
"Is no great thing) strait my whole Body's yours.
"Would yo^ ^y Soul? I shall no whit delay,
"But gladly what you gave me shall repay.
"What e're you ask I give you willingly,
"An offering rather then D^livery.
"What need you have forced them from me? Now you may
"Receive them; no* nor now shall take away.
"Since nothing from that Man can e're be taken,
"Who of himself seeks nothing to retain.
"Naught against my Will, am I compelled to bear,
"To God in love I'assent, not serve in fear.
"Since I know all things move by a decree,
"Sure, and enacted from Eternity.
We Are led by Fate; and his first Hour of Breath,
Unto each Man prescribes his Hour of Death.
Cause upon Cause depends, and all are drawn.
By a long-link't Concatenation.
Which therefore We should bear with courage, sin^^
Naught falls by chance, but comes by Providence.
Our Joys, and Sorrows were long since decreed,
And though the life of each Man, seem indeed
With much Variety distinguished; yet,
There is to All, one common Period set,
All We Have received is subject to decay,
And We our selves must one day pass away.
Why then do We complain? or fret with scorn
And Indignation? We for this were borne.
Nature may do (by whom We all subsist)
With her own Compositions, as she list.
Yet let us cheerfully with Minds prepared
Think, that there is nothing of our own impaired.
Quest.
What is it best befits a good Man's State?
Answ.
To yield himself into the Hands of Fate.
It Is no small comfort, that We Are rapt, and hurled
About, with the same Course as the whole World.
That which commands us to live thus, thus dye,
Binds Heaven by the same Necessity.
And all things humane, and Divine, does force
Along in an irrevocable Course.
Who made, and rules this All, to Fate prescribed
Laws, yet himself even by those Laws is tied.
And that which his Commands did once deliver,
Now to observe he stands obliged for ever.
Quest.
Why yet by God i'th'distribution
Of Fate, seems there so much Injustice shown?
That Poverty, wounds, cruel Deaths, he should
Assign still for the Portions of the Good?
Answ.
The Workman cannot new his Matter cast;
That has the Laws of it is Creation past.
Some things will not be separate, nor leave
Others, but, as if Individualls, cleave.
Those heavy Souls, who still in slumbers steep
Their drowsy Brains, and seem awake, to sleep;
Of dull, and gross Materials framed are.
But to the making of a Man that is rare
An abler Fate's required, he must not go
The plain way, but must travel high, and low
He must with tossing storms acquainted be,
And guide his Vessel in a high-swol^c Sea.
Must shape his Course against Fortune; to him, shall
Many a hard rough Accident befall:
Yet such as he himself with some small pain
May bring to a soft smoothness and make plain^.
The best of Mettalls, gold, the Fire does try;
The best, and Valiant'st Men, Adversity:
See but what Steeps Virtue climbs up, and sure
You Will then confess, she cannot go secure.
PART. VI.
ARGUMENT.
No Joys the Bad can happy make,
Naught from the good their Joys can take.
Quest.
WHy yet does God by his Eternal Will,
Permit good Men to suffer any Ill?
Answ.
Know, he permits them not; for by his Care
All evils far from them removed are.
Flagitious Crimes, soul thoughts, corrupt Desires,
Blind lust, and Avarice that still aspires
To be Possessor of another State^;
He them does both defend, and Vindicate.
Sure there is no Man at Gods hands exacts
That he should bear their Budgets, and their Packs.
Even they themselves ^cquit God of that Care;
By whom, all outward things contemned are.
Democr^us his Riches cast, since they
He thought were Clogs to a good Mind, away.
W^nd'r^st thou then if God t'a good man, shall
Permit that, which himself desires might, fall?
Obj.
Of Childr^n ^hey're deprived; Answ.
Why not? Since they
Are mortal, and must dye themselves one day.
Obj.
They are exiled: Answ.
Why not? Since they sometime,
Forsake never more to see it, their Native Clime.
Obj.
They Are st^^n, Answ.
Why not? Since We have known that some
Unto their Deaths by their ow^ Hands h^ve come.
Quest.
Why suffer they Adversities* Answ.
That so
They might teach others them to undergo.
They Are for Examples borne; Think that you hear
"God say, What Cause have you that you should e're
"Make your Complaints of me, you, who in Right,
"And in Integritic, have took delight?
"Others with seeming Goods I Have but enriched;
"And with a long and slattering D^eame, bewitched
"Their v^iner Minds. Gold, Silver, Iv'ry's seen
"T'adorne their outsides, but no good within.
"Those you count happy Men, (could but that side
"Which they conceal, as that they show be spied)
"Most miserable, filthy, sordid, are.
"And like their Walls, only on th'outside fair.
"'It Is no sincere, solid Felicity,
"But thinly crusted over to the Eye.
"Whilst therefore they stand sure, and as they lift
"Doc show themselves; they shine as through a Mist
"With larger Orbs: but if ought come that may
"Disturb their Quiets, and them open lay,
"Then will appear how much of base impure
"Filch, their false boasted splendour did obscure.
"True, real Goods, and such as shall abide
"I have on you bestowed, which the more tried*
"By you they shall be, and be searched more near,
"They better still, and greater shall appear.
"Minds have I given you Terrors to despise;
"And loath, what most, affectionately prize.
"Yours is no outward tinseld Braverie,
"The goods which you adorn, turned inward be.
"So does the World his outward Parts despise,
And with his inward Beauty please his eyes.
"The happiness which you 'bove all poss^sse,
"Is not to stand in need of happiness.
Ob. "But many sad, and dreadful Accidents,
"And often intolerable Fate presents,
Ans. "Since you from these could not exempted be,
"I h've armed your minds against adversity.
"Bear all things stoutly, by which means y^u may
"Walk before God in his appointed way.
"Without the suff'rance of Miseries
"He is, and yo^, above their suff'ran^e rise.
"Want an^^^w Poverty, contemn, and scorn,
"There Is no man lives s^^^ore as he was borne.
"Dolor, and pain cont^mne; 'twill have an end,
(...)send
"Fortune despise; whose Power I have confined;
"She has no weapon that can wound the mind.
"Nay Death it self; which ends, or does translate
"Your bad condition, to a better state.
The few following Lines in the Close of the Original, (being a Stoicall
Exhortation to the Anticipation of Death) are purposely omitted.

FINIS.

