A NEW SYSTEME: OF Geography, Designed in a Most Plain and Easy Method, for the
better Understanding of that Science. Accommodated With NEW MAPPS OF ALL THE
Countries, Regions, Empires, Monarchy, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedoms,
Marquesates, Dominions, Estates, Republiques, Soveraignties, Governments,
Seignories, Provinces, and Countries in the whole World. WITH Geographical
Tables, Explaining the Divisions in Each Mapp.

By John Seller, Hydrographer to the King.

And are Sold at his Shop on the West Side of the Royal Exchange.

A New Systeme of GEOGRAPHY. Reduced to a Plain and Easy Method For the Ready
finding out any Empire, Kingdom, Principality or Government in ye whole World.

By John Seller Hydrographer to the King

Europe

Asia

Africa

America



A New SYSTEME OF Geography.
The Elements and Principles of Geography.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Division of Geography.
GEOGRAPHY is a Science showing the Divisions and Distinctions of the Earthly
Globe, as it is a Spherical Body, Composed of Earth and Water, for that both
these do together, make one Globe.

2. And hence the Parts of Geography are two, the one concerns the Earthy, and
the other the Watery part.

3. The Earthy part of the Globe may be divided into Continents and Islands.

4. A Continent is a great quantity of Land, not Separated by any Sea, from the
rest of the World; as the whole Continent of Europe, Asia and Africa.

5. An Island is a part of Land Environed with some Sea or other, as the
Islands of Great Britain, and Ireland, with the Ocean: The Island of Sicilia
with the Mediterranean.

6. Both those are Subdivided into Peninsula, Isthmus, Promontorium.

7. Peninsula is a Tract of Land which being almost Encompassed round by Water,
is joined with some little part or neck of Land.

8. Isthmus is that narrow neck of Land which joineth the Peninsula to the
Continent, thus is Africa joined to Asia, only by that small neck of Land that
is Contained between the Mediterranean, and the Arabian Gulf; called the Red
Sea.

9. Promontorium is a high Mountain which shoots it self into the Sea, the
utmost end thereof is called a Cape, as Cape Bona Esperance in Africa.

10. The Watery part of the Globe is Destinguished by Diverse Names, as Oceanus,
Maro, Fretum, Sinus, Lacus and Fluvius.

1. Oceanus, or Ocean, is that Great general Collection of Waters that
Encompasseth the Earth on every side.

2. Mare, the Sea, is a part of the Main Ocean, to which we cannot come but
through some Fretum or Strait, as Mare Meditterraneum, and sometimes takes its
Name from the Adjacent Shore; as Mare Adriaticum, from the City of Adria, or
from a first Discoverer, as Mare Magelanicum.

3. Fretum or Strait, Is a part of the Ocean, straightened between some Narrow
bounds, and opening the Way to some Sea, as the Straits of Gibralter, the
Straits of Magelan, etc.

4. Sinus Is a Gulf or Bay or any Indraught of Water as the Gulf of Venice, the
Gulf of Mexico, the Bay of Biscaia, and the Bay of Bengale in the East Indies.

5. Lacus or a Lake, is a Body or Collection of Waters, which has no visible
Intercourse with the Sea, or Influx into it, as the Lake of Geneva, and the
Lake of Asphaltites, or Dead Sea, in the Land of Canaan.

6. Fluvius or River, is a Watercourse Issuing from some Spring or Lake. --
And Emptyeth it self into some part of the Sea, a great River, as the Rhine,
the Thames, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Circles of the Sphere.
THere are ten Circles of the Sphere, six great: and four lesser.

The Six great Circles, are the Meridian, the Horizon, the Equinoctial, the
Ecliptic, the two Colures, all which divide the Sphere into two Equal parts.

The four lesser Circles are the two Tropiques, and the two Polar Circles, each
of which Divides the Sphere into two unequal parts.

The Meridian is a great Circle which passes through both the Poles of the
World, and through the Zenith and Nadir Points, and shows the Latitudes of
all places on the Earth.

The Horizon is also a great Circle which divides the visible part of the
Heavens, which we see, from those we see not.

The Equinoctial is a great Circle 90 Degrees from either Pole, in which Circle
are reckoned the Longitude of all places on the Earth, from any certain
Meridian Assigned, which Primary Meridian (from whence the Longitude of places
in all the Mapps in this Treatise, does Commence,) is that which passes
through the Island of Pico Teneriffa, and from thence Reckoned Eastward round
the World.

The Ecliptique is a great Circle divided by the Equinoctial into two Equal
Parts, one declining toward the North, and the other toward the South, the
greatest Obliquity being 23 Degrees, 30 Minutes.

The Colures are two great Circles of the Sphere Intersecting each other at
Right Angles in the Poles of the World. One is called the Solstitial, the other
the Equinoctial Colure: The Solstitial Colure is that which passes through the
Poles of the World, and cutteth the Ecliptique in the Points of Cancer, and
Capricorn.

The Equinoctial Colure passes through the Poles of the World, and cutteth the
Ecliptique, and the Equator in the Points of Aries and Libra, by which Points
the four Seasons of the Year are Distinguished.

map A MAPP OF THE FIVE ZONES.


The Four Lesser Circles of the Sphere.
The four lesser Circles of the Sphere are the two Tropiques and the two Polar
Circles, which Circles Divides the Earth into five broad Spaces called Zones,
which are distinguished in the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Division of the Earth by Zones.
A Zone is a broad Space of the Earth limited by the Tropiques, and the Polar
Circles, and are five in Number, one Torrid (or burning Zone) two Temperate,
and two Frozen Zones.

1. The Torrid or Burning Zone is, that Space of Earth and Sea Contained
between the two Tropiques, and is 47 Degrees in Breadth.

2. The two Temperate Zones are that Space Contained between each Tropique, and
the Polar Circles, one called the North, and the other the South Temperate
Zone: And are each of them 43 Degrees in Breadth.

3. The two Frozen Zones are those Spaces Contained between each Polar Circle,
and the Poles of the world.

4. The Inhabitants of those Zones in Respect of the Diversity of their Noon
Shadows, are Divided into three Kinds, Amphiscii, Heteroscii, and Periscii.

5. Those that inhabit in the Torrid Zone are called Amphiscii, because their
Noon-shadows are Diversely cast, sometimes toward the North, and sometimes
toward the South, according to the Position of the Sun, when it is on the
North or South side of their Zenith, or Vertical Point; and their Shadows are
cast accordingly, viz. If the Sun be to the Northward, then their Shadow is
cast to the Southward, and so on the Contrary.

6. Those Inhabitants that live in the Temperate Zones are called Heteroscii,
because their Noon Shadows are cast but one way, and that either North or
South; Those who live in the North Temperate Zone, their Noon Shadows are
always cast toward the North, and those of the South Temperate Zone, their
Noon Shadows are always cast toward the South. As may be seen in the Anexed
Mapp of the Zones.

7. Those who Inhabit in the Frozen Zones, are called Periscii, because their
longest day is at least 24 hours in length, and therefore the Sun being Carried
Circularly about them, their Shadows are also Carried about them, in the same
manner.

CHAP. IV. Of the Division of the Earth by Climates.
A Climate is that Space of the Earth Contained between three Parrallels, the
middle most whereof Divides it into two Equal Parts, serving for the setting
out the Length and Shortness of the days in every Country: and for as much as
there have been several ways used by the Ancients in Dividing the Climates, I
shall at present Content my self with this only Division; by Reckoning the
Differrence of each Climate to be one Quarter of an hour, and so the Climates
are 24 in Number; till you come to the Latitude of 66 Degrees, 31 Minutes,
(taking up 48 Parrallels.) To which are added six Climates more, where you will
find the days to be One, Two, Three, Four, Five and Six Months long at the very
Pole it self, as you may plainly see in the Annexed Table; Where you may Note,
that the greater the Latitudes are, the longer the days are.

A Table of Climates, From the Equinoctial North and South to the Poles,
wherein you may see in every Clime the length of the day in Hours and Minutes;
As for Example, in the Climate or Parrallel of 50 Degrees. 33 Min. you will find
the longest day to be 16 Hours, and 15 Minutes, and in the Margent you find
what Inhabitants dwell in those Climates viz. the Amphiscii, Heteroscii, and
the Periscii.

Latitud. Lon. d. D. M. H. M. 00 00 12 00 Amphiscii.
04 18 12 15 08 34 12 30 12 34 12 45 16 43 13 00 20 53 13 15 23 10 13 30 27 36
13 45 30 47 14 00 33 45 14 15 36 30 14 30 39 02 14 45 41 22 15 00 43 32 15 15
44 29 15 30 47 20 15 45 49 01 16 00 50 33 16 15 52 58 16 30 53 17 16 45 54 29
17 00 55 34 17 15 56 37 17 30 Heteroscii.
47 34 17 45 58 26 18 00 59 14 18 15 59 59 18 30 60 40 18 45 61 18 19 00 61 53
19 15 61 25 19 30 62 53 19 45 63 22 20 00 63 40 20 15 64 06 20 30 64 30 20 45
65 49 21 00 65 06 21 15 65 21 21 30 65 35 21 45 65 49 22 00 65 57 22 15 66 06
22 30 66 14 22 45 66 20 23 00 66 25 23 15 66 28 23 30 66 30 23 45 66 31 24 00
67 15 Months. 01 69 30 02 Periscii.
73 20 03 78 20 04 84 09 05 00 00 06

CHAP. V. Of the Division of the Inhabitants of the Earth, Respecting their
Site and Position, in Reference to One another.
1. THe Inhabitants of the Earth are divided into the Periaeci, Antaeci, and
Antipodes.

2. The Periaeci are such as dwell in the same Parallel on the same side of the
Equator, and opposite to us: These live in the same Zone, and the same Clime;
and cast the same shade with us: These Enjoy our Portion of heat and cold, our
Seasons of the year, our Increase of Days and Nights, and all things else of
this kind; Saving that our Hours are Opposite their six in the Evening, is our
six in the Morning, our Noon their Midnight.

3. The Antaeci are Inhabitants that are under our Meridian, which makes our
hours, and theirs the same; but by being 51 Degrees. 30 Min. on the other side of
the Equator, it happens that though we all agree in the Temperament of Zones,
Number of Climes in Casting a Shadow to one side only, and the like; Yet their
Zone and Climate is Southern, their Shadow falls to the South Pole, their
Winter is our Summer, our Spring their Autumn.

4. The Antipodes are such as dwell Feet to Feet, and are in height of
Opposition, and differ in all things; our Summer is their Winter, our Noon is
their Midnight; we have the North Pole Elevated, they the South. This truth of
the Antipodes was in former time Reckoned so Ridiculous and Impossible, that
Virgilius Bishop of Salisburgh who writ a Treatise thereof, was Condemned of
Heresy by Pope Zachary, in the year of our Lord, 745.

CHAP. VI. Containing several Useful Distinctions in Geography.
THe Latitude of a place is its nearest distance from the Equator, either to
the Northward, or Southward thereof, measured in the Meridian.

2. The Longitude of a place is the Number of Degrees, (Reckoned Eastwardly in
the Equator,) from the Grand Meridian to the Meridian of the place required.

And here Note that in all the Mapps in this Treatise, the Longitude begins
at the Meridian of Pico Tenariffa.

Zenith, is a Point in the Heavens that is Right over our heads, and is
sometimes called the Vertical Point, and Pole of the Horrizon.

Nadir, is a Point in the Heavens, Opposite to it, right under our Feet.

32-point compass rose Pixis Nautica or the Mariners Compass Showing the Names
of the Points.
By John Seller Hydrographer to the King
outer ring I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XII I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X
XI XII


middle ring -- 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 -- 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 -- 10 20 30
40 50 60 70 80 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10


inner ring NORTH North by East North N East North E by Nor. North Easst North
E by East East N East East by North EAST East by South East S East South E by
East South East South E by South South S. East South by East SOUTH South by
West South S West South W. by Sou South West South W by West West S. West West
by South WEST West by North West N West North W by We. North West North W by
No. North N. West North by West






Of the 32 Points of the Mariners Compass, which are thus Divided.
The four first, are the Cardinal Points, and are Composed of one Syllable, as
East, West, North, South.

The Four Seconds are Colateral Points, Consisting of two Syllables, as North
East, North West, South East, South West.

The Eight Thirds are, those that are Composed of Three Syllables, as North
North East, North North West, South South East, South South West, East North
East, East South East, West North West, West South West.

There are Sixteen Inferior Points, Eight of them are Composed of four
Syllables, and the other Eight of five Syllables: Those of four Syllables, are
these that follow.

These are Composed of four Syllables.
North and by East. East and by North. East and by South. South and by East.
South and by West. West and by South. West and by North. North and by West.
These are Composed of Five Syllables.
North East and by North. North East and by East. South East and by East. South
East and by South. South West and by South. South West and by West. North West
and by West. North West and by North.
The Figure of the Mariners Compass is here Annexed.

Of Measures.
Twelve Inches makes a Foot.

One Foot and a half one Cubit.

Two Foot and a half a Common Pace.

Two Common Paces, one Geometrical Pace.

Three Foot one Yard.

Six Foot one Fathom.

Sixteen Foot and a half, one Pole or Perch.

Forty Perches makes one Furlong.

Eight Furlongs, or 320 Perches, make one English Mile.

125 Geometrical Paces makes one Stade.

Eight Stades, or 1000 Geometrical Paces, is equal to an Italian Mile.

1250 Geometrical Paces is one English Mile.

60 English Miles has Vulgarly been accounted one Degree on the Earth, but
really and truly, (As has appeared by very Worthy Experiments,) that 69 Miles
and a half of our Statute Miles, makes one Degree on the Earth: But according
to the Vulgar Measure, the Compass of the Globe of the Earth, is 21600 Miles,
and the Diameter thereof, is 6875 Miles, and 4528 parts; which Diameter being
Multiplied by the Circumference, gives the quantity of Miles in the Superficies
of the Earth and Water, And the Superficies being Multiplied by of the
Diameter, gives the Solidity in English Miles.

2500 Geometrical Paces make one Scotch Mile.

2500 Geometrical Paces make one Common French League.

3400 Geometrical Paces makes a Spanish League.

4000 Geometrical Paces makes a German League.

5000 Geometrical Paces makes one Swedes or Swisses League.

6000 Geometrical Paces makes one Hungarian League.

CHAP. VII. Of the Use of the Mapps and Tables Contained in this Book.
THat which has been already discoursed, has been in the Nature of an
Introduction; to give you some Light and Understanding in the Principles and
Elements of Geography: that Concerns the several Distinctions and Divisions of
the Earthly Globe, by Circles, Zones and Climates; Discovering the various
Positions of the Inhabitants, in Respect of their Shadows, and Contrariety of
Seasons, etc. Which may very well serve as a good Introduction to that which
follows.

Therefore take notice, that to each Mapp there is a Table, that is as an Index
to show you what Divisions are in the Mapp, and is as it were an Explanation
thereoff, which you will find very useful for the understanding of them.

As for Example, In the Mapp of the World, the Table Informs you of the General
Division of the World, which is thus worded, The Mapp of the World is divided
into two Continents; The Continent of Europe, Asia and Africa.

The Continent of North- America, South- America.

Now if you cast your Eye upon the Mapp, you may there plainly perceive the
same Divisions Circumscribed with one entire Color with the Name in the midst
thereof, in Remarkable Capital Letters.

Then if you desire to know how any of the Quarters are Divided; Pitch upon
what Quarter you please, (Suppose Europe;) Then Apply your self to the Table,
and there you will find the General Divisions of Europe into the Empires
Kingdoms, Principalities and Dominions, etc. Contained in the same, with the
Principal Cities in each Country; then turn to the Mapp, and you will see each
Respective Division, Exactly Answer thereunto, as it is Expressed in the Table.

Now, if you would descend into the particular Divisions of any one of the
Quarters, you must proceed in the same Order, as has been Directed; (Suppose it
were Germany:) Therefore turn to the Table, and there find into what parts
Germany is Divided; as Mecklenburgh, Pomeren, Brandenburgh, etc. with the
Principal Cities contained therein; so that by this you may note the Excellency
of this Contrivance, for by these Divisions, appearing so plainly to the eye,
that you may see how one Country borders world clock An Instrument for finding
the hour of the Day (at all times) in any part of ye World.
An Example of the Use of this Instrument

If it be 9 a Clock at London what hour is it at any other part of the World,
therefore -- turn London to 9 (the hour given) Then shall ye present hour be
shown at all those places Expressed in ye Rundle; as you see it is 11 at
Constantinople and 12 at Aleppo etc.



map A MAPP of the WORLD
Showing what a Clock it is (at any time) in any part of the World, And to know
where the People are Riseing, and where they are at Dinner, where at Supper,
and where going to Bed all over the World.

upon another, so that by this View an Idea of the whole Country (with all its
Divisions) may be framed in your mind, that at any time you have the whole
Prospect thereof drawn into your Imagination, and Understanding; and can
thereby Conceive the Probability or Improbability of any matter, that may be
discoursed of in those Countries.

Now, if you would yet descend into the knowledge of any one particular
Country, (or Subdivision in this or any other Empire or Kingdom that is
Expressed in the General Table,) you are to proceed in the same Order and manner
as is before Directed.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the Use of a Mapp of the World that gives the hour of the
day, (at any time,) in any part of the World; and to know where the People are
Rising, where they are at Dinner, where at Supper, and where going to Bed;
being an Opperation most Diverting and Pleasant, to be performed by a Map.
IT is in all Respects as other Mapps of the World, save only that this is
Divided into 24 Merididians, or hour, Circles-Numbred in the Equinoctial with
I. II. III. IIII. V. VI. etc. to XXIIII. the hour Circle of XII. passing
through the Zenith of London.

The Uses Follow.

To find the hour of the Day (at any time) in any part of the World.

Having the Mapp before you, you may take notice that when it is Twelve a Clock
at London, then wheresoever you cast your eye, it is the same hour at Every
Place, as is Expressed in the Mapp, viz. It is one a Clock at Venice, Two a Clock
at Constantinople, Three at Aleppo, and Four at Madagascar, etc. In the Eastern
Hemisphere, and in the Western Hemisphere: Six a Clock at Jamaica, Three a
Clock at Califournia, etc.

But, Suppose it be any other hour with us at London, then for a more ready
finding the hour in other places: I Refer you to this Adjoining Instrument, the
Use of which may be made plain by one Example: As, Suppose it were Eleven a
Clock at London, then turn London (on the moveable plate) to the hour of Eleven
in the hour Circle, then will it show at that very time the present hour, at
all those places in the moveable Plate; it will be Twelve a Clock at Venice,
One a Clock at Constantinople, and Two at Aleppo, etc.

So the same Rule will tell you, at any time, the hour of the Day in any part
of the World: by turning London to the present hour there, and all the rest
will fall successively, as in the foregoing Example.

To know by the aforesaid Mapp, where the People are Rising, and where they are
at Dinner, where at Supper, and where going to Bed; and where it is Midnight in
any part of the World.

This Problem is grounded upon this Hypothesis, that Six a Clock in the Morning
may be taken for time of Rising, and Twelve a Clock for Dinner time, and Six a
Clock in the Evening for Supper, and Ten a Clock at Night for time of going to
Bed; and Twelve a Clock for Midnight.

Therefore Note, when it is Dinner time with us at London, then they are Rising
at Jamaica, and at Supper at Surrat, and going to bed in the Phillipina
Islands, (a little to the Eastward of China) and Midnight in the Pacifick Sea,
and by the same Rule and Reason you may know the same things at any other hour
at London. The forementioned Instrument does most readily perform the same
Operations by Noting what hour stands against any place in the Moveable Rundle;
as suppose you turn London to Twelve a Clock, then you will find the hour of
Rising, Supper time, of going to Bed, and Midnight, at the places before
Mentioned.

There is also another Pleasant Operation to be performed by this Mapp, to know
what company we have of Diverse Nations to rise with us, to go to Dinner when we
do, and to Sup and go to bed at the same time with us, that is to say, all
those Inhabitants that dwell under our Meridian, or hour Circle, which are
French, Spaniards, Moors and Negroes, all which Nations Rise, Dine, Sup, and
go to bed, when we do.

CHAP. IX. Giving the Content or Quantity of the whole World in Acres, and of
every Kingdom and Province thereof.
THe Globe of the World is supposed to be one third part water and Seas: And
one third part not Inhabited; And one third part inhabited, which Contains in
Acres, as follows.

In Europe.
England. -- 29000568. Acres. Scotland. -- 14000432. Acres. Ireland. --
18000000. Acres. The Ten Spanish Provinces. -- 7197000. Acres. The Seven United
Provinces. -- 3599000. Acres. France. -- 82879000. Acres. Spain. -- 67000535.
Acres. Italy. -- 44000257. Acres.
Under Spain.
Naples. -- 11704000. Acres. Lumbardy. -- 1640000. Acres. Savoy. -- 1910000.
Acres. Piedmont. -- 1160000. Acres.
Under Venice.
Trevisano. -- 2584000. acres. Verona. -- 480000. acres. Friul. -- 1047000.
acres. Mantua. -- 480000. acres. Tuscany. -- 4785000. acres. Suria and
Florence. -- 1480000. acres. Mercia Ancona. -- 1412000. acres. Parma. --
885000. acres. Sicilia. -- 3113000. acres.
Under Rome.
Liguria. -- 1415000. acres. Romania. -- 1085000. acres. Heturia. -- 540000.
acres. Latium. -- 480000. acres. Cyprus. -- 1601000. acres. Corsica. --
1395000. acres. Sardinia. -- 4089000. acres. Candia. -- Under the Turk. --
2060000. acres.
Under Germany.
Saxony. -- 3484000. acres. Misnia. -- 3249000. acres. Turingia. -- 1093000.
acres. Lnsatia. -- 2572000. acres. Bavaria. -- 3249000. acres. Holsatia. --
3644000. acres. Helvetia. -- 1232000. acres. Basil. -- 842000. acres. Sweburgh.
-- 2109000. acres. Saltsburgh. -- 1063000. acres. Trier Mentz Spires. --
4237000. acres. Stratsburgh and Worms. -- 4237000. acres. Juliers. -- 348000.
acres. Cleve. -- 258000. acres. West-Phalia. -- 2300000. acres. Osnah. -- 358.
acres. Silesia. -- 5706000. acres. Bohemia. -- 7024000. acres. Austria. --
6121000. acres. Moravia. -- 4114000. acres. Pomerania. -- 3249000. acres.
Brandenburg. -- 6208000. acres. Mecklenburg. -- 2107000. acres. Franconia. --
6361000. acres. Tyrol. -- 3249000. acres. Carinthia. -- 1588000. acres. Stiria.
-- 1779000. acres. Palatine of the Rhine. -- 4361000. acres. Wortemburg. --
1223000. acres. Emden. -- 230000. acres. Oldenbourg. -- 449000. acres. Liege.
-- 548000. acres. Cologne. -- 215000. acres. In all -- 93000646. acres. Russia.
-- 9607000. acres. Voshinia. -- 5762000. acres. Massovia. -- 196000. acres.
Livonia. -- 34115000. acres. Poland. -- 19205000. acres.
The Dominions of Denmark.
Danmark. -- 10426000. acres. Norway. -- 28492000. acres. Holstein. -- 1065000.
acres. Ditmarsh. -- 337000. acres.
The Dominions of Sweden.
Swoden. -- 57430000. acres. Finland. -- 7531000. acres. Gothia. -- 20936000.
acres. Hungaria, 385367000. acres. Dalmatia, 385367000. acres. Transylvania.
385367000. acres. and all Turkey 385367000. acres. in Europe 385367000. acres.
Part of Russia, or Muscovia, 232558000. acres. in Europe, Contains. 232558000.
acres. Part of Muscovia in Asia Contains. -- 128817000. acres. Tartary. --
299110000. acres. Persia. -- 385367000. acres. East Indies. -- 587200000.
acres.
In Africa.
Africa. -- 1541883000. acres.
In America.
North part of America. -- 1152400000. acres. South part of America. --
1349133000. acres.
So that the whole Sum of the Habitable Part of the World is six Milliars, six
hundred and 23 Millions, and Seventy thousand Acres.

Note, that a Milliar is one Thousand Millions.

A Table showing the bearing Distance, and Longest day, and difference of
Meridians of most of the principal Cities in the World, from the Famous City of
London.

Names of the places. The way or Point of bearing. Did. in miles. Longest day
Differ. meridi H. M. H. M. Alexandria-in Egypt. s. e. by e. 2196 14 00 1 42
Amsterdam in Holland. e. by no. 266 16 40 0 28 Athens in Greece s. e. by e.
1641 14 40 0 56 Antwerp in Brabant East fere 248 26 28 0 24 Barwick in England
Nor. fere 267 17 24 0 2 Babylon in Chaldea ea. so. ea. 2724 14 25 3 56
Bethsaida in Canaan s. e. by e. 2365 14 6 2 29 Bermudas West Ocean w. so. w.
3409 14 10 4 56 Cali^ute in East-Iudia s. e. by e. 5214 12 20 6 8 Calis in
France ea. by so. 86 16 25 0 9 Constantinople in Turkey ea. so. ea. 1547 15 15 2
24 Dublin in Ireland n.w. by w. 296 17 15 0 26 Dantzick in Prusia. ea. no. ea.
961 17 5 1 44 Damascus Turkey in Asia ea. so. ea. 2404 14 15 3 16 Edinburgh in
Scotland North 328 17 40 0 0 Ephesus in Greece e. s. e. 1808 14 40 2 30
Florence in Italy sou. east. 801 15 10 0 57 Frankford in Germany East fere. 448
16 15 0 47 Hamburgh in Germany ea. no. ea. 538 18 0 0 56 Jerusalem in Canaan
s. e. by e. 2352 14 8 3 3 Isleland in the N. sea n. n. w. 930 21 44 0 52 Joppa
in Canaan s. e. by e. 2938 14 6 5 0 Lisbone in Portugal so. so. w. 985 14 45 1
0 Middleburgh in Zeland East 295 16 30 0 20 Mentx in Germany East 410 16 25 0
45 Millain in Italy s. e. fere. 645 15 22 0 48 Morocco in Barbary so. by w.
1449 14 0 0 28 Mexico in America w. by so. 6844 13 20 9 59 Naples in Italy So.
by e. 1051 14 50 0 16 Niniveh in Asia e. so. ea 2635 14 30 3 52 Paris in France
s. s. e. 215 15 57 0 20 Philippi in Macedonia. e. s. e. 1395 15 10 2 10 Prague
in Bohemie East fere 700 16 15 1 14 Quinzai, the greatest City in the world. E.
by S. 7272 13 35 u 28 Rome in Italy s. e. by e. 887 15 4 1 7 Spiers in Germany
c. by s. 430 16 2 0 46 Strawsborough ea. by s. 432 16 0 2 41 Toledo in Spain
so. by w. 934 14 30 5 36 Troy in Greece e. s. e. 1605 15 0 2 25 Venice in Italy
e. s. e. 744 15 28 1 3 Sivil in Spain so. by w. 950 14 40 0 52 York in England
No. fere. 150 17 0 0 4 LONDON. 16 26 0 0

FINIS
A Geographical Description OF THE WORLD.
CHAP. I. Of the World in General
THe surfare of the Earth is Divided into two great Continents one of which is
Divided into Europe, Asia and Africa, and the other into two, viz. North and
South America, as are plainly soen in the Mapp of the World, with their names
in the midst in Capital Letters: There is but little difficulty about the
bounds after that which joins Europe and Asia, is Considered (for bating the
little Isthmus made by the Mediterranean and Mare Rubrum, which contains the
Limits of Asia and Africa) there is no part of the said Quarters which is not
Surrounded by the Sea: For the separation then or Boundary between Europe and
Asia, Geographers are of various Opinions Concerning this Division; Some Divide
it thus, with a line drawn through the Egean Sea and Helespont, through the
Euxine Sea to Palus Meotis, along the stream of the River Tanais to the mouth
thereof, and so by the River Dwina to the Bay of St. Nicholas in the white Sea.

Others (as the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain) in his Book of the use
of the English Globe, does more Judiciously divide it thus, Supposing a line
drawn from the Mouth of Tan^^s Runs up the stream to Tuia (Situated on the
most Easterly flexure,) and thence going to the nearest Banks of the Riyer Oby,
accompanies it till it falls in the Northem Ocean, my Lord does the rather
Incline to this Division than any other, because it Contains almost all the
Vast Dominions of the Russian Emperor, and so makes him an entire European
Monarch.

CHAP. II. Of Europe in General.
EVrope although it be the least of the four grand Divisions of the Earth (as
appears in the Mapp of the World) yet it is of the most Renown. 1. For the
Temperature of the Air, lying in the midst of the Temperate Zone, and therefore
Fertile in its soil. 2. The flourishing of Arts and Sciences. 3. For the Purity
and Sincerity of the Christian faith,

The language of the Europeans is Divided into several branches or Dialects,
but all from three Roots or stems, which are, 1. The Latin. 2. The Tutonick or
High Dutch. 3. The Sclavonian tongue. Those that Branch from the Latin are the
Italians, French, Spaniards, Portagalls; and those from the Tutonick, are the
English, Dutch, Swedes, Danes, Goths; and from the Sclavonian, the Crontians,
Hongarians, Transilounians, Russians,

The Kingdoms and Principal Regions are as follows, (as they stand in the
Table of Europe,) viz. England, Scotland, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, France,
Italy, Germany, XV II Provinces, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Lithuania,
Moscovia, Russia, lesser Tartary, Turkey in Europe.

The most famous Rivers in Europe are nine, The Thames in England, Tornia in
Scandin^^ia, Wolga in Muscovia, the Loire in France, the Rhine in Germany, the
Weyssel in Poland, Tagus in Spain, Po in Italy, and the Danube in Germany and
Turkey in Europe.

We Rank England, Scotland and Ireland, in the first place, in Regard they owe
obedience to the Stepter of our Gracious Sovereign.

We shall therefore Begin with the Desoription of the Kingdoms of Great Britain
and Ireland, (not affecting that Diminutive Appellation of the British Isles)
as if they were Gnernsey or Jursey and no way Comporting with the Renown and
Grandeur of those famous Kingdoms.

Of Great Britain.
GReat Britain Contains England, Scotland, and Wales, making the most Famous
Island in the whole World. It was once called Albion, ab Albis Rupibus from the
white Rocks apearing on the South Coast, toward France, from whence it was
first Discovered. Afterward Britain, some say from Brutus, of the Trojan Race,
who first settled a Government here; or as others will have it, from Prutainia,
signifying Metals, because of the great quantity of Tin, Iron, Lead, etc. that
is found here. But others say the Britains had their name from the word,
Brith, which signifies stained or painted, by reason of a Custom the Natives
had to paint their Skins all over, and of several Colors, that they might
thereby the more Terrify their Enemies, whence also the Romans called the
People of Scotland Pists.

The whole length from Strathy-head in Scotland to the Lizard-point in
Cornwall, is counted 624 Miles: And the breadth from the lands end in Cornwall,
to the Isle of Thanet in Kent is about 340. It is observed in his Majesty's
Teritoryes about Great Britain and Ireland, there are eight Several Dialects
spoken by his Majesty's own Subjects, viz. 1. English. 2. Scotch. 3. Irish. 4.
Welsh. 5. Cornish (in Cornwall.) 6. French (in Garnsey and Jarsey.) 7. Manks
(in the Isle of Man) and 8. Gothish (in the Islands of Suhtland.

Of England.
ENgland (a name taken from the Angli a people that came in with the Saxons,
and not changed by the Danish or Norman Conquerors) is the chief part of the
Island of Great Britain, being Divided into 40 Countys and 22 Bishoprics, is
Accounted in length 386 miles, in breadth 279. The soil is very fertile and
plentiful; several of its Chief Commodities and Excellencies are Contained in
this verse, Anglias, Mons, Pons, Fons.
Ecclesia, Femina, Lana.
England is stored with Bridges, Hills and Wool,
With Churches, Wells, and Women Beautiful.


Its first known inhabitants were the Britains, who being Conquered by the
Romans, and afterward overrun by the Saxons, were forced to Retire into that
Corner of the Kingdom called Wales: where their Posterity to this day Inhabit,
being a Province Divided into 12 Countys and 4 Bishoprics, the eldest Son of
our English Kings, being always Entitled Prince of Wales.

The forementioned Saxons Divided the whole Realm into seven Kingdoms, and were
much oppressed for a long time by the Danes, but at last being united under one
King, were subdued by the Normans, under William the Conqueror, whose
Successors Continue to this day.

Of Wales.
WAles is Environed on all sides by the Sea, except toward England, from which
it is separated from the RIVER DEE, and a line drawn to the RIVER WYE: But
Anciently it Extended to the RIVER SEVERNE Eastward, for Offa King of the
Mercians, forced them to leave the Plain Countries beyond that River (which now
is called the Marches of Wales,) and to betake themselves to the Mountains;
which he caused to be separated from England, by a great Ditch called Offa's
Dike, in Welsh Claudh-Offa, in many places yet to be seen.

The whole Country is Generally Mountanous and Barren, yet affords several
good Commodities, and is not without many fertile Valleys, which bear good
Corn, and breeds abundance of small Cattle, with which they furnish England;
as also with Butter, Cheese, woolen Cloth, called Friezes Cottons, Bays,
Calveskins, Hides, Honey, Wax.

It is divided into 4 Circuits for the Admistration of Justice, and is divided
into 13 Counties, wherein is contained 1016 Parish Churches, 56 Market Towns
and 40 Castles, 230 Rivers, 99 Bridges, 32 Parks, 13 Forests, 1 Chase. Also
these hills are famous for their height, viz. Snowden, Plinillimon, Brechin,
Moylvodian, Brethen, Caddoridrie, Rarduvaure, Monuch, Dennye, and Penm^n-Maur.

Of Scotland.
SCotland is the Northern Part of Great Britain, longer then England, but not
so broad, much colder and less Fruitful, the whole Containing 35 Shires, is
Divided into Lowlands, which speak a kind of Barbarous English, and the
High-lands, whose language is very near the same with the Irish. This Realm,
upon succession of King James to the English Crown, became united to that
Scepter, and are Jointly styled Great Britain. Its Chief Commodities are Course
Clothes, Frieses, Fish, Hides, Lead-Ore, and here are four Universities,
Edenbrugh, Glascow, St. Andrews, and Aberdeen, two Archbishops and eleven
Bishops.

As to their Courts of Justice, they are peculiar to themselves, the chief of
which is the Session or College of Justice, onsisting of a President, 14
Senators, 7 of the Clergy and as many of the Laity, unto which was afterward
joined the Chancellor, who is chief, and 5 other Senators, and in time of the
Sessions of Parliament there is a high Commissioner constituted by his Majesty
to Act as Vice Roy under him, which at present is the Illustrious Prince James
Duke of York and Albany.

Of IRELAND.
I Reland is the bigest Island in Europe after Britain. The West of which lies
toward Spain, Containing in length above 300 Miles, in breadth 150. It neither
breeds nor will Harbor venomous Creatures; the Soil is very good, and by the
late Industry of the Inhabitants (now the greatest part English;) the whole
Country begins to Grow rich and Flourishing, as the Populous and fair new
buildings at Dublin, and other Places, Demonstrate. It is Divided in four
Provinces, viz. Leinster, Vlster, Munster and Counaught, and each of them into
several Countyes, as may appear in the Table of Ireland.

The Commodities are store of Cattle, as also Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Wool,
of which they make cloth, Frieses, Ruggs, Mantles, etc. Its Seas yields great
plenty of Codfish, Herrings, Pilchers, etc. and in the Bowels of the Earth,
Mines of Tin, Lead, and Iron.

Of Spain.
SPain, the most Western Country of Europe it separated from France or the
Northeast by the Pyrenean Mountains, and on the West joining to Portugal, on
all other parts washed by the Sea, its whole Circuit being 1900 English Miles.
They are a mixed People, Descended from Goths, Saracens, and Jews: from the
Jews they Inherit Superstition, from the Saracens Melancholy, from the Goths
desire of Liberty. They are much given to Women, vain glorious, and stately;
very Grave in their Carriage, zealous Adherers to the Church of Rome, Obedient
to their Prince, true to their words, and of Wonderful Patience, Enduring
adversity: their Women sober, loving to their Husbands, and Gallants,
wonderful, Delicate, Curious in Painting, and perfuming, but by Custom
forbidden to drink any Wine, at least till they are Married. This Country
yields Sacks, Sugars, Oil, Metals, Liquorish, Rice, Silk, Wool, Cork, Rosin,
Steel, Oranges and Lemmons, and Raisins, etc. But is defective in Corn, and are
glad to be supplied therewith from Italy, France or Sicilia; nor are their
Cattle large or many, their fare being most upon Sallats and Fruits; every
Gentleman limited what flesh he shall buy for himself and Family: they have
Universities, such as they are: their Courts are kept at Madrid.

Of Portugal.
POrtugal is a Distinct Kingdom by it self, though anciently a province of
Spain. Its Chief City is Lisbon; their Customs and Religion much like the
Spaniards.

Of France.
THe Kingdom of France is for one entire thing, one of the most rich and
absolute Monarchies of the World, being almost a square, each side containing
about 600 Miles; it is bounded on the North with Lower Germany, on the
North-West, washed with the British Ocean, on the west with the Aquitain Sea, on
the South the Pyrenean Mountains fence it from Spain, on the East it extends to
the Medeteranean, and the Alps, which Divide it from Italy. It abounds with all
manner of good Fruits, besides great store of Fish and Fowl; but its Chiefest
Commodities are Wine, Salt, Linen, Cloth and Corn; the less Maternall are Wood
for dying, Paper, Nutts, Almonds, Laces to the New Modes. The People are
general Complemental, inconstant and Rash; both their Gentlemen and Citizens
live more sparingly then the English, they feed most on Boiled or Liquid Meats,
and are very curious in sawces. In Matters of War, there is an old Comparison
that Resembles the French to a Flea, quickly Skiping into a Country, and as soon
leaping out of it; of which late Transactions afford several instances; their
Language is Amorous, and they leave out manny Consonants in Pronuntiation,
Occasioning this Proverb, A Frenchman writes not as he pronounces, Sings not as
he Pricks, nor Speaks as he thinks. The National Religion is Popery, yet
there are many Protestants amongst them, whom they in derision call Hugonots,
who of late have bin and are under great Persecution for their Religion and
loss of their Privileges, not occasioned in the least by their disloyalty, or
any disturbance of the Government, but only and alone from the Malice of the
Popish Clergy. The Air in the Northern parts of France is Pu^er then that of
England, and being not so much Covered with Clouds drawn out of the Sea,
becomes more cold in Winter, and more hot in Summer, and less Annoved with
mists and Rain.

The Kingdom is divided into twelve General Governments, to which may be added
four new Governments, being the late Conquests of the French King.

Four toward the North on this side the Loir, four in the middle of France, on
each side the Loir, four on the South beyond the Loir, and the other four to
the Eastward toward Germany.

Of several Countries bordering upon France
LA Franche Comte, or the free County, called also the County of Burgundy, is
environed with Champaigne, Lorrain, Bressy, and the Duchy of Burgundy, being
in length 90 Miles, and breadth 60. One of the most fertile Provinces in the
World, the chief City is Besanson, the next Dole, famous for the College of
Jesuies there. It was under the Spanish Crown, but a few years ago sudenly
surprised by the French.

2. Lorrain, a Principality adjoining to that last mentioned, about four days
Journey in length, and three in breadth; it abounds with Corn and Wine, good
Horses, plenty of Mines and Store of Salt and Fish: the Dukes Revenue was
formerly computed at 700000 Crowns per Annum; and they were wont to give for
their Device, An armed Arm coming as it were from Heaven, and Grasping a naked
Sword, to show that they were absolute Princes, holding their estate by no
other tenure then from God and the Sword: but the French have likewise not long
since violently overrun; this Country; and the present Duke Commands the
Emperors forces, having Married the Queen Dowager of Poland.

3. Savoy, a Dukedom compassed with Dauphine, Switzerland and Piedmont, which
latter it for the most part under its Government, lying on the Italian side of
the Alps, and being exceeding pleasant and Fruitful. The rest of Savoy is
Mountanous and Barren. Adjoining hereunto, on the Lake Lemane, stands the City
of Geneva, a Common wealth, not extending eight Leagues in Circuit; But of
indifferent good Trade, and well Fortified.

4. Switzerland, is likewise a Republic, Consisting of 13. Shires or Cantons,
of which five are all Papists, six all Protestants, and two mixed. It Is thought
to be the highest Country in Europe, and sends forth four of the Greatest
Rivers, viz. The Danubias through Germany and Turkey East; the Rhine, through
Germany, North; the Rhosne, through France, West; and so through Italy, South;
the Soil is but mean, being so Hilly; but the Men great Warriors, and famous
for their Mercinary Valor.

This Country is in length about 240 miles, and 188 in breadth, very
Mountanous, affording Deers, VVild-Goats and Bears. The Valleys affords rich
Pasture for Cattle, wherein consists their greatest wealth, in some places they
have good VVines and Corn.

Of Italy.
I Taly is the most famous Region of Europe, very much Resembling the form of a
man's leg; A most Pleasant Country, Commodious for Traffic, and Exceeding
fertile.

It Is bounded on the East with the Adriatic Sea, South and West with the
Tyrrhene Sea, on the North with the Alps, being in length 1020 Miles, and in
Breadth not above 440. in the Broadest place.

It abounds with Corre, Wine and Oil, yields plenty of Almonds, Pomegranats,
etc. The whole Country seeming as an entire Garden.

The People were Anciently famous for their Valor and Prudence, and are still
Courteous and Grave, and very Obliging to Strangers, yet much Enclining to
Jealousy and Wantonness, and sharp Revenge; sparing in Diet, but neat; their
greatest Expenses are about their Gardens.

Here about 1600 year ago the Latin tongue Florish'd, being vulgarly spoken;
but afterward by the Invasions of the Goths and Vandales, and other Barbarous
Nations, the Common Speech became mixed and degenerated, which at this day we
call the Italian, and is still a most Delicate, Noble, and Courtly Language.

The Capital City is Rome, once Mistress of the World in Temporalls, and still
pretending to be so in Spiritualls, in Compass about 11 Miles, but full of
Gardens, and waste ground, so that its supposed not to Contain above 250000
Souls, two parts in three of whom are Clergy men, and Curtezans.

But in the Flourishing of the Roman Empire, it contained 50 Miles in Compass,
and not Fewer then 3 or 4 Millions of People, as is found in Authentic History.

After the Emperors removed their Seat to Constantinople, the Bishop of Rome
taking Advantage by their absence, by pretended Donation from Constantine made
himself absolute Prince of a great part of Italy, called St. Peter's Patrimony,
and the Lands of the Church, and the rest in time became Cantonized into
several Petty Principalities and States.

In the Bottom of the Adriatic, now called the Gulf of Venice, stands the
famous City and Virgin Commonwealth of Venice, Situate on many Islands; and the
water running through every street, being in compass 8 Miles, Containing 70
Parishes, many Excellent Palaces, and Curious Buildings.

Of the Principal Islands in the Mediteranean Sea.
Of Sicilia.
THis Island is the chiefest of all the others in the Mediterranean Sea, and is
a Kingdom of it self, it is in Circuit about 780 Miles, it is of a Triangular
Shape.

It is very plentiful, and abundant in most things, especially Corn; it yields
most Delicate Wines, sweet Oil, Sugar, Honey, Silk, Safron, great store of
Salt, and by reason of the sweet Temperature they have all Sorts of Fruits, as
also Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron and Allom: there are also found Emeraulds and
Agates, and other Precious Stones; The Country breeds an Excellent Race of
Horses; and amongst the Hills and Mountains, there is the famous Mount Etna,
now called Mount Gibello, although it lies covered with Snow,) et from the topp
Issues forth flame and smoke, and sometimes casts forth such a quantity of
Ashes, that the fields are Covered therewith.

There are at present 12 Episcopal Cities, the three whereof, as Palermo,
Messina and Monwale, are Arch Bishoprics, all very rich; Palermo is the Royal
seat of the whole Kingdom; The Sicilians are very Ingenious and sharp witted
People, Eloquent and Pleasant, desirous of Honor; the Island is under the
Power of the King of Spain.

Of Sardinia.
THe Island of Sardinia lies in the Mediterranean or Tyrrhenean Sea, whose
Circuit is 560 Miles, it is Divided into two parts, one is more Hilly then the
other; the Island produce (...) Excellent Wines, and abundance of Cattle, and
great store of Cheese; they have good Horses, but not very high: here are many
hot Bathes, Salt pitts, Mine^ of Silver, Brimstone and Allom. This Island has
two Arch Bishoprics, the one is Cagliari, and is the chief City, Seated on a
Mountain, having a fair Port; the other is Oristano, very meanly Inhabited by
reason of a bad Air; is has a Port, and a great River. The Sardes are a Rude
People, and uncivil, well able to endure Labor and hardness good Hunters, not
daynty in food, not Curious in Apparel. They formerly had a language of their
own but, now Corrupted, and in the the Cities they speak Spanish.

Of Corsica.
THis Island has been Inhabited with diverse Sorts of People, it is in length
120 Miles. It is Divided into two parts, the Eastern part is called the
Interior, and the other on the West called the Exterior side; the Island is
every where Enclosed with Rocky Clifts, and within the land very Hilly; it
produces Horses of a fierce Nature, and Hounds of a wonderful Bigness.

First this Island was possessed by the Tyrheans, and afterward by the
Carthaginians; but they were driven out by the Romans, which were also Expulsed
by the Saracens, which were likewise subdued by the Genoeses, under whose
Jurisdiction it remains.

Of Malta.
THis Island is renowned for the residence of the great Master of the Knights
of Jerusalem, the Circuit is 60 Miles, the land is Stony without River in it;
they have store of Sheep, Goats, Oxen, Asses, Mules, Coneyes and Partridges;
the Inhabitants ^re very brown, swarthy Color, by reason of the heat of
Summer; the Women are fair, but they hate Company and when they go abroad they
are Covered. Upon this Island was the Shipwreck of St. Paul, the chief town and
seat of the Bishop is called Malta.

Of Corfu.
COrsu is one of the Islands in the Ionian Sea, in Circuit 300 Miles, and 40.
in length; the South part Hilly, but the North part plain, one Mountain
Excepted, which stands near the Sea, on whose top is seated Castle Nova,
underneath it Castle Vechio, and at the foot of the Hill lies the City of
Corfu, shut in and enclosed between those two Castles; the Air is very sweet
and good; it abounds with Cedar trees, Orange trees, and other Fruits; it is
Plentiful in Honey, Wax, Wine and Oil, Fish and wild Fowl, and wild Beasts, to
the great pleasure and pastime of the Inhabitants in their Hunting and Hawking
Recreations.

Of Candia.
THis Island is one of the most famous in the Mediterranean Sea, it reaches 270
Miles in length, and 50 Miles in breadth. This Isle was ormerly called Crete,
and had at that time 100 Cities; it is Hilly in the Eastern part: it abounds
with Olive trees, Oranges, Cedars, and Excellent Wine, called Malmsey or
Muscadine, and in their Valleys Exceeding fair Pastures. This Island has been
lately famous for the great and eninent defense it made against the Turk, but
at last was forced to yield the Conquest thereof to them so the Venetians lost
it, after a long and tedious siege. The Chief City of the Island is called
Candia.

Of Cyprus.
THis Island is 550 Miles in Circumference, in length it is 200, and in breadth
65 Miles. It is Divided into two parts by a Mountain which runs through it from
East and West; the Air is very hot, and but little water, there falls little
rain; it abounds with all things needful for life; it produces great store
of Corn, and other Pulse and Grain, Oil, excellent Wine, Sugar, and
Cotten-Wool, Honey, Turpentine, Verdigreace, Brass, and all Sort of Metals,
Salt and Grogrames of Goats hair; the Women Lascivious.

This Kingdom is Divided into 11 Provinces, the Chief City is Nicosia, adorned
with sair Churches and sumptuous Palaces; it was once in the Possession of the
Venetians, but now under the Turk.

Of Majorca and Minorca.
TWo Istands about 60 miles from Spain, the first 300, the second is 150 Miles
in Circuit, and both Indifferent Fruitful.

Of Cephalonia and Zant
THese Islands each of them are in Compass 60 Miles or there abouts, they have
plenty of Currants and Oil, and Wine; and are under the Venetians.

Of Germany.
GErmany is Divided into two parts, High and Low. High Germany is bounded on
the West, with France and Belgium; on the North, with Denmark and the Baltique
Sea; on the East, with Prussia, Poland, and Hungary; and on the South with the
Alps and Italy. The Country is almost Square, each side being 650 Miles; it
has one General Governor called the Emperor, a Name derived from the Ancient
Roman Emperors, but retains very little of that Power; for most of the other
Princes are absolute in their Respective Dominions, whence this mighty Body, by
Reason of Various Interests and Differences, becomes nothing so formidable as
it would be, if firmly united under one Sovereign Monarch; The Principal
Regions are presented to you in the Table of Germany, the whole Country abounds
with most things necessary for Life.

Its Commodities are Mines of Silver, an other Inferior Metals; Wines, and
fresh Fish, Quicksilver, Allom, etc. The People are Honest, Laborious, and
Sincere, Stout Drinkers, and Good Soldiers: The Women of Indifferent
Complexions, but somewhat corpulent; as for their Diet, There is this Proverb,
The Germans have much meat, but Sluttishly dressed; The French little, but neatly
Cookt; The Spaniards neither one nor the other.

The Title of the Father descends to all the Children, every Son of a Duke, is
a Duke, every Daughter a Duchess; For Religion, some are Papists, others
Protestants; which latter are again divided into Lutherans and Calvinists.

Of the Seventeen Provinces.
LOwer Germany is that which is called Belgium, or the Netherlands, and is
bounded on the East, with the River Ems, and part of High Germany, on the West
with the German Sea, on the North with East Freesland, and on the South with
the Some, Champaign and Lorrain, containing in all Seventeen Provinces: But we
shall only speak here of the seven United Provinces, or Dutch Commonwealth;
The Names of which are, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Over-Issel, Zutphen,
Gronixgen, and West-Friesland, which was first made in the year 1581. on their
Revolt from their Ancient Sovereign the King of Spain, against whom by the
great Assistance of the English, and Princes of Orange, they Waged War many
years so successfully, that he was at last forced to treat with them as a Free
State.

These Countries are exceeding Populous, being a People very Industrious, they
have attempted to Grasp the Trade of this part of the World into their hands.

In these Provinces the Women govern all, both within doors, and without, and
make all bargains, which makes them injurious and Troublesome; the Eldest
Daughter is of the greatest Reputation, yet has no larger Portion then the
rest; they Marry Noble with Ignoble, young with old, Master with Servants, and
into strange Towns, and Foreign Countries.

There are within Holland also a great Number of Lakes and standing Waters.
They want both Corn, Wine, Oil, Wood, Wool, Hemp, Flax, and almost all other
Commodities; and yet there is not any Country in the North which abounds so
much as Holland and Zealand, in almost all the forementioned Commodities; so
great is the Advantages these Provinces receive by the Sea.

The ten Catholic Provinces, or Spanish Netherlands.
THe ten Spanish Provinces are these, Flanders, Limburg, Luxenburg, Brabant,
the Marquesate of the Holy Empire; Artots, Henault, Namurs, Meckline, and
Gerderland.

The Soil is very Fruitful, and mightily Peopled, but exceedingly wasted and
impoverished by the late Wars and Incursions made in their Country by the
French King.

In these Countries belonging to the King of Spain, are 208. Walled Towns, 150.
Towns privileged, as walled Towns; 6300. Villages with Parish Churches,
besides a great Number of Villages and Hamblets.

There are five principle Rivers in the seventeen Provinces; The Rhine, the
Meuse, the Scheld, the Haa, and Emes.

The Meuse affords abundance of Sturgeon, so big, that some of them weigh four
hundred, and some four hundred and twenty pounds, and are twelve foot long, of
Antwerp Measure; The Scheld does also abound with most sorts of Fish.

They have diverse Forests and Woods, well stored, with Red and Fallow Deer,
Goats, Wild Boares, Hares, Coneys, Badgers, Wolves, Foxes, etc. which yield
good Furrs.

The Fowl in these Countries are Partridges, Feasants, Turtle-Doves, Quails,
and any sort of Birds as we have in England.

The two Principal Cities in these Countries are Amsterdam in the Seven United
Provinces, and Antwerp in the Ten Provinces.

Amsterdam stands upon the Gulf Tie, and is built upon Piles under the
Ground, as Venice is; so that the buildings under ground, are more chargable
then above: It is very rich in Merchandise, the buildings are very Sumptuous
and Fair.

Antwerp lies on the right side of the Scheld, it flourishes exceedingly in
the Number of Inhabitants, in beautiful Buildings, and in Merchandising, which
is chiefly occasioned by the the Commodiousness of the Scheld, it being a River
of so great breadth and depth, and Ebbing and Flowing so far into the Sea.

Of Norway.
Norway the Western parts of Scandanavia, is a place very Barren and
Mountainous, so that instead of bread the People eat dried Fish, which we call
Stock Fish. They export Furs, Train-Oyl, Timber, Deals, Clapboard. It is a
Kingdom of it self, and divided into five Governments or Provinces.

1. The Government of Bahus, the chief Towns, Bahus and Maerstrand.

2. That of Agger, the chief Towns is Agger, Opslo, and Frederick Stadt.

3. That of Bergen, the chief Town Bergen, the Residence of the Viceroy.

4. The Government of Dronthem, the chief Town Dronthem, the Seat of the
Ancient Kings of Norway.

5. Wardhuyse, the chief Town Wardhuyse, near the North Cape of Norway.

The Normegians are little given to si^kness, and are of a strong Constitution;
their great inclination to Sorcery, makes them have the Reputation of selling
the Winds to the Scamen.

Of Sweden.
THe Kingdom of Sweden has on the East Muscovia, On the West the Dofriae-Hills
(that part that side from Norway) on the North the Frozen Seas, and on the
South the Baltic. The Country is little less then Italy and France put
together. The People are good VVarriers, and live hardly, the Air is sharp but
so salubrious, that it is ordinary for men to live 100 years; It abounds with
Lead, Iron, Copper, Tarr, Furrs.

Sweden Comprehends seven parts, which are.

1. Halland, Schonen and Bleking, all which go under the name of South
Gothland. The Chief Towns Lunden, Malmugen, Landskroon, and Christianstadt.

2. The North part of Gothland is divided into Ostro Gothland and Westro
Gothland; The Chief Towns Calmar, Gottenburgh, and Linkopen.

3. Sweden containing eight or nine Provinces. The Chief Cities are Stockholme,
Vpsal and Nikopen.

4. Lapland is Divided into five Regions or Terr^tories, viz. Vma, Piiha, Lula,
Tormia and Lapmark, with the Towns of the same name whereof Tormia is of most
importance.

5. The great Province of Finland, subdivided into several small Provinces, The
Chief Towns are Abbo, Wiburg and Roseburg.

6. Ingria, The Chief Towns, Noteburg and Juanagr^d.

7. Livania, or Liffland, The Chief Town, Riga, Derpt, and Revel.

The Crown of Swedland is also possessed of several Islands in the Baltic Sea;
And in Germany, the Dukedoms of Pomeren, Bremen and Ferden; The Town of Wismar,
and the Island of Rugen.

In the North Part of Sweden, Tormia and Kimi, are the most Considerable Rivers
of Scandinavia.

The Country is full of Mountains and Woods, The Commodities of the Country,
are Copper, Buttet, Tallow, Hides, Skins, Pitch, Rosin, Timber and Boards.

There are so few sick people among them, that Physicians and Apothecaries have
little or no Practice.

The Air is so sharp and salubrious, that it is ordinary for men to live an
hundred years. Their Religion Lutheran

Of Denmark.
DEnmaark Consists of three Parts, to wit, Jutland, which is a great Peninsula,
or Chersonesus, annexed to Germany.

Jutland is Divided into North and South Jutland.

1. North Jutland includs four Lutheran Diocesses, which are,

1. The Diocese of Rypen. 2. Of Arhusen. 3. Of Wiburg, and Alburg, and Schagen,
the North Cape of Denmark.

2. South- Jutland Comprehends two Dukedoms.

1. The Dukedom of Holstein, Included within the Circle of Lower Saxony.

2. The Dukedom of Sleswick, the Chief Town of the same name, with the Castles
of Gottorp, Tonningen and Fiendsburg.

The most Remarkable Islands of the Baltic are.

1. Zeland, the Chief City Copenhagen the Residence of the King, whose Brother
Prince George was Married to the Illustrious Lady ANN, Daughter to his Royal
Highness the DUKE of York, Anno 1683.

2. The Island Fuinen the Chief Towns Odensee, Middlefort and Niburg.

The Islands and Countries in the Northern Sea, which depends upon the Kingdom
of Denmark, are a great Island of Iselandia, the Chief Town, Hola a Bishopric.

The Islands Fezo.

The Kingdom of Norway, etc.

Of Poland.
THe Elective Kingdom of Poland, lies to the Eastward of Germany, on the North
of Hungary, Transylvania, and Moldavia, and South-westward from Muscovia.

It Contains two Estates, that of true Poland with the Provinces Annexed
thereto, and the great Duchy of Lithuania, with its Dependancies, which is now
united to the Crown of Poland.

The whole Kingdom is divided into twelve Provinces as may appear in the Table.
It is in Compass 2600 miles very fruitful in Barley and Cattle, and Hemp Wax,
Pitch and Tarr and other Merchandise. The Inhabitants Excellent Soldiers; They
are all pestered with factions, that they can attempt no great matter, only to
defend themselves from the Turks. They are much addicted to the Latin Tongue.

They have of all Religions amongst them, but the Present King seems much to
favor Popery, and was Eminently service able in the late War in the relief of
Vienna, and the regaming of Hungary from the Turk.

Of Lithuania.
LIthuania is the Greatest Province of all those which Compose the Estates of
the Crown of Poland; It has the Tittle of a Grand Dukedom, wherein there are
as many great Officers, as in the Kingdom of Poland.

The Country is full of Marshes and Sloughs, that there is no traveling in the
Winter for Ice.

Samogitia, a Country in this Dukdome, whose Inhabitants live very poorly.

Volhinia, the Chief City Kiou, an Ancient place, having once 300 fair
Churches, but destroyed by the Tartars; still a Bishops See, acknowledging the
Partriarch of Mosco, and of the Communion of the Greek Church; seated on the
Borysthenes, where the Cossacks have often had their Retreats. It was lately in
the hands of the Muscovite, but now said to be the Turks, in the year 1678.

In Podolia stands the well fortified and Impregnable Caminiack, which formerly
withstood the Armies of the Turks, the lesser Tartars, the Transylvanians, and
the Walachians; but at length was forced to yield to the Grand Seignior, in the
year 1672. since Retaken by the Poles; but by the last Treaty delivered to the
Turks, as also Orzanthow and Dussow, at the mouth of the Borysthenes.

Of Muscovia.
MVscovia is the vastest Empire in Europe, 3300 miles long, and 3000 broad: The
whole Country is over spread with Woods and Lakes. The People for the most
part fat and Corpulent, strong of Body, and good proportion, only Great
Bellyes, and Broad Beards, are in Fashion. The Women love not their Husbands,
unless they beat them.

They only teach their Children to Write and Read.

They wear long Robes, under which they have close coats down to their knees,
but they tie their Girdles under their bellyes.

The Religion of the Muscovite is of the Greek Church; all their Images are in
flat painting.

The Grand Duke bears the Title of Czar, as much as to say Cezar. The Habits
which he is said to wear makes him look like a Priest.

The Ambassadors of Foreign Princes are at the greatest trouble in the World
to give him his right Titles.

One of his Pedeceisers was so Barbarous, that he caused the Hat of a French
Ambassador to be nailed to his Head, because he refused to be uncovered in his
presence: but Queen Elizabeth sent an Ambassador thither soon after, a man so
Courageous, that he stood also in his presence covered, and undauntedly told
the Czar to his Face; that if he touched a hair of his Head, his great Mistress
would make his Empire to tremble; and made the Titles of his Mistress, the Queen
of England, Exceed the number of the Czars Tittles; Stiling her The M^st high
and Mighty Monarch: ELIZABETH Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Northumberland, Westmorland Cumberland, Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, etc.
Running through all the Countyes and shires in England the length of which
Titles Amazed the Czar; and he acquainted the Ambassador, That he had a great
Esteem for her Majesty and for her Subjects; and declared his willingness to
suffer her Subjects to trade in any part of his Empire, without paying any
Duties, which great Privilege was Continued to our English Merchants, until
the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the first, of glorious Memory; he mightily
resenting that Horrid Act; and that Privilege has not been yet regained.

Muscovia is Divided into two parts, the Northern and the Southern: Mosco it
the Capital City, and the Residence of the Czar.

There are at this present two Czars, who not long since sent two Ambassadors,
one from each, to his Majesty of Great Britain: 1683.

Of Turkey in Europe.
THat part of the Ottoman Empire which is Turkey in Europe, Contains the
greatest parts of Hungary, and all Transylvania, Moldavia, Bessarabie,
Walachia, Bulgoria, Servia, Bosnia, Sclavonia, Albania, Romania, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Epirus, Achaia, and Morea. with the Aegean and Jonian Islands, And in
the year 1683 the Grand Segnior brought an Army of 100000 men in Austria, where
with he thought to have Conquered, not only the small part of Hungary that is
left to the Emperor, but the greatest part of the Empire also; The Conduct of
which army was Committed to the Grand Vizier, and past by all the strong Cities
in Hungary, as Raab, Komorra, etc. and sat down before Vienna the 8th of July.
in hopes to have taken it by Surprise.

The Imperial Army under the Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain, their General,
very oppertunely Conveyed his Infanry into the City, consisting of 15000 men;
who having Count Staremburg for their Governor, a man famous for his Valor
and and Conduct, that the great fury the Turks showed in their several Assaults
Redounded to their own loss, and the encouragement of the Besieged; and were
repulsed with a very great slaughter; some say with no less then 15 or 20000
men, whose dead Bodies proved so great an Annoyance to the Turkish Army, that
the Grand Vizier desired three days Truce to bury his dead; which being denied
by the Worthy Governor, caused him to remove his Camp at a further distance,
for fear of infecting his Army; and finding himself deceived in his
Intelligence; (the Garrison being stronger than he was informed) he proceeded
to a formal Siege, which he Continued for the space of nine Weeks; with more
then ordinary Toil and Labor, working with his Mines day and night, in hopes
to have Carried the place before any Relief could come to them; and having
sprang several of them by which the place was Assaultable, he stormed it
several times, but was still beaten off with great loss, and having at last
sprung one under the Baston Lobel, he continued his Assault with greater fury
and vigor, though without success; so that after so long a time, and so many
Continued Assaluts, the Governor finding himself reduced to great Extremity,
made the Appointed Sign to the Duke of Lorraine for Relief: VVhereupon the King
of Poland being joined with the Imperial Forces, made up an Army of 85000 Men,
Horse and Foot.

It was Resolved at a General Council of War, to Attaque the Turkish Camp upon
the 12th of September new style; And Accordingly it was put in Execution. The
King of Poland having the Attacked the Grand Visiers Quarters, The Duke of
Lorraine on the side of the Bastion of the Court; and Prince Waldeck that which
leads to the Scottish gate. The Attaque being warmly begun, and Count
Staremburgh Sallying out at the same time, soon put the Infantry into disorder;
upon with their Horses fled, and with them the Grand Vizier, leaving them to
the Mercy of the Christians, who cut them all to pieces, and remained Master of
their Camp, with their Tents, the Pavilion of the Grand Vizier, Their
Artillery, and Ammunition, and a Considerable sum of Money; in this Action the
English that were there, behaved themselves very Gallantly to the great
Commendation of our Nation.

After the relief of Vienna, the two Armies under the King of Poland, and the
Duke of Lorrain continued the Pursuit, and with great Success, and regained all
the strong Holds in Hungary that were possessed by the Turks; and in all this
great Action the Turks did not Rally their Army to Face the Christians: But did
Continually fly before them.

THE General Description of ASIA.
ASIA is a very Considerable part of the World, in regard, First, That Man was
therein Created; Secondly, Here our blessed Savior was born, wrought his
Miracles, and Suffered for the Redemption of the World; Thirdly, Here was
Transacted the most Remarkable Occurences mentioned in the Old and New
Testament, and from hence all Nations of the World, and all Arts and Sciences
had their first beginning.

Many are the Religions here Followed; but the Jews, Mahometans and Idolaters,
excel the Christians in number.

Mahometisme is received by the four Principal Nations of Asia, viz. the Turks,
Arabians, Persians, and Tartars.

The Turks gives most Liberty, the Arabians are the most Superstitious, the
Persians most Rational, and the Tartars most simple.

The Turks follow the Doctrine of Omar and have their Partriarch at Badgat.

The Persians follow the Doctrine of Haly, and have their Partriarch at Ispahan.

The Greeks also have their Partriarchs here, one Residing at Antioch, and the
other at Jerusalem.

As to the Division of Asia from Europe, it has already been discoursed of, in
the Description of Europe.

The Principal Seas within the Land are the Caspian, the Euxine, and the
Persian Sea.

The Principal Rivers are the Euphrates, Tigris, Indus, Ganges, Crocas, Kiang,
etc.

The Air of Asia is almost every where Temperate, and abounds with Gold and
Silver, Precious Stones, Spices, and Silks.

Asia is in Subjection under four mighty Monarchs viz. The Grand Senior, the
Sultan of Persia; the Cham of Tartary (and now King of China) and the Great
Mogul.

A great part of Asia Consists in a great multitude of Islands, of which are
Maldives, Ceylon, Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Aynam, Japan, the Philippines, the
Moluccaes, etc. And the Island of Cyprus, and Rhodes, and some others in the
Mediterranean Sea.

Of Turkey in Asia.
THe Turk by his Puissance having overrun a great share of two of the
Considerable parts of the World; Possesses in Asia, these Countries Anatolia,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia, and Georgia.

1. Anatolia vulgarly Natolia, and Anciently Asia the less, a Country once of
great Fertility, but now wast and almost desolate, there were the seven
Churches to whom St. John Directs his Book of the Revelation, as Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamas, Sardis, etc.

Formerly the Air was Exceeding sound and Healthful, now every six years the
Pestilence destroys Millions of People.

The Mohammedan Religion is chiefly professed in most places thereof.

Ephesus once famous for the Temple of Diana, of 425 foot in length, 220 in
breadth, supported with 127 Marble Pillars, 70 foot high, 220 years in
building, seven times fired.

Smirna, a place of great Plenty, the Soil abounding with Wine and Oil.

The heats are very Excessive in Summer, (and would be unsupportable, were it
not for the Breezes that come off the Sea about 10 a clock, and continues till
evening,) and is followed with the Pestilence and Malignant Fevers.

Pergamus and Sardit, have been Royal Cities, Pergamus is famous for the
wealth of Attalus, for the Invention of Parchment, and the Birth place of
Galen, for its Tapestry, and for its being one of the seven Churches.

Sardis for the Residence of the Kings of Lydia, and also one of the 7 Churches.

The most Renowned Mountains of the lesser Asia are Taurus, which divides Asia
into two parts, and is the most famous Mountain in the World for its height and
length.

Euphrates divides Armenia and Mesopotamia from Asia Minor, Syria, and Arabia.

Tygris, descends from the Georgian Mountains falls into diverse lakes, loses
it self diverse times in the Earth cutts through the Mountains and divides
Mesopotamia from Assyria, washes the Ruins of Nineveh, receives the branches
of the Euphrates, and disembogues it self into the Persian Gulf.

Syria, and Phenicia, Two Adjoining Provinces wherein is Mount Libanus, famous
in Scripture for goodly Cedars: The Chief Cities Damascus, Antioch, Tire, and
Sidon, and those now more renowned for Commerce are Aleppo and Scandaroone. The
Country abounds with Wheat, Oil, Balm, etc.

Canaan or Palestine, in length but 200 miles, and in breadth not above 50; yet
so Fruitful that we read in Holy writ, it once sustained 1300000 fighting Men,
besides the tribes of Levi and Benjamin, but now it is nothing so plentiful;
It Is now under the Turk Inhabited by mixed People, pretending to Christianity,
showing diverse of the places mentioned in the Scripture.

Mesopotamia or Diarbeck lying between Euphrates and Tygris, the Soil is
exceeding Fertile, and from hence supposed to be the place where the Garden of
Eden was.

Upon Tygris stands Babylon, now called Bagdat, where happened the Confusion of
Languages after the Flood, and is only a great Ruinous heap near which place
stood the Tower of Babel.

Babylon was built by Nimrod much Augmented by Nebuchadnezzar, it was taken by
Cyrus, Darius, and by Alexander the great, who died there.

In the year 1638 when Amurath the fourth retook it from the Persians, he
caused three Men out of every Tent throughout his Army, to be cast into the
Mote, and over them a vast number of Bavins and Woolsacks, that he might the
more easily assault the place.

Armenia now called Turcomania taking its name from the Turks, who being a
People of Schythia, and too populous to get food sufficient in so Barren a
Country broke through the Caspian Sea, and seated themselves here in the year
Anno Domini 844.

Georgia, not so called from St. George whom yet here they greatly reverence
but from the Georgi who long ago Inhabited the Adjacent Countries, the People
now though Tributaryes to the Turk, Profess Christianity, and agree in most
points with the Greek Church: It is seated between the Euxine and the Caspian
Sea.

Of Arabia.
ARabia is bounded on the East with the Persian Gulf, and Chaldea, and on the
South the Ocean, and on the West the Red Sea, and some part of Egypt, and on
the North the River Euphrates, with some part of Palestine.

It is Commonly divided into three parts, viz. Arabia the Stony, Arabia the
Desert, and Arabia the Happy.

Arabia the Stony lies near the Holy Land.

Arabia the Desert, lies near Chaldea and the Euphrates; Arabia the Happy
advances it self between the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, which divides it
from Persia; and this part is the greatest, and Richest, and best Inhabited of
all.

Arabia the Stony has for its chief City Herat, which signifies a Rock,
whereon it was built, with an advantageous Situation, a place of great
strength.

On the Coast of the Red Sea is the Castle Tar, a Walled Town and a Port, very
famous, and it is believed the Israelites having passed the Red Sea, Entered
the Deserts this way; and it is likewise a Passage, where the Carravans stop at
their return from Mecca.

Arabia the Desert, so called by reason of the vast Sandy Deserts, and the
uninhabitableness thereof, of, scarce offerding either food for Man or Beast:
So that those which travel those Countries are forced to carry their Provisions
with them, and guide themselves to the place designed by the help of the Stars,
or Mariners Compass, as they do at Sea, and go in great Companies for fear of
being robbed or rifled by the wild Arabs.

The People are much addicted to Theft by which they get their living, being
stout and warlike Men; their Chief food being Venison, Milk, and Herbs; they go
half naked; their Wives they hire for what time they please,

Arabia the Happy may properly be so called by Reason of the Fruitfulness and
Richness of the Soil, which Produces plenty of Corn, Wine, Fruit; and
Odoriferous Spices; great increase of Cattle; also abounding in Gold, Pearls,
Balsom Myrrh, Frankincense, and several forts of Druggs.

These People are very Faithful and Punctual in their Promises; here are great
quantities of Ostriches which for the most parts abide in the Deserts.

In the Province of Hagiaz, the Chief Cities toward the Red Sea are Medina,
and Mecca, this last being the Birthplace of Mahomet, and the other his
Burying-Place.

Medina, though Situated in a Barren and Desolate Place, adjoining on Arabia
the Stony, yet by Reason of, its being the Sepulcher of Mahomet, is become a
fair City, containing about 6000 Houses, being a place of great Trading and
resort, by Reason of the Pilgrims, which flock thither to pay their Blind
Devotions.

This Sepulcher or Tomb wherein their Prophet lies, is Enclosed within an Iron
grate, and Covered with green Velvet, having the supply of a new one every year
from the Grand Seignior, and the old one becomes the fees of the Priests, which
they sell in small pieces and shreds for great Relics to the Pilgrims, which
brings them in great Revenues.

In this Temple are about 3000 Lamps of Gold and Silver, wherein is Balsam and
such other rich Odours, Ointments, and Oils, which are Continually kept burning.

The People for the most part are of a mean Stature, Lean Swarthy Complexioned,
Effeminate voices, very Swist of foot, and very Expert in the Bow and Dart.

The Horses are also little and lean, and spare in feeding; yet Courageous,
Swift, and of great Labor.

The People are almost all Mahometans, except some Greek Christians, toward
the Mounts of Sinai and Horeb; likewise toward the Red Sea, and in the Deserts
of Arabia the Stony, and Arabia the Desert; Arabia the Happy, is the
unhappiest, by having the fewest.

Of Persia.
THe Kingdom or Empire of the Sophy of Persia, is one of the greatest and most
famous of all Asia; it Extends from Tygris and Euphrates on the west, almost to
the River Indus in the East; And from the Gulf of Persia, and the Arabian and
Indian Sea, which bounds it on the South, unto the River Gehon and to the
Caspian Sea, which are its Bounds of the North; so Containing about 600 leagues
in length, and 500 in breadth.

The Persian Monarchy began under Ninus, and lasted under 30 and odd Kings 13
or 1400 years, ending in Sardanapalus.

It divided it self into Medes and Babylonians, afterward the Persians made
themselves Masters of it.

Alexander the Great held this Empire but few Years; and dying, it was divided
amongst many of his Captains, who at last took upon them the Title of Kings.

Hispahan the Metropolitan City of the Persian Monarchy, seated in the Parthian
Territory, which in its Situation is pleasant and delightful, and in its Soil
Fruitful, its air Serene and Healthful, and for bigness is now become the
greatest City in all Persia; whose Walls are in Circumference a reasonable Days
Journey, containing not less then 75000 Houses.

The Inhabitants do all their affairs on Horseback, as well Public as
Private, in the buying and vending their Commodities: But the Slaves never Ride,
which makes the difference between them. The Native Commodities of Persia are
Gold, and Silver, Raw-Silk in such great Quantities that they furnish most part
of the East.

The heats in these parts in the Summer season are so great, especially toward
the South part of the Mountains, that the Inhabitants are forced to forsake the
Cities, and retire into the Mountains for coolness.

The Persians are of low Stature, yet have great limbs and strong, they are of
an Olive Color, hawk'd Nosed, and Black Hair'd, which they shave every Eight
Days; they paint their Hands and Nails of a Reddish Color.

In their Habits they follow much of the Turks; their Clothes have no
proportion to their Bodies, hanging loose and large, much in the Fashion of the
Women; their Garments they Gird about their Waists with a Scarf; Their Turbants
are Red. The Women in their streets, go with white Vailes over their Faces,
down to their knees; they are very Neat and Rich in their Clothes and Houses.

The Persians are very Strict, Superstitious, and Ceremonious in their
Religion, as the Turk is. They Bury their Dead three hours after they are
departed, Except they Dye in the night: They wash or bathe the Bodies of their
Dead before they are interred, in a great Cistern, which they have for the same
purpose near the Mosque, to which place they are Carried on a Bier in their
Clothes, and after they are stripped and washed, they put them in clean Linen,
Anoint them, and so bear them to the Grave, being accompanied with his Friends,
Relations, Servants, etc.

The King of Persia Governs by an absolute Power, disposing of the Lives and
Estates of his Subjects, as best pleases him, making his Will his Law, not
daring to Murmur, though his Actions are never so unjust.

The Administration of Justice is decided by the King, but first tried by the
Secular Judges, who Examine the same, and deliver up their Opinion to the King.

They have several Severe and strict Punishments, which they inflict upon the
Offenders, according to the Hainousness of the Crimes; for some Offenses they
cut off their Ears and Nose, sometimes their Foot and Hands, for others to be
Beheaded; for some again, they are tied between two boards and so sawed
asunder, with several other cruel Deaths, too tedious to name.

In their Military affairs they are well Experienced, their Army consisting
only of Horse, who have for their Armor Darts and Javelins, yet have they some
in the Nature of our Dragoones.

They have great quantity of all Sorts of Cattle, Grain and Fruits; amongst
their Fruit Trees, they have great quantities of black and white
Mulberry-Trees, which grow not above five or six Foot high, which serves for
Food for their Silk Worms, which makes them great store of Silk.

Of the Empire of the Great Mogul.
THe Great Mogul, is one of the greatest and most Powerful Princes of Asia,
whose vast Empire Comprehends the Greatest part of the Continent of India. In
which large Territories there are several Indian Kingdoms Tributary to him; He
is esteemed the Richest Prince of the World; Sha Johan who Reigned 40 Years,
lest him, behind him, five Millions of Livers: And the Throne that he made cost
one hundred and Sixty Millions, and Five-Hundred-Thousand Livers, besides six
other Thrones, set all over with Diamonds, Rubyes, Emeralds, and Pearls.

He is able to bring into the Field One-Hundred-Thousand Horse, and
Two-Hundred-Thousand Foot, and two or three thousand Elephants.

The Great Moguls Ordinary Guard Consists of about twelve-Thousand Men, besides
Six-Hundred of his Life Guard; he never stirs abroad to Hunt, take the Air, or
the like, without the Atendance of Ten-Thousand Men of all Degrees; besides, to
make his State the Greater, there are one Hundred Elephants, Richly trapt and
covered with Scarlet Velvet, or the like; on each of these Elephants there are
seated two Men, the one to guide him, and the other Supports a large Banner of
Silk richly Embroidered with Gold and Silver; after these Hundred Elephants
comes the Mogul, either mounted on an Excellent Horse, or else in a Coach or
Sedan, attended by his Nobles and other Courtiers: After whom comes about
Five-Hundred Elephants, Camels and Wagons, which are to Carry the Baggage; For
he Commonly Encamps in the Field, to have the Benefit of the Coolness of the
Air: The Mogul Celebrates with great Pomp and State the first Day of the Year.

The Emperor himself is a Turkish Mohammedan, although the most part of his
Vassals are Pagans; For as there are several sorts of People, so there are
diverse sorts of Religions amongst them. The Country is very Fertile, yielding
great store of Corn and Rice; and all Sorts of Provisions are very Cheap, and
the Inhabitants very Sober and Temperate.

It is conceived to be the largest Country of any one name in the World,
(Except China and Tartaria.)

The whole Country is Divided into two Peninsula's, one Peninsula is accounted
on this side the River Ganges, called India Intra-Gangem, and the other
Peninsula beyond the Ganges, called India-Extra-Gangem, of each we shall take a
Brief Survey.

Of India on this side the Ganges, called India-Intra-Gangem.
INdia-Intra-Gangem, is bounded on the East with the River Ganges, till the
fall thereof into the Sea; And after, that with that large and spacious Bay,
called the Gulf of Bengala. On the West, with the Territories of the Persian
Empire, and part of the Arabian Seas; On the North where it is broadest with
Mount Taurus; On the South with the Indian Ocean, ending in a sharp point or
Promontory, as you may see in the Map.

We Divide this Peninsula into ten parts or Divisions, being under several
Kings, Governments, and Religions. In the Kingdom of Cuncan, are Goa, Visapore,
Dabul and Rejapore, Carapatan and Mongrelia: Goa is a City, as fair, Rich, and
of as great Traffic as any in the East- Indies, being Situated on an Island of
the same name, taken by the Portugals in the Year 1510, and have since that
Established themselves so Powerfully there, that their Viceroy, Bishop, and
their Council, for the East- Indies, have their Residence there; Their streets
are large, their Houses fair, especially their Palaces and Public Buildings,
which are very Magnificent, their Churches are Stately, and Richly Adorned; The
City is 15 Miles in Compass. The Portugals live here in all manner of Delight
and Pleasure.

Here on this Coast is also Situated Surrat and Bombay, two great Factoryes of
the English Merchants.

The whole Country is under the Government of the S^vagee, who is a Tributary
to the great Mogul. The People bloody and treacherous, addicted much to the Art
of Poysonning, and do Fight commonly with Poisoned Arrows.

A notable Instance of their Treachery I shall give you; Which was in the Year
1683. There was three of their Ships and four Grabs, manned with 1500 of their
Men, which the Suvagee afterward (by way of Excuse) pretended to be Arabians,
and took the Ship to be a Portuguese, and as a token of their Resentment
Imprisoned the Chief of them; They set upon one of our East- India Ships,
called the President, Captain Jonathan Hide Commander, whom they Attaqued very
desperately, and was as Briskly received by the English, and as bravely
Repulsed with a great Slaughter of the Indians: And Recovered their Ship, to
the great Comendations of all that were there in. Which brave Souls had not the
Happiness to Enjoy the Honor of that Action in their own Country. The Ship
being unfortunately cast away in February following, and all their Men lost but
two, as they were coming into the Chanel, to the great grief and sorrow of the
Merchants and Owners, as well as their Particular Friends and Relations.

Malabar, extends its self from the River Gangeraco, to Cape Comarine, 300
miles in length, but is not above 50 in breadth, and ending toward the Cape in
a Point; The Country is more Populous for the bigness then any in India,
enjoying a very Temperate Air, and a Fruitful Soil, well Watered, and indented
with many Creeks; The Ground unfit for Corn but Plentiful in Rice, and all
manner of Spices, as Ginger, Cinnamon, Cassia, Pepper, and most Excellent
Fruits.

The People on this part of India, are of a blacker Complexion then the rest of
the Indians, well Limbed, wearing their Hair long and Curled: About their Heads
they wear a Hankerchief, wrought with Gold and Silver, and about their middle a
Cloth, which hangs down to conceal their Nakedness.

The Natives on the whole Coast of India, are of Nature Treacherous and Bloody,
more properly to be termed Desperate, than Stout and Valiant; in their Wars
they use Poisoned Arrows, as they do in their Pyrating and Thieving, both by
Sea and Land.

The Kingdom of Bisnagar, seated in the Bay of Bengala, between twelve and
fifteen Degrees of North Latitude, in which Kingdom is the great Factory of our
East- India Company, called Fort St. George; almost all the People are
Idolaters, some Mahumetans and a sew Catholics. Amongst the Customs of those
Heathens, they have the Inhumane Custom for the Women, to Burn themselves with
the Corpse of their deceased Husbands, (in this manner) the Husband being Dead,
the Wife prepares her self for her Funeral Habit in Transparent Lawn; Her
Nose, Ears, and Fingers she Adorns with Precious Stones, in one hand She holds
a Ball, and in the other a Nosegay of Flowers, both as Emblems of Par^dise: And
being thus Habited: She is Accompanied to the place by her Relations, Friends,
and Acquaintance, and all the way Going, the Priest denotes the Joys She is to
Possess, together with the Assurance of Enjoying her Husband, which does Excite
her to Valor; so that when She comes to the Place, sees the Flame, and the
Carcass of her Dead Husband, whom She longs to be with, and being as it were
Transported with Joy, She takes leave of her Friends and Relations, and Jumps
into the Flame, in which the Corpse of her Husband was first put, both which is
soon Reduced to Ashes, during which time they have several sorts of Music, to
Drown the Cries of the poor Wretch, casting in store of sweet Wood and Oil into
the Fire, to take away the Unsavory smell.

Of the Island Ceylon.
THe Island Ceylon, lies to the Eastward of Cape Comarine, of an Oval form,
divided from the Main, by a shallow Chanel. The Havens Refreshing it with their
Dews; The Air with Fragrant freshness.

The Land stored with whole Woods of Cinnamon, besides Fruits, Lemons and
Oranges, etc. Of Fowls and Beasts great Plenty, both Wild and Tame; It so
abounding with all Contentments, that the Indians hold it to be a Paradise; In
this Island is a mighty high Hill, called Adam's Pico, reputed to be seven
Leagues high.

The People for the most part Tall and Strait of Body, in matters of Religion
they are generally Idolaters, very Active and well Skilled in Juggling. This
Island is Divided into several Kingdoms, as of Cand^e, etc. And a City of that
Name, the Seat of the King. This Island is memorable for the 20 Years Captivity
of Captain Knox, and of his Miraculous Escape, which when he Returned to
England, he wrote a large Treatise of the Nature of this Island, and the
Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, (to which) I refer you.

Of the Maldive Islands.
NEar unto the Coast of Malabar, lies a great Number of Islands, called
Maldive, from Mal, the City of those Islands, and Dive which signifies an
Island; They are Divided into 13 divisions, divided by certain Channels. From
hence the King of Maldives terms himself King of 13 Provinces, in which are
Contained Eleven-Thousand Islands, as is Reported by some that have been there;
here they take Multitudes of little shells, called Couries, which pass in many
places for Money. The King Resides in the Isle of Mal, which is one of the
greatest; but not above a League and a half In Circumference, but it is a most
Fruitful place, strangers frequent it, because of the Court; There Grows on
these Islands neither Rice nor Wheat, yet all sorts of Provisions are Cheaper
here then in other parts of India; There are here abundance of Cocoe Nuts; they
have little Beef or Mutton, no Dogs (for they Abhor them,) they have great
store of Fish. The Inhabitants are very Industrious and Sober People.

Of India beyond the Ganges, called India-Extra Gangem.
INdia Extra-Gangem, is that part of the great Continent of India, which lies
on the East Side of the River Ganges; In this Peninsula are a great Number of
Kingdoms, but I shall only discourse of the Principal ones that are Contained
in the Table, which are Arracan, Pegu, Martaban, Siam, Cambodia, Couchin,
China, Malacca, and Tanquin.

The Kingdom of Arracan is Situated on the Eastside of the Bay of Bengala,
extending it self from the Tropic of Cancer to the sixteenth Degree of North
Latitude, it being a brave and Fruitful Country.

The Kingdom of Pegu, when in its Splendour, was so Rich and Powerful, that some
would equal it to China. They have in many places Mines of Gold, Silver and
Precious Stones; Besides Grains, Fruits, Herbs, Fowl, and Beasts, which are
here found Excellent. And without doubt it is the Richest Country of all the
Indies, and for the same Reason one of the best Peopled and most Powerful.

The Chief City of this Kingdom is Pegu, the Metropolis; The Houses well Built;
The Palace-Royal is Seated in the midst of the City, having its partitular
Wall-Moat and other Fortifications.

The Habit of the Natives is but mean, contenting themselves for the most part
with a piece of Linen, to Cover their Nakedness; They all black their Teeth,
because they say Dogs Teeth are white; They are Generally all Pagans; Those
that Marry, Buy their Wives of their Parents.

The Kingdom of Martaban toward the Gulf of Bengala, is Contiguous to Pegu, to
which it has been Subject, at present to Siam; this Kingdom has many Ports
frequented for Trade, for besides its Grains, Fruits, Oils, and Medicinal
Herbs, it is Rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, etc.

The Kingdom of Siam has several Cities of Note, but we shall (for Brevity
sake) only treat of Siam, as the Metropolis, being a City of large Extent, and
of so great strength, that in the Year 1567. they stoutly defended themselves
against an Army of 1400000 Fighting Men, which the King of Pegu brought against
them, for twenty Months together. The Commodities of this City and Kingdom are
Cotton, Linen of several sorts, Benjamin Lacque, of which they make Excellent
hard Wax.

The Kingdom of Cambodia, which lies between the Gulfs of Siam and
Couchin-China. The Principal Cities Ravecca and Camboja; The People in their
manners and Customs, Resemble those of Siam, whose Subjects they have been.

The Kingdom of Couchin-China, lies to the Eastward of Camboja, its Name
signifies west China, and was supposed formerly to belong to China, whose
Language, Manners, Customs, Government, Religion, and other Ceremonies, they
yet retain. All the Country is Fertile, abounding in Rice, Fruits, and Herbs.
They have Gold, Silver, Silk, Porcelain, and many other valuable Commodities;
The Air Healthful, and the Soil so Abundant in all things, that the Inhabitants
know nothing of Contagion, or Famine. They are Courteous, Liberal, kind to
Strangers, and Faithful in their dealings.

In the Peninsula of Malacca, are diverse Kingdoms, which are Tributary to
Siam, Except the City of Mallacca.

The whole Country is well Traded, by Reason of its Archepelago, which contains
several Islands, and of its Isthmus, which facilitates the Transportation of
Merchandise, from one Sea to another; and of its Ports, which are Commodious.

Patane, within few Years is grown Famous; The Kingdom being frequented by
diverse Nations, perticularly the Chinois, who bring thither Parcelain, and
diverse Manufactures and Instruments of Husbandry; The Soil is good, producing
Fruit every Month in the Year; Their Hens, Ducks, and Geese, often lay Eggs
twice a Day.

Ihor is Situated on the utmost point of the Peninsula, its Chief City was
taken and ruined by the Portugals in 1603. who took from thence Fifteen-Hundred
brass Cannons.

The Kingdom of Tanquin, divides China from Couchin-China, and has about 150
Leagues of Sea Coast. This Kingdom contains 7 Provinces. The King of Tanquin,
Ordinarily entertaines a Militia of 50000 Men.

The Land has Beautiful Plains, and Watered with many great Rivers; They have
neither Asses nor Sheep, but many Horses, Elephants and Rhinocerotes, whose
Flesh, Skins, Bones, Teeth, Nails and Horns, serve for Antidotes against
Poison; The Catholic Religion was so Introduced some Years past, that there
was estimated to be more then 200000 Christened Souls; Two-Hundred great
Churches, and great Quantities of Chapels and Oratories, but since there has
hapened great Changes; in those Kingdoms the Portugals have several Towns and
Cities, by which they have a great Revenue.

Of the Island of Sumatra.
THe Island of Sumatra, lies on the North of Java Major, and a long the
West Side of Mallacca, the length thereof Extends from the North-West to the
South-East, about 800 miles, and is 200 in breadth.

The Air is very hot and unwholesome, by Reason of the gross Vapors, drawn from
the many Fens and Rivers, which are found to be in it. The Soil not Capable of
such Grain as in other places, except Rice and Millet; it Affords great plenty
of Wax and Honey, store of Silks and Cottons, Rich Mines, not only of Tin,
Iron, Copper, Sulphur, and other Minerals: But of Gold such quantity, that some
conceive this Island to be Solomon's Ophir, for one of the Kings thereof wrote a
Letter to King James, wherein he hinted the Riches of his Country Abounding in
Gold, and that he had in his Dominions a Mountain of Gold, King of which Golden
Mountain, he Entitled himself in his Regal Style, his Title is also King of
Achem. His Covernment is Absolute, and merely Arbitrary, executing what he has
a mind to, without form of Law. So Cantelous, that without his Placard, no
Stranger can have Ingress into his Dominions, nor is Admittance to his Presence
granted to any whom he first sends not for, by an Officer with a Gilded Staff;
He is conceived to be strong, both by Sea and Land; his Country Populous, his
Elephants many and well Trained.

Of the Island Borneo.
THe Island Borneo, is Situate under the Equator, and is Adjudged to be more
then 2200 miles in Circumference. The People Generally more white then the rest
of the Indians, of good Wits and Aproved Integrity.

The Country is said to be provided Naturally, with all things Necessary; But
unfurnished with Asses, Oxen, Herds of Cattle, except only Horses, and those
but small of Stature; the great Riches of it, being Camphir, Agarick, and some
Mines of Adamants.

The Island is divided between two Kings of two Religions; The King of Borneo
and his Subjects are all Mahumetans, and those of Laus still Remaining in their
Ancient Gentilisme. These think the Sun and Moon to be Man and Wife, and the
Stars their Children, Ascribing to each of them Divine Honors, to the Sun
especially, whom they Salute at his first Rising, with great Reverence.

Their Public businesses are Treated of commonly in the Night.

The King of Borneo keeps the Greater State, not to be spoken with, but by the
Mouth of some of his own Interpreters, and in his Palace Served by no other
Atendants, than Maids or Women.

Of the Island Lucon.
THe Island of Lucon begineth at the thirteenth Degree, and continues up to
the Ninteenth Degree of North Latitude, lying South from China* Manilla is its
Chief City, well Built after the Modern way, and its Houses are of free Stone,
Built by the Spaniards; this being one of the Philippine Islands; So called
from Philip King of Spain.

The Governor, or Vice Roy of these Islands as also an Arch Bishop, who has a
Spiritual Jurisdiction over all these Islands which he exercises by three
Suffagan Bishops.

This City is very populous, here commonly refiding 15000 Chinois, besides
Japoneses and Spaniards, which drive a Trade in several good Commodities.

Of the Island Paragoa.
THe Island Paragoa stretches it self Southwest, and North-East, in length
above 100 Leagues, not having above Ten, Fifteen, or Twenty Five in breadth, it
begins almost at the Eighth Degree, and ends not till the Eleventh Degree of
North Latitude. It is said, that it bears Figs as thick as ones Arm. Its King
is a Vassal to him of Borneo.

Of China.
CHina is bounded on the North, with Altay and the Eastern Tartars, from which
Continued with a Chain of Hills, (part of those of Ar a at) and where that
Chain is broken off, or interrupted with a great wall, extended 400 Leagues in
Length.

On the south part with Couchin, China, and partly with the Ocean; on the East
with the Oriental Ocean, and on the West with part of India. It is said to
contain in Circuit 3000 Leagues, Containing not less then Sixteen Provinces at
this day. The Country is very Rich and Fertile, so that in some places they
have two and in some three Harvests in a year.

The People are for the most part of a Swarthy Complexion, short nosed, black
eyed, and very thin beards; they wear their Garments very long, with long loose
sleeves, and their hair long; they drink their drink hot, and eat their meat
with two sticks of Ivory or Ebony.

The Son is bound to follow his fathers occupation; The People are good
Artificers, Ingenious and Excellent in all things they take in hand, as the
Purcelian Dishes, curious Carvings, and the fine painted works which comes over
from thence does manifest. They are effeminated with ease and pleasure; and are
not much given to Wars.

Of both Sexes, there is thought to be Contained in this Country not fewer then
Seventy Minions. In Matters of Religion, are generally all Gentiles.

The Forces which this King is able to draw into the Field, must needs be
infinite, Considering that incredible number of Subjects under his Command, for
whereas France is thought to Contain Fifteen Millions of People, Italy with the
Isles, as many, Germany with the Switzers and Belgic Provinces about that
Proportion; Spain not above Seven Millions, and the Kingdom of England and
Wales not above Five Millions which is in all 57 Millions, his people is 13
Millions more then all these put together. The Government of this Kingdom is
Tyrannical, there being no Lord but the King, no Title of Dignity or Nobility
known amongst them, nor Toll or Duty paid to any but to him.

The Dignity of the Crown is Hereditary, falling to the Eldest Son after his
decease. The King, they highly reverence, calling him the Son of Heaven, and
the Son of God, etc.

The great City of Pequin, now the Seat of the King is of a vast bigness,
Containing within its Walls 3300 Pogodes or Temples, wherein are continually
sacrificed a great number of Wild Beasts and Birds. In the Walls which
encompasseth this City are 360 Gates, to each of which is joined a small Fort,
where a Guard is continually kept as also a Register to take the names of
persons, that pass thereat, each of the streets having its Captain and other
Officers who are to look after the same, and every night to shut up the Gates;
Here are about 120 Aquaducts and Canals upon which are near 1800 Fair Bridges
sustained on Arches. This City is the Residence of the King, when he is in the
Northern Provinces as Nanquin is in the Southern.

Of Tartary.
TArtary is seated on the most Northern part of Asia, and extends it self from
East to West; from the River Volga, and Oby (that separates it from Euprope)
unto the straight of Jesso which separates it from America. Their Neighbors
are the Muscovites on the West, on the North the Tartarian Sea, and the
Persians, the Mogolls and the Chinois on the South, on the East the Straits of
Jesso or Anian, not yet certainly known.

The People are of an indifferent Stature, ugly Countenances, thick Lips,
Hollow Eyed, Flat Noses, broad faced, very strong, Stout, Valiant, and good
Warriers, very Active, Vigilant, exceeding quick of foot; patient in all
afflictions, they are very Rude, Barbarous, and revengeful, do eat their
Enemies, and drink their blood, as Wine at Feasts.

Their Habit is mean, made of Course stuff, reaches but to their Knees, yet
they are very Proud, and think their Cham to be the greatest Prince in the
World.

In Matters of Religion they are generally Pagans and Mahometans The Pagan
being the best Gentleman, being of the Elder House.

Their Food is mean and sluttishly dressed; they eat Horses, and drink Mares Milk.

The Government is Tyrannical, their Great Cham being Lord of all, in whose
Breast lies their Laws. Every man has the liberty of having two or three
Wives, which they never choose, but out of their own Tribe.

The Country is very Fertile in most places, abounding in Wheat, Rice, Wool,
Hemp, Silk, Musk, Rubarb, great Herds of Camells and Horses, which they vend to
the Chinois, Mogolls, and other Indians that comes thither to Trasick.

A General Description. OF AFRICA.
CHAP. I.
AFRICA is a Peninsula so great, that is makes the third, and most southerly
part of our Continent. It is bounded on all sides by the Sea, it is by the
Latins called Africa, and the Greeks Lybia. It approaches so near to Spain
that only the Straights of Gibralter, divides them, and is joined to Asia only
by a small Isthmus of Thirty or Forty Leagues between the Red Sea, and the
Mediterranean.

It is every where Inhabited, (though not so well as Europe and Asia,) partly
by reason of the unsupportable heats, and partly for want of water in many dry
Countries.

As to its divisions. In the higher part of Africa is Barbary, Billedulgerid
and Egypt; further South is the deserts of Zaara, the Country of Negroes and
Guinea; in the higher Ethiopia, or under Egypt, are Nubia, Abissina, and
Zanguebar; In the lower or Inferior Ethiopia, Congo, Mono, Motapa, and the
Cafrees.

Barbary extends it self along the Mediterranean-Sea from the Ocean to Egypt,
and is bounded on the South by Mount Atlas.

Billedulgerid lies along this Mountain, likewise from the Ocean unto Egypt,
bounded by Zaara, or desert. Egypt is only one valley from the Cataracts of
Nile unto the Mediterranean-Sea. Likewise Zaara the desert, the Country of the
Negroes and Guinea, stretch themselves from the Ocean unto the high and low
Ethiopia; We have divided Ethiopia into the higher and lower placing in the
Higher, Nubia, Abissina and Zanguebar; in the lower Congo, Monomotapa and
Cafrees.

The Mountains in Africa are in great number and are very remarkable for their
height, and the Metals wherewith they abound. The most famous are Mount
Atlas, those of the Moon, and Siere Lione; Atlas was the most famous amongst
the Ancients, who believed it bounded the world on the South; The Mountains of
the Moon are higher than any in Europe, and are always covered with Snow and
Ice. The largest and most famous Rivers of Africa are the Nile and the Niger.

The Emperors, Kings and Princes which at present possess Africa are in very
great number; The most powerful and Considerable, are the great Turk or Sultan
of the Ottomans, who hold all Egyp^, a great part of Barbary, and almost all
the Coast that touches the Red Sea. The Negus of the Abissines, who possesses
the fairest and greatest part of the Higher Ethiopia, the Xeriffs of Fez and
Morocco, which have held those two Kingdoms in Barbary, in which Country was
situated the City and Garrison of Tangier, belonging to his Imperial Majesty of
Great Britain, which was demolished in the year 1684. managed by the prudent
Conduct of the Right Honorable George Lord Dartmouth in the Ship of Grafton,
and several others under his Command.

The Religions in Africa may be reduced to four, viz. Mahometism, Christianity,
Paganism and Judaism, Mahometism, possesses Barbary, Biledulgerid, Egypt, Zaara
the desert part of the Negroes and a good part of Zangubar. Paganism holds part
of the Negroes, Nubia and Guinea, and all the Lower Ethiopia, with the Cafrees,
and some mixture otherwhere. Christianity holds in Africa almost all the whole
Empire of the Abissines, and part of Egypt, and by the Portugals in their
several Factories and Colonies that they have upon the Coasts of Africa.

As for Judaism it is scattered in many Cities on the Coast of Barbary, as at
Morocco, Fez, Algier, etc. Likewise in Egypt, and on the Confines of the
Abassines.

CHAP. II. Of the Country of Africa in particular.
Of Barbary.
THe People in Barbary are of a duskish or blackish Complexion, of Stature Tall
and well proportioned, they are of an Active Disposition for Horsemanship,
otherwise excessive idle; they are very subtle, close, perfidious, inconstant,
Proud, much addicted to Luxury; and therefore by consequence very jealous of
their Wives, whom they keep with great severity, and that the more according to
their handsomness.

Their Religon is Mahometism, and are for the most part inclined to Literature
and Arts.

The Moors of Fez and Morocco are well disposed, strong, active, and yet
melancholy, they may marry four Wives, and as many Concubines as they can keep.

Here the women at the death of their friends, assemble themselves together,
habit themselves in Sackeloath and Ashes, and sing a Funeral Dirge to the
praise of the deceased, and at the end of every Verse howl and cry, and this
they do for seven days together.

Of Billedulgerid.
BIlledulgerid, or Land of Dates, has Barbary on the North, from whence it is
separated by Mount Atlas, on the south Zaara, on the west the great Ocean Sea,
and on the East Egypt.

The Air is healthful, they live long, are deformed, and are held base people,
ignorant of all things, are addicted to Theft, Murder, and are very deceitful,
they feed grossly, and are great hunters, they acknowledge Mahomet.

Of Zaara.
ZAara is an Arabian name, and signify Desert; The Country is generally hot
and dry, it has but little water, except some few wells, and those salt, if
there falls great rains, the Land is much better; but besides the leanness of
the soil, there is sometimes such vast quantities of Grasshoppers, that they eat
and ruin all that the earth produces.

It is so barren and ill Inhabited, that a man may travel a week together
without seeing a tree, or scarce any grass or water.

The People are Bereberes and Africans, almost all follow Mahometism.

This great desert is divided into five principal parts, as is showed in the
Table and Map.

Of the Land of Negroes.
THe Negroes are People about the River Niger, which has taken its name from
these people, and these people from their Color.

In this Division are placed several Kingdoms as you will find marshalled in
the Table; and what is remarkable in them, we shall briefly touch.

Some of the Kingdoms are rich in Grain, Cotton, Cattle and Gold, the Country
of the Negroes is esteemed as fertile, as those watered with the Nilo; it bears
twice a year, and each time sufficient to furnish them with Corn for five whole
years; which makes them not sow the Lands, but when they judge they shall have
need; they keep their Corn in Pits and Ditches under ground, which they call
Matamores.

The People are generally idle and ignorant but bear great respect to their
Kings.

Of Guinea.
GVinea is that part of the Coast of Africa, which is found between the River
Niger and the Equinoctial Line. This Coast from East to West is 7 or 800
Leagues long, and not above 100 or 150 in breadth.

The Soil of Guinea very fertile, and for the most part bears twice a year,
because they have two Summers and two winters. The Commodities of the Country
are Gold and Elephants Teeth in great abundance, in Wax. Hides, Cotton and
Ambergreese, and for these Commodities, they barter for course Cloth, both
Lannen and Woolen, Red Caps, Freez Mantles and Gowns, and leather bags, Guns,
Swords, Copper Bars, and Iron Knives, Hammers, Axes, etc.

The Inhabitants go naked, save about their Waste they tie a piece of Linen,
yet very proud and stately, in matters of Religion, great Idolaters worshipping
Beasts; on this Coast are several Factories belonging to the Royal African
Company.

Of Congo.
TO the southward of the Equinoctial Line, and unto Cape Negroe lies the
Kingdom of Congo; and is said to be the fairest of the lower Ethiopia. The
Inhabitants are naturally very sweet, and are able and strong of body, but dull
and idle, their money is of gray shells, their Grains, Fruits, Waters, Fowl,
Sea and River Fish are excellent, they have store of Elephants, Mines of
Silver, Iron, Crystal, Marble, Jaspar, Porphyre, etc. They know no History but
by the Reigns of their Kings.

The most famous Rivers of this Kingdom are the Zaer, the Lelunda: the Zair
descends from the Lane of Zair, from whence also descends the Nile, The Zaer
has 400 Leagues Course, and is very Rapid by reason of the Cataracts or great
falls, which it has from the Mountains.

Of Biafara.
BIafara is a Kingdom in the lower Ethiopia, in the Gulf of St. Thomas (by our
English-Seamen called the Bight) the people very Barbarous, their habits made
of Mats, they adict themselves to Witchcraft, and sometimes sacrificing their
children to Devils.

Of Monomotapa.
THE Monomotapa, that is the Emperor King, or Sovereign of Motapa; and
possesses an Empire so great, that it is 1000 Leagues Circuit, this Prince
deports himself with gravity, and that there is no access to his person, but
with very great submissions, he is always adorned with Chains and precious
stones like a woman:

The Inhabitants are all black, of mean Stature, and excellent good footmen,
that they are said to outrun horses.

The Woods have great store of Elephants as also other Beasts; rich Pastures
well surnished with Cattle, plenty with Grains, Fruits, Fowl, and is well
watered with Rivers, in which are abundance of Fish, the Air temporate, their
summer is when we have our winter, and their winter is when we have our Summer.

Of the Abissines.
THE Empire of the Abissines, Heylin makes to be the Dominions of Prester John,
and says he is of such great force that he is able to raise upon a sudden
occasion, a million of fighting men, his Government is absolutely Tyrannical;
The people profess the Christian Religion, which was first made known to them
by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, who was baptized by Philip the Evangelist, and
more generally by the Preaching of Saint Matthew the Apostle; since which they
have much swerved from the Purity of the true Religion, by their many Corrupt
Opinions, they keep many of the Ceremonies of the old Law, they keep the
seventh day Sabbath according to the fourth Commandment, they allow their
Priests no yearly maintenance, neither will they suffer them to beg, they get
their livelihood by their own labor, they administer the Ordinance of the
Lords Supper to Infants presently after they are Baptized, they Baptize
themselves in Ponds and Lakes every Ephiphany day, supposing that to be the day
that John Baptized Christ in Jordan.

Titles of the Emperor as Dr. Heylin does inform us, are as follows, viz.

Supreme of his Kingdoms, and the beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith, sprung
from the stock of Judah: The Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the Son of the
Column of Sion, the Son of the seed of Jacob, the Son of Mary, the Son of Naha,
after the flesh, the Son of St. Peter and St. Paul, after the Spirit. Emperor
of the higher and lower Ethiopia, andt.

Of the Islands Belonging to AFRICA.
THose that are situate in the Occidental or Atlantic Ocean, may be Marshalled
into three Bodies of Islands, viz. the Islands of the Azores, the Canaries and
the Islands of Cape de Verde.

Of the Islands of Azores.
THe Azores are nine in number, which are 1 St. Michael, 2. St. Mary's, 3.
Tercera, 4. St. Gratiosa, 5. St. George, 6. Foial, and 7. Pico, 8. Flores, and
9. Corvo. The Air of these Islands is gegerally good, they are well stored with
Flesh, Fish and Fruits.

Of the Canary Islands.
THe Canary Islands are in number seven, The Names are as follows, viz. 1.
Lancerotta, 2. Forteventura, 3. Canaria, 4. Teneriffa, 5. Palma 6 Ferro and
Gomera.

These Island abounds in excellent Wines, Honey, Wax, Sugar, Oade,
Lawrel-trees, Dragon-trees, out of which they draw a Red Liquor, called by our
Apothecaries Sanguis Draconis. Also Corn and Sugars, and all sorts of Fruits,
stored well with Cattle, and is therefore the victualling place of the King of
Spains Plate-Fleet.

To the Northward of these Islands lies the Island of Madera: belonging to the
Crown of Portugal, The Air very wholesome, refresht with pleasant Fountains and
Rivers, it yields also a pleasant Wine called Madera Wine.

The Islands of Cape de Verd.
THese Islands are in number ten, bearing the name of 1. St. Mayo, 2. St.
Anthonyes, 3. St. Vincent, 4. St. Luce, 5. St. Nicholas, 6. Isle de Sal, 7.
Bana Vista, 8. Isle de Fuogo, 9. Brava, 10. St. Jago; Some of these Islands
yields good store of Salt, but the Air of them is not very wholesome.

Princes Island yields Fruit, Sugar, and Ginger; and is the Revenue of the
Prince of Portugal, and therefore called Princes Island.

Annobon yields Sugars, Cottons, Cattle, and Excellent Fruits, and Oranges.
Inhabited by Portugalls.

St. Helena lying in sixteen degrees south latitude belonging to the East India
Company, well furnished with good water, which alone is a great refreshment to
the Ships that return from India, the Valleys are very Fertile, the Air
healthful, that sick persons are in a short time restored to their health;
There are also in this Sea the Islands of Ascension, and St. Mathewes,
affording Fowls and Wild Beasts, but not Inhabited.

Zocatora and Babel Mandel lies toward the Red Sea, where the passage is
narrow and most convenient from the Coast of Africa, Zocatora, near Cape
Gauderfu is under the Jurisdiction of an Arabian King, it is a good Road, and
has convenient Bays where Ships may ride secure among the very Rocks. It
affords excellent Fishing, Cattle in great abundance, and is famous for the
quantity and goodness of its Aloes.

Of Madagascar.
THe Island of Madagascar is the bigest of all the Islands that belong to
Africa; The Air is temperate, the soil produces several sorts of Grains and
Trees, the Waters excellent, the Fruits delicious. The Mountains are full of
wood, Pasturage and Plants, etc. The Natives very black, and of Rude Behavior,
partaking of the Customs and Manners of the Africans.

A General Description OF AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
AMERICA, so called from one Americus Vespucius (who following the Steps and
Examples of Columbus and Cabot) Discovered a part of this great Continent,
which might as properly have been called Columbana, Sebastiana, or Cabotia, but
most improperly the West Indies.

It is bounded on the East with the Atlantic Ocean, on the West with the
Pacifick Ocean, on the South with Terra Australis Incognita, from which it is
separated by the Streights of Magellan: The North bounds of it, not hitherto so
well known as that we can certainly affirm it to be an Island or Continent.

The Natives are Fair and Clear, little inclining unto Blackness, being
generally Tall and well proportioned, their Eyes little and black, strong and
healthful; for the most part Naked, unless a Cloth about their Waste.

Their Language high and lofty in signification, for one Word serves instead
of two or three, the rest are supplied by the understanding of the hearer.

Their Houses are Mats or Bark of Trees set on Poles, in a fashion of our
English Barnes, they lie on Reeds or Grass: As to the other Rights and Customs,
I shall mention in the respective place.

For their Original, it is supposed to be of the Jewish Race, that is of the
Stock of the Ten Tribes, and that for the Reasons following, 1. They were to go
to a Land not planted or known. 2. Their Countenances and Children resemble the
Jews. 3. They also agree in several Rites and Ceremonies, for they reckon by
the Moon. 4. They Offer their first Fruits. 5. Many words they have of the
Hebrew Ideom amongst them. 6. They have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles. 7. They
are said to Build their Altar upon Twelve Stones. 8. Their Mourning is a Year.
10. Customs of Women, as to their Separation from their Husbands, after the
manner of the Law of Moses.

It is commonly divided into Two Parts, viz, into South and North America, the
several Colomes thereof take as follow.

CHAP. II. Of South America in Particular.
Of Magellanick Land.
IT lies upon the Southernmost part of America, near the Streights of Magellan,
whose Name it still bears: It is a very poor Country, much subject to Cold;
the Natives live in Caves: We have the Names of some places; as 1. Desaguadore,
and 2. Magellanick; but having no perfect knowledge of them, I can say little
thereto.

Of Paraguay.
PAraguay or rather Plata, so called by reason of a River of that Name that
Waters it, the Country is very pleasant and delightful, for it abounds in
Corn, Vineyards, Fruit Trees, and Cattle in abundance; places of most note are
1. St. Jago D'estra, 2. Villa Rica, and 3. St. Anne.

Of Chili.
CHili bears the Name of one of her Valleys, much subject to Cold, yet in some
parts the Soil is so fertile and pleasant, that no part in all America more
resembles Europe; it yields Ostriches, Copper, and the finest Gold in the
World. St. Jago, Imperiale, Baldavia, and Castro are the principal places of
Chili.

Of Peru.
PEru, though it gives Name to all the South America, yet it is but meanly
furnished with Food, the chiefest thing being Maize, which is not very
Plentiful: The Commodities are Gold, Cotton and some Medicinal Drugs; it is
divided into 1. Quiro, 2. Truxillo, 3. Lima, 4. Cusco, and 5. Arica, of which
we have no other Relation than what the Spaniards reports.

Of Brasil.
THough it lies under the Torrid Zone, nevertheless the Air is Temperate and
Fertile: The Commodities besides Brasil, are Amber, Balsom, Tobacco, Train-Oyl,
Cattle of diverse sorts, Sweetmeats, and Sugar in abundance: It is divided into
several Capitanies, as 1. Siara, 2. Saltan, 3. Para, 4. Paraiba. 5. Pernambuco,
6. St. Salvador, 7. Ilheos. 8. Porto Segaro, 9. Spirito Sancto, 10. St.
Sebastian, and, 11. St. Vincent.

Of Amazones.
AMazones or Guiana, has its Name from a River so called; the Air is
Healthful, the Soil is good in some places; for Tillage of Maniac, Cotton,
Sugar, Tobacco, Gums, Wood. Stones of diverse sorts, Parrots, and Monkeys:
Places of most Note are 1. Coropa, and 2. Villago Dor, but very little known to
us, by reason that the Spaniards suffer none besides their own Nation to come
into the Country, but kill all strangers they find.

Of Terra Firma.
OR Castill del Ore, the latter given by the Castilians; the chief places are
1. Panama, 2. Cartagena, 3. St. Fed Bagota, 4. Venezuola, 5. Surranam, and 6.
Manoa. The Air is very unhealthful, the Commodities diverse, as Balsom, Rosin,
Gums, Long Pepper, Dragons Blood, Stones of diverse sorts, and Gold: They have
several sorts of Beasts, as the Viuves or Rams, etc. which you may find in
Helyns Cosmography.

The chief Rivers in this Southern America are 1. Oronoque, which overfloweth
once a Year as does the Nilus, 2: Amazones, the greatest and swiftest in all
America, 3. St. Francisco, 4. Paraguay or Plata, 5. Vraguay.

Of the Islands of AMERICA.
Of the Caribbees.
BEtween South and North America li^s several Islands, the first are the
Carribee or Cannibal Islands, which are several small Islands, which lie
extended from the Coast of Paria to the Isle Porto Rico, the chief are, 1.
Granada, 2. St. Vincent, 3. Dominica, 4. Barbados, 5 Antego, 6. St.
Christophers, 7. Nevis, 8. Monserat, etc. The Air good, considering how they
lie; the chief Commodities being Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, and Tobacco, Inhabited
by several Nations.

Of the Lucaie Islands.
SO called from Lucaien the Name of the biggest; of little Note, unless for a
Fountain, which is said to Renew Youth again, and for their handsome Women, of
which they are reported to have great store.

Of Porto Rico.
THe Air is very Temperate and pleasant, the Soil indifferent Fertile; the
Commodities Sugar, Ginger, and Cassia.

Of Barmudas.
IT is an Isle of a good Temperature, the Soil Fertile and Good, yielding Two
Crops a Year, having excellent Fruits; the Commodties are Sugar, Oranges,
Cochaneel, and Tobacco, and some Cotton also they have, but no great store. It
is subject to the Crown of England.

Of Jamaica.
THe Soil Rich and Fat, the Trees and Plants being always green and pleasant;
the Air more temperate than any of the other Isles: The Commodities besides
Sugar, Cotton, Indico, and Tobacco, are diverse and plenty; they have Cattle,
Fowl, Fish and Fruits of diverse sorts. It is subject to the King of England.

Of Cuba.
THe Air is temperate and good, the Soil fertile, the Commodities are Ginger,
Cassia, Mastich, Aloes, Cinnamon, and Sugar, also Gold, but somewhat drossy.

Of Hispaniola.
THis is much like Cuba, saving that the Gold is more pure without Dross. It is
subject to the King of Spain; somewhat Hot and Unhealthful, much subject to
Thunder and Lightning, by reason of its situation so near the Equinoctial.

CHAP. III. Of North America in Particular.
Of New Miexico.
IT is a Province little known to the Europians; the Inhabitants being diverse
in Language, Manners, and Customs. It is divided into New Mexico, Arian,
Quiviria, and Libola.

Of Mexico or New Spain.
A Country enriched with innumerable Mines of Gold and Silver: The Air
temperate, the Soil fertile and good, The chief Towns are 1. Mexico, 2.
Guatamala, 3. Truxillo, 4. Acupulco, 5. Panaco, The Commodities besides Gold
and Silver, are Copper, Iron, also Wool, Silk, Sugar, and diverse Medicinal
Drugs. They have also several other Commodities, which are too long to insert
in this place. It is fully subject to the Spaniard.

Of Florida.
IT is a place of very good Temperature, the Soil very Fertile, full of Fruit
Trees; the Towns well peopled; yet the Coast is very inconvenient for great
Vessels, by reason of the Shallowness of the Water: Places of most Note are St.
Martha and Cofa.

Of Carolina.
IT is a Country blessed with an excellent Temperature of Air, the Soil Rich and
Fertile, producing excellent Fruits, the Earth also apt to bring to Maturity
Corn, all sorts of Garden Herbs and Roots: The Commodities are Wines, Oils,
Silk, Cotton, Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco; plenty of Fish, Fowl, and Cattle;
the chief Town is Charles Town, Governed by one at the Appointment of the
Proprietors.

Of Virginia.
THe Air of this place is sufficiently pleasant, the Soil exceeding Fertile; it
produces all sorts o^ Grain and Pulse, diverse sorts of Garden Herbs and Roots;
Silk Worms also which make good Silk; the Commodities diverse, but the chief is
Tobacco. The place of most Note is James Town, Governed by one Deputed by the
King of England.

Of Pensilvania.
IT is a place not yet well Planted, but may be in time, the Soil and Air being
fit for the Nature of an Englishman: Granted by Patent from his late Majesty
King Charles the Second, unto William Penn Esquire and his Heirs for ever, and
therefore caled Pensilvania.

Of Maryland.
HAving given you so full an account of Virginia. I need say little more, only
that the general way of Commerce in both places being by interchanging one
Commodity for another, and that which sets a Price upon all other is
Tobacco, there being such abundance of this Imported into England, that the
King has 60000 l. per Annum for Excise and Custom. The chief Town is Baltamore.

Of New Jersey.
FOr Temperature of Air and Fertility, there has been enough said already in
Virginia and Maryland, this place partaking of all the Properties and
Advantages of them both.

Of New York.
A Colony so called from his Royal Highness the Duke of York our present King.
A Country sound to produce the same Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Fruits with New
England, being Rich and Fertile. The chief Town James Town.

Of New England.
IT is a vast Tract of Land, healthfully seated, the Soil exceeding Fertile,
for it yields Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Cats. Indian Corn, Flax, Hemp,
and all sorts of English Herbs. It has plenty of Cattle of diverse sorts, Fish,
Fowl, and good Cider. It excels with good Cellarage to preserve all, which is
not common in Virginia; the chief Commodities are Furs, Flax, Amber, Iron,
Pitch, Tar Masts and Timber to Build Ships. Their Metropolis is Boston, well
seated, and adorned with fair and beautiful Houses, and well peopled.

Of New Scotland, New France, Canada.
THree Places full of Stags, Bears, Martens, Hares, Foxes, and store of Conies,
Fowl, and Fish; not over Fertile. The chief places are Port Royal in New
Scotland, Quebeck in New France, and Breast in Canada, of no great Importance.

Of New Britain, New South Wales, and New North Wales
THree Provinces much like the former (we having but little knowledge thereof
only the Soil is somewhat better. Places of most note are Fort Charles in New
Britain, Port Nelson in South Wales, and Ne Vltra in North Wales. It was in
some of these places that Hudson and others Wintered in their Voyages to the
North West.

Of the Island of California.
THe Air hereof is indifferently Temperate, being full of Herbage and Cattle,
which be little less than them of Europe; supposed to have some Traffic with
China, but not certainly known.

Of Newfound-Land.
IS an Island famous for its Bays, Harbors, and the great store of Fish caught
there; and therefore much frequented by French, Dutch, and Biscaners; some part
thereof Granted by Patent to Sir. George Calvert, and still possessed by hi Son
and Heir the Lord Baltamore.

Of Groenland.
GRoenland contains a vast Tract of Land, not yet fully discovered, though it
has been long known to the Norwegians, who have several Colonies planted
therein; it has also been touched at by several of our English Men in their
Voyages to the Northwest: The Sea has great store of Whales, also Sea Wolves,
Dogs, and Calves, and White Bears which are said to live more by Water than
Land, and Feed most upon Fish: they have also Wheat, Chestnuts, Apples, and good
Grass for Pasture: There are also Horses, Stags, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, and
Martles. If I should go about to relate all the Stories (which are more strange
than true) that are told of the strange things in this Country. I should need
a far larger Volume than this to contain them.

Of Island.
ISland is an 150 Miles long and little less than an 100 broad. Its Inhabitants
are subject to the King of Denmark; so healthy are they, that they live to an
hundred years of Age; nevertheless very unlearned, and little are they skilled
in the Liberal Sciences, following nothing so much as the Feeding of their
Flocks and Cattle.

In this Island are Two Mountains, the Name of one is Hecla, the other Helga,
which vomit and send forth Fire in abundance: the first being so fierce, that
there is no approaching it by six Miles and therefore the place is much
indamaged thereby, that it is a great loss to the Inhabitants.

Of Hudsons Bay.
BEtween Groenland and the Coast of Nova Francia, lies a great Sea called
Hudson's Streights, which after some Leagues Passage opens into a sine Bay
dilating it self both toward the North, South, and West, giving great hopes of
a passage that way to the East Indies. First discovered by the Two Cabots,
Father and Son, upon the account of Henry the Seventh of England. Afterward by
Hudson, Forbisher, Weymouth, Button, Baffin, Smith, James, etc. and of latter
times we have had a Trassick thither, which is managed by Merchants of London
called by the Name of Merchant Adventurers to Hudsons Bay: the Coast of New
Britain runs along by the side of some part of this Bay, and though it has been
much sought into yet it cannot be found out yet whether there be a passage this
way, or whether it is no more but an Inlet of the Sea; there being several
places called by the Name of the first Discoverers, as the place where Hudson
Wintered James Bay, Buttens Bay, Forbishers Streights, Freum Davis, Baffins
Bay, etc.

Thus have I given you as full a Relation of Ameriea as the bulk of my Book
will permit (being nothing (according to the best of my knowledge (but what is
the true state thereof at this time, hoping that ^f there be any mistakes you
will not impute it to my carelessness, but to the Misinformation of them that
have writ of any of these New Discoveries. I shall end therefore with that
Advice of Helyn: But whither goes my Bark? Return: for we
Have sliced the Capering Brine enough: See, see
The South Wind 'gins to gather Clouds apace;
It Is no safe tarrying inso fieree a place.
Whilst thou have time, retire, thou wearied Bark
Into safe Harbor; when the Cloud which dark
The Worlds bright Eye shall be dispelled away,
And shining Phoebus make a lightsome Day.
Tritons shrill Trump shall thee recall again,
From the safe Harbor to the foaming Main,
And we with all our Powers will boldly try
What of this Unknown World we can descry.


FINIS.
All sorts of Mathematical Books and Instruments both for Sea and Land; Maps
both great and small of all Countries, Maritime Charts, and Sea Plats, are sold
by John Seller at his Shop on the West Side of the Royal Exchange in London,
and at the Hermitage in Wapping.

Scales of Miles and Leagues, of Diverse Nations showing what Proportion they
bear to a degree of the Earth.
The Length of one degree.

Roman, Italian, Turkish, and English miles, 60 to one degree

Arabian, English, and French Leagues, 20 to one degree or hours goeing

Spanish Leagues 17 1/2 to one degree

Common German miles 15 to one degree

Swedes and Danish miles 10 to one degree

Hungarian miles 14 to one degree

Scotch miles 40 to one degree

Low Dutch or Hollands miles 19 to one degree

Russian miles 80 to one degree

Persian miles 8 to one degree

East Indian miles 100 to one degree

Kingdom of Cambaja, and Gazuratt, 30 Cosa's to one degree

The Mapp of the WORLD is thus divided into two Continents. The Continent of
Europe Asia Africa
The Continent of North: America South: America



map A NEW MAPP OF THE WORLD.
By John Seller Hydrographer to the KING.



^UROPE is thus Divided. England -- 1 London Scotland -- 2 Edinburg Ireland --
3 Dublin XVII Provinces -- 4 Amsterdam France -- 5 Paris: Breast Marselles
Spain -- 6 Madrid Mallago Bilboa Gibralter
Portugal -- 7 Lisbon Italy -- 8 Rome Venice Genoa
Germany -- 9 Vienna Prague Hambourg
Denmark -- 10 Coppenhgen Rypen
Norway and Sweden -- 11 Bergen Dronthem Stockholm Ryga Abo
Moscovia or Russia -- 12 Moscou Archangle Wollogda Cazan Kola
Lesser Tartaria -- 13 Caffa Poland -- 14 Danzick Cracow
Lithuania -- 15 Wilna Hungaria -- 16 Buda Turkey in Europe -- 17 Constantinople
North yt. South yt. of Turkey -- 18 Ragusa Zant North yt. South yt. in Europe --
19 Lepanto Morea -- 20 Modon Coron



map EUROPE


The Kingdom of ENGLAND is divided into two parts. ENGLAND is divided into
forty Countyes Buckingham shire Bedford S: Berk S: Cambridgshire Cheshire.
Cornwall Cumberland Darby S: Devon S: Dorset S: Durham Essex. Gloucester S:
Herefordshire Hant S: Hertford S: Huntingto^ S: Kent Leicestershire Lancashire
Lincolnshire Monmouthshire Midlesex Norfolk Northamptonsh: Northumberland
Nottinghamshire Oxford S: Rutland Shropshire. Sussex Somerset S: Suffolk
Stafford S: Surrey Warwick S: Wilt S: Westmorland Worcester S: York S:
WALES is divided into twelve Countyes Anglesey Brecknockshire Cardiganshire
Carmarthenshire Carnarvanshire Denby S: Flintshire Glamorganshire
Merionethshire Montgomery S: Pembrook S: Radnor.



map A Mapp of the Kingdom of ENGLAND and WALES. By John Seller


^COTLAND is thus Divided. In the North are these Divisions Cathanes
Strath-navern Southerland Assynt-ross Lochquaber Murray Any beyne Buchan: Mar
Badenorth Lochabyr Anthol Goure: Mernes Angus Perth Broad Albain Argile: Lenox
Strath Menteith Eife: Lorne Cantyr
In the South are these Divisions Sterling Reinfrew Cuningham Lothia
Cluydesdale Kyle Carrick Twedale March Tivedale Lidesdale Eskeda Annadale
Nythdale Galloway



With many Islands

map SCOTLAND By I. Seller.


IRELAND (...) Divided unto four ^rovinces w.th ^^^ir respective Countyes.
Leinster Louth East Mead West Mead Dublin Kings County Queens County Kildare
Wicklow Catherlaugh Wexford Kilkenny Longford
Ulster Antrim Down Londonderry Dunagall Tyrone Fermanagh Monohon Ardmagh
Cavan
Connought Slego: Mays Letrim Galloway Roscommon Clare
Munster Waterford Cork Kerry Limrick Tipperary



map IRELAND


THE XVII PROVINCES is Divided into Dukedoms Limbourg Mastrich Limbourg
Masewick Liege
Luxembourg Luxembourg Rochefort
Gueldre Gueldre Arnheim Harderwick
Brabant Charleroy Boisleduck Louvain. Breda Brussels Tillemont

Marquisate of ye Holy Empire Antwerp
Earldoms Flanders Hulst. Gaunt Bruges. Ipres Mont Castlel Dunkirque Ostend.
Lille Tournay
Artoys Arras S.t Omer
Hainault Mons
Namur Namur
Zutphen Zutphen
Holland Amsterdam Rotterdam Leyden. Hage Delf. Dort Harlom. Brill Edam. Horn
Zeland Middleburg

Baronies Frisia Lewarden
Utrech Utrech
Overisle Couwarden Oldenzeb
Malines Malines
Groningen Groningen




map THE XVII PROVINCES


FRANCE is divided into these Provinces Picardi Calais Amiens
Normandy Diepe Haver de Grace Rouen Caen
Bretagne St. Mallo Rhennes Nantes Breast
Orleanois Orleans Tours. Bourges Angers Poictours la Rochelle
Guienne Bourdeaux Rodes
Gascogne Aux Bayone Pau
Languadoe Thoulouse Monpilier Narbone
Provence Marselles
Dauphine ^^enne Grenoble Embrun
Lyonnois Lion Clermont Moulins
Burgundy Dijon Auton
Chapagne Tryers Rhens
Isle of France Paris



The Chief Rivers are ye Seine. Loire. Dordogue. Adour. Garonne. Rhosne. Lot


map FRANCE


SPAIN is thus divided Biscaie Bilboa S. Sebastian
Asturies Oviedo Santillana
Galice Coruna Compostella Tuy
Leon Leon Salamanca
Portugal Braga Port Coimbra Lisbon Eyora Baja
Algarve Faro old Valladolid Villa Franca Placentia
Castile new Madrid Toledo Cuenca Badajos
Andalusia Cordoue Cadis Seville St. Lucar Gibralter
Granada Granada Malaga
Murcia Murcia Cartagens
Valencia Valencia Alicante
Arragon Caragoca Calatajud Albarazin
Catalonie Lerida Barcelona Girone Tarragona Tortose
Roussillon Perpignan Navarre Pamplona Estella
The Chief Rivers are ye Douero Tage Guadiana Guadalquvir Xucar Ebro



map SPAIN


PORTUGAL is thus Divided Enter Douro Minho Valence Braga Porta
Tralos Montes Braganca Miranda Moncoryo Almeida
Beyra Lamego Viseu Mira Counbra Sabugal Cashelbnvico
Estremadura Lisbone C. de Roca N. Lisboa Leiria Santare Tomar Punhete Almerin
Palmela Setuval C. S.t Joan Alcacer de Sal
Alentejo Portalegre Eyora Beja S Iago d. Cacem Mertola
Algarvia Silues Lagos Faro C. d'. St. vincent
The chief Rivers are ye. Dover Tage Gaudiana



map PORTUGAL


ITALY is divided into these parts. Kom of Naples Naples Policastro Regio Gaeta
Tarante Otranto Brindisi Potignano Isola Monfredona Vestica - Aquila Pescara
Estate of the Church Rome Spoleto Fermo Ancone Urbino Ravenne Bologne Ferrara
Tuscane Florenza Ligorn Pisa Siena
Luca -- Luca Genoa -- Genoa Parma -- Parma Modena -- Modena Montova -- Montova
Venice -- Venice Padoua
Trente -- Trente Milan -- Milan Piemont -- Turin Nice
The Chief Rwers are ye Tiber Po



map ITALY


^^RMANY (...) thus divided. Meclembourg Meklembourg Wismar
Pomerain -- Stralsund. Stetin Coleburg. Rugen Isle
Brandenburg Bertin. Kustrin Francfort
Upper Saxony Wittemberg. crfort Leypsick. Minden
Lower Saxony Brunswick Lubeck Bremen. Hamburg
Westphalia -- cmden. Munster Paderborn
Hesse -- Cassel. Marpurg Ecclesiatick Electorats Mayance. Cleves Cologne.
Treves
Palatinate of Rhine Worms. Heidlbera. Spire
Franconia -- Francfort Nuremberg
Loraine -- Metz. Toul. Nanci Alsace Strasburg. Brisac Franche Com.te Besancon.
Dole Savoy -- Chambray Suisses -- Geneve. Berne. Basel Sovabie -- Augsburg. Ulm
Constance. Hailborn
Tirol -- Inspruck. Landeck Bavaria -- Rattisbon. Passau Salzbourg. Munich
Bohemia -- Prague. Satz Conigingracz
Lusace -- Bautzen Silesia -- Breslaw. Oppelen Tescheu
Moravia -- Obruitz. Bren Austria -- Vienna. Lintz Stein
Stiria -- Greece Carinthia -- S. Veit Carnolia -- Lauhach


map GERMANY


map A Ground Plat of the City VIENNA and the Adjacent Country


DENMARK is thus Divided. Iutland The Scaw Wensissel Seeby Alborch Wiborg
Lemwick Arhusen Ebelted Horsens Vard Hennebarch Rypen
Sleswick Sleswick Tonderen Apenrad Flensborg Rensborg
Holstein Meldory Kiel Niemurester Gluckstat Oldeslo Niestat Oldenborg
Zeland I Copenhage Roskil Elsenaur Neswed Frestoe Holbeck
Fionie I. Odensee Forburg



With several small Islands

map DENMARK


map A MAP of the City HAMBVRGH the Adjacent Country. By John Seller.


SWEDELAND and NORWAY is thus divided. Swead and Lapland Stockholm. Ulm Upsale.
Torn Nicopin. Kimi Geralie. Lula Hundinkwald Indal. Pitha Hernsand
Gothland Gottenbourg Elsenborg Calmar Norcopin Carolstat Ahuys. Eahus
Livonia Riga. Pernau Revil. Derpe Nerva
Ingria Noteborg Finland Wihorg. Abo Raseborg Nitslot Bienburg Vassa Oulo
Cayaneborg
Norway Fredrickstat Obslo Christiana Bergen Stafanger The Nasse Drontem Salten
Hereles
Norway Lapland North cape Wardhuyse Roverda



map SWEDELAND and NORWAY


MOSCOVIA or RUSSIA is divided into. Kingdom's Siberie Cazan Astracan
Principalities Pleskow Bielskow
Dukedoms Novogorod Weliki Nova Zemla Obdora Reschaw Moscow Twer Belejezoro
Worotin Ieroslaw Wologda Rosthow Susdale Wolodimer T de Mordwa Rezan Nisi
Novogorod Condora Iuhorki Permski Waithka Bulgar Circasses Tartar
Provinces Dwina Kargapol Ustingha Petzora Okrain Pole
Republics Lapland Samojedes Tingoisis Manamo Czeremissi Nagornoi



map MOSCOVIA or RUSSIA


LESSER TARTARIA In Lesser Tartaria are these Towns Besergenof Maniez Azac or
Azow Pisan Paparoma Cambra Precop Baciassarai Lustloua Mancup Baluclava Caffa
Trusta Carubas Kers Arbotka
On the Coast of PONTUS EUXINUS Oczakou Bialogrod Killia Constantinople Scutari
Heraclia Sinopoli Simiso Trebisond Varth Fazo Savatopoli Eschisumuni Sophia
Teman Temrok Cozala Bacmachi Baletecoi



map LESSER TARTARIA


POLAND is thus Divided Great Poland Guesne. Posna Kalisch. Rava
Cujavia Vladislau
Lesiser Poland Cracow. Lublin Sandomiri Czeslacou
Prussia Roy: Danzick Torn. Culm
Prussia Du: Koningsberg Elbing Maremburg
Mazovia Plocake Warsoona
Polachia Tikasin Bielski
Black Russia Zamoski Ieroslau Lemburg. Belz.
Podolia Kameniec Braclau. Bar.
Volhinia Ukrain and Cosaques Volodzimirez Lusuc. Kiou Krzemieniec Zitomirs
Czernobel Bialacerkiew Czircassi Kudac
Lithuania Braslau Wibia. Kouno Minski. Grodno Novogrodck Lakouvick. Orsa
Uitopski. Sklou Rzeczica Mazi
Curland Vindau. Liba Mitau
Samogatie Memel Rosutie



map POLAND.


LITHUANIA divided into these ^^latinates (...) Duches. Polocak Poloczk. Drina.
Witepsk Witepsk Whieliss Surass
Braslaw Braslaw Miadzia Drysunath
Vilna Wilna Wilkomirz
Troki Troki Lida Kouno Grodne
Novogrodeck Novogrodeck Wolkowiska Slonini Ostrow
Minski Minsti Lesanica Boryssaw Brodziec
Mscislaw Mscilaw Mchilow Byehow: Orsia Balymisrie
Lands of Rohaczow and Rzeczyca Rohaczow Rzeczyca Mazy Dobosina
Duche and Palate: of Smolensko Smolensko
Duche and Palate: of Novogrodeck Swierski Novogrodeck Swiersk: Starodub
Duche of Czernihow Czernihow Sluczk.



map LITHUANIA.


HUNGARIA The Greatist part is Conquered by the Turks. Upper Hungaria
Preshourg Transchin Nitria. Bars Cassovia. Rab. Epires. Papa Unghuar Rena.
Sopron Tokoy. Vespron Namyn. Bator Vgogh. Zatmar Benhalora Comora
Lower Hungaria Newhausel Strigonie Alba Regalis or Stul Wessenbourg Offen. or
Buda Pest. Vazzon Kanise. Lippa Agria. Schag Giula. Zeged Novigrod Zobiock
Colocza 5 Eclesiae. Zygeth Bathmonster Thurtur Waradin Czongrad Chonard
Temesuar Breczkerk Mesasomlo
Sclavonia Posega Marsa. Valpon Warasdin Szerem



map HUNGARIA and SCLAVONIA.


TURKEY in EUROPE Divided. Upper Hungaria Presbourg Raab: Toky
Lower Hungaria Newhausel: Gran Buda or Offen Colocza. 5 Eclesiae
Sclavonia Posega
Translvania Clausenburg Hermanstat
Moldavia Soczowa Iazi: Gallacz
Walachia Ermstat Torgowis
Bessarahie Bialigorod: Tekin
Bulgaria Uscopia: Sophia Nicopoli: Varne Tomi: Dora
Servia Belgrade: Zizza
Caroatia Withita
Dalmatia Spalatra: Zoar Raguse:
Bosnia Narenca: Iaicza Catoro: Risin
Albania Scutari Durazo: Valone
Romania Constantinople Andrinopoli Gallipoli Asperosa
Macedonia Salonichi: Contessa
Thessalia Larisia
Epiros Perga
Achaia Lepanto: Negrepont Setines: Stieus
Morea Corinte: Argos Arcadia: Modon Misistra



map TURKEY in EUROP.


The Northpart of TURKEY in Europe Transylvania Chuisenburg Newmark Scespurg
Meduuish Hermanstat Fogares. Egedin Deuua. Torda Huniad Hatzag
Moldavia Soczowa Sereth. Smatin Moldavia Tragorod Aczud. Iazy Rebnick Barlach
Fabeim Vasthuy Bradi. Tirasno Margosest Iapuczna Skoka. Galacz Srzepanavicze
Walachia Torgowis Barskow Pitesk Arcim Rebnik Aluth. Zalatma Zula. Ris Zers.
Zorlo Dombovisa Ermistat Ialonicz Brailonum
Bessarabie Tekin. Orihou Bialigrod Moncastro Kilia. Smil Taristo.



map The North part of Turkey in Europe TRANSYLVANIA MOLDAVIA WALACHIA
BESSARABIE.


The South part of TURKEY in Europe. Bulgaria Uscopia Ischa. Sophia Nicopoli.
Tomi Varne. Dora
Servia Belgrade. Obrach Semandria Nizza. Noviba
Croatia Withicz
Dalmatia Zegen. Zara Spalatra. Raguse
Bosnia Bagnaluc Narenca. Iaicza Risin. Catoro
Albania Scutari. Durazo Valone
Romania Constantinople Andrinopoli Phillipopoli Asperosa Gallipoli Chiorlich
GREECE Macedonia Salonichi Contessa. Pella Acomama
Thessalia Larissa. Trica Armio
Epiros Butinito Prevesa. Perga
Achaia Lepanto Setines. Steius Negrepont
Morea Corinte. Arcadia Agros. Patra Olimpe. Modon Misistra

With many small Islands



map The South part of TURKEY in Europe.


ASIA is thus divided. Turkey in Asia Jerusalem Smirna Bagdat
Georgia Cotatis
Arahia Mecca Catif Calajate Fartach Aden
Persia Ispahan Taurus Ormus
Empire of Mogal Lahor: Delly Agra: Diu Ougley Bengala Surrat
India this side Ganges Bisnagar Goa Fort St. George
India beyond Ganges Pegu: Sian Camboja Malacca Tunquin
China Peking Nanking Canton
Tartaria Samarkand Belch Kasghar Thibet Tangut: Xamo Chacan Kalmach
The Chief Rivers are the Ganges Indefai Eufrates



map ASIA


AFRICA is thus Divided. Barbary Tanger Morocco. Fez Alger. Tunis Tripoli Barca
Biledul: gerid Tesset Darha Segelmesse Tegoram Tolacha Guargala Teuzara Gaoga
Desert of Sarra Zunziga Targa Lemp^a Bardoa Borneo
Nigros Gandia Genehoa Tombut Gambia Cantori Mandinga Agades Gago Cano Guber
Cassena Zegzeg Zanfara Gangara
Guiuea S.G d'Mina Ardd Benin
Congo S Salvador Dongo Loango
Biafara Biafara Medra Corisco
Monomo: tapa and Caffa^es Bagamedro Monomatana Butua Zofala
Ahissines Caxumo Sova Vangue Angoce Ambiam Amara Damut
Zangubar Magadaxo Adel Malinda Monbara Quiloa Mazambique
Nubia Nubia
Egypt Cairo. sosu
The chief Rivers are ye Nilus Niger



map AFRICA


NORTH AMERICA is thus divided New N. Wales Ne Ultra New S. Wales Port Nelson
New Britain F. Charles Canada New France Quebeck New Scotland P. Royal New
England Boston New York New York New Jersey F. Elsenburg Maryland Baltamore
Pensilvania Virginia James Town Carolina Charles T. Florida S. Martha Cofa
Mexico or New Spain Mexico Guatamala Truxillo Acapulco Panuco
New Mexico New Mexico The chief Islands are California Hispaniola Cuba: Long
I. Iamaica Porto Rico New Foundland Barbados Bermodas Lucaie Islands Caribes
The Great River Canada


map NORTH AMERICA


SOUTH AMERICA is divided into these parts. Terra Firma Panama Cartagena S.t
Fed Bagota Venezuela Surranam Manoa
Amazones Coropa Village delor
Brasil Para. Siara. Saltpan Paraiba Pernambuca S.t Salvador Ilhros Rto Seguro
Sp.to Sancto St. Vincent
Peru Quiro Truxillo Lima. Cusco. Arica Potosi
Chili St. Iago Imperial Baldivia Castro
Paraguay St. Iago d'estra Villa Rica St. Anna
Magellanick Land Desaguadero Magellanick I.
The Chief Rivers are ye. Oronoque Amazones St. Francisco Paraguay or Plate
Uraguay.



map SOUTH AMERICA



