JOHANNES SELDENUS. Armig:


TRACTS Written by JOHN SELDOM OF THE INNER TEMPLE, Esquire. The First
Entitled, JANI ANGLORVM FACIES ALTERA, rendered into English, with large Notes
thereupon, by REDMAN WESTCOT, Gent. The Second, ENGLAND's EPINOMIS. The Third,
Of the Original of ECCLESIASTICAL Jurisdictions of Testaments. The Fourth, Of
the Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods.


The Three last never before Extant.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE Reverse or Back-face OF THE English JANUS. TO-WIT, All that is met with in
STORY Concerning the COMMON AND STATUTE LAW OF English Britanny, From the first
MEMOIRS of the two NATIONS, to the Decease of King HENRY II. set down and tackt
together succinctly by way of Narrative. Designed, Devoted and Dedicated to the
most Illustrious the EARL of SALISBURY.

Written in Latin by JOHN SELDOM of Salvinton, Student of the Inner Temple in
LONDON; and Rendered into English by REDMAN WESTCOT, Gent.

Haec facies Populum spectat; at illa Larem.


London, Printed for Thomas Basset, and Richard Chiswell. MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable and truly Noble Lord, Robert Earl of Salisbury,
Viscount Cranborn, Baron Cecil of Essenden, Knight of the Illustrious Order of
the Garter, Lord High Treasurer of England, Master of the Court of Wards, and
Privy Counselor to His Most Excellent Majesty, JAMES, King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, Heartily according to his high desert, I devote and
dedicate,
AND as it were with consecrated Flowr, and crackling grain of Salt, I offer up
in Sacrifice. I am not in condition to do it with a costly Victim, or a full
Censer. GREAT SIR, deign with favor to receive these scraps of Collection;
relating entirely, what they are, and as far as the present Age may be supposed
to be concerned in ancient Stories and Customs, to the English-British State
and Government; and so far forth to Your most Honored Name. Which Name of
Yours, whilst I, one of the lowermost Bench, do with dazzled eyesight look
upon (most Noble Lord, and great Support of your Country) I devoutly lay down
Upon its ALTAR This small Earnest and Pledge of my Obedience and Duty.

THE TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THOU can not be such a Stranger to thy own Country, as to need my
commendation of the Learned, Worthy and Famous AUTHOR of these following
Sheets; or that I should tell thee, what a Scholar, a Philologer, a Humanist, a
Linguist, a Lawyer, a Critic, an Antiquary, and (which proves him an absolute
Master of all these and many other Knowledges) what a Writer, the Great SELDOM
was. Since it is liberally acknowledged by every body, that knows any thing
(not only at home, but abroad also among Foreigners) that Europe seldom has
brought forth His Fellow for exquisite Endowments of Nature, Seize of
Study, and Accomplishments of Ingenuity, Sagacity and Industry. And indeed, to
save me the labor of saying any more concerning this Non-pareil in all kinds
of Learning, His own WORKS, which are now under a Review, and will e're long be
made Public in several Volumes, will sufficiently speak his Character, and be
a more prevailing Argument to indear Him to thy good Opinion and firm
Acquaintance, than mine or any other Words can.

My business now is only to give thee some Account of the Author's design in
this little Treatise, and of those measures I took in Translating Him, that is,
in restoring him to his own Native Language; though his great Genius had made
the Latin and several other Tongues, as natural and familiar to Himself, as the
English was.

To speak first of the Author, I do take this Piece to have been one of his
first Essays, if not the very first; wherein he launched into the World, and
did not so much try the Judgment, as deservedly gain the Approbation of the
Learned: which was certainly one Reason, why, though the whole matter of the
Book be of an English Complexion and Concern, yet he thought fit to put it
forth in a Latin dress. That this was his first Specimen, or at least one of
the first, I gather from the time of his Writing it, viz. in the Six and
Twentieth year of his Age; when I suppose he was not of any very long standing
in the Temple; I mean, in all likelihood, whilst he was on this side the Bar.
For having fraught himself with all kind of Learning, which the University
could afford him (which could be, we must imagine, no small time neither; as I
may be allowed to guess from that passage of his in this Book, where he so
affectionately recognizeth his Duty and Gratitude to his dear Mother OXFORD;
who, if she had no other Antiquity to boast of, is and ever will be Famous for
This Her Scholar, our great Antiquary; who has also such a Monument to be seen
in her public Library, as will make her Glory and his Memory ever to flourish)
I say, having after some competent time taken leave of Academical Institutions,
and being now engaged into the Study of Law, he thought he could not do his
Profession a better service, than by looking back into former times, and making
a faithful Collection of what might be Pertinent and Useful, to bring down,
along through all Changes and Vicissitudes of State, the Light and Strength,
the Evidence and Reputation of old Institutes and Precedents to our present
Establishments under our Gracious and Happy Monarchy. May It, as it is in its
Constitution to the English people Gracious; so be ever in its Success to It
self, and consequently to Us all, Happy! Here then thou will find the Rights of
Government through all Ages, so far as our Histories will help us; Here thou will see, from the first, our KING settled in his just Power, even in his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction against the Papal Usurpation; one shrewd Instance
whereof is, the forbidding Appeals to the Pope, at such a time when the Popish
Religion was at its Zenith in this Island; that is, when People in all
probability were most Ignorant. Here thou will easily be brought to acknowledge
the Antiquity and Usefulness of Parliaments (though under other Names till
after the Conquest) when all the Barons, that is, as that Title did at first
import, all Lords of Manors, all Men of Estate assembled together for the
determination of public Affairs: which Usage, because it produced too numerous
and cumbersome a confluence, was afterward for better convenience retrenched
into a popular Election by the Kings Writ to choose some of the Chiefest to act
for all the rest. And sure enough, if we in Duty keep up the Royal Prerogative,
and our Kings, as ever they have done, and ever, I hope, will, in Grace and
Clemency oblige the Peoples Consent in their Representatives; we shall always
have such Laws, such a Government, such a Correspondence betwixt Prince and
Subjects, as must (according to the Rules of Humane Prudence, adding our Piety
to it) make this Kingdom of Great Britanny (maugre the malice of the Devil and
his Agents whatever, Jesuits or Fanatics) a flourishing and impregnable
Kingdom.

Having said this in General of the Author's design, I shall not descend to
Particulars, which I leave to thy self, R^ader, to find out, in the perusal,
that may be of good Use and great Consequence to the Public; but fearing, thou
may think I am so much taken up with the Author, that I have forgot My self,
I have two or three words to speak of that sorry subject, before I leave thee.

As to the Translator; I confess, it is no great credit for any one to appear
in that Figure; a Remark, which I have learned from one, who has translated
another excellent Piece of this Noble Author, (Noble I call him, since Nobility
is raised by Parts and Merits, no less than continued by Birth and Descent) it
was his Mare Clausum, wherein he, I spoke of, has acquitted himself very well,
abating for his Villainous Dedication to the RUMP-Parliament, which was then
setting up for a Republic; in which Dedication of his, he has vilely and like
himself (I speak in Charity, as to his Interest, I mean, not his Judgment or
Conscience at least, if there were any) aspersed the Royal Family with Weakness
and Collusion, to have lowered the British Renown.

I am bid by Him, who puts this into thy hands, to tell thee, that when he was
embarked into this Employ; whatever it was, upon the coasting of it over, he
was surprised to find, he had undertaken such a difficult and hazardous Voyage,
and did presently conclude, That none but a Seldom (that is, a Person of
omnifarious Reading) was fit to be a Selden's Interpreter. For no other person,
but one so qualified, can be Master of his Sense, Master of his Expression. His
ordinary Style, where he delivers himself plainest, is as to the Matter of it,
so full of Historical and Poetical Allusions and as to the Method (and has
that of Crabbed in it besides) so Intricate and Perplex, that he seems, even
where he pretends to Teach and Instruct, to have intended only to Amuse and
Confound the Reader. In very deed, it is such a Style, as became a Learned
Antiquary, which is to be Antique and Oracular; that one would think, the very
Paper, he wrote upon, was made of the Sibyll's old-worn Sheets, and that his
meaning could not be fisht out without the assistance of a Delian Diver.
However the Translator (though so much Inferior to the Undertaking, as to be
almost Unacquainted with some considerable parts of it) did presume (whether
rightly or no, must be left to thy judgment) that he was not utterly
unfurnished with those Skills and Helps, which might make the Work Intelligible
and Acceptable even to Plebeians. For though it was at first designed by the
Excellent Author in his Latin for such as were merely Lawyers and Scholars
(they must be both, that mean to understand it as he wrote it) yet now it being
done into English, it was to be calculated to the Meridian of common Capacities
and vulgar Understandings. Which end he has, he hopes, in some good measure
answered; and in order to which end, he has, to supply the defects of his
Translation, at the end of the Book subjoyned some Annotations, which may serve
partly to clear the Author's meaning, and partly to vindicate himself in the
Interpretation. He did think once to have affixt those Annotations to the
places they belong to; but upon second and better thoughts, he considered, that
the Authors Quotations would be enough of themselves to charge the Margin with,
and a further superfoetation would but cloy and surbate the Reader; though in
the body of the Work, there are up and down many Explanations inserted, to
excuse him from the trouble of having recourse to those Notes, which are added
out of pure necessity, and not from any vanity of Ostentation, since the whole,
if it had its due, might seem to require a perpetual Comment. In the main,
which is enough for a Translator, be his Author what he will, he does assure
thee, that the meanest Subject of England may now read one of her greatest
Champions and Writers (for Learned Pens sometimes do as good and as great
service as Valiant Swords do) so understandingly, that he may edify and learn,
what duty and deference he ought to have for the Best of Governments.

And now, Reader, excuse me in a Digression, and do not impute it as a Levity
to me, that I follow my Grave Author. It is my Duty so to do; it is my
Happiness, if I can: He does not despair, now he appears in English, to have
Female-Readers too, to court him so far at least as to peruse his Translation,
who has so highly courted them with Noble Caresses in that Chapter, wherein he
has so learnedly pleaded the Excellencies and Rights of that Angelical Sex,
(if Angels have any Sex) to the abashment and overthrow of the Salick Law. To
what purpose did the Author write so much in their Commendation, if they were
not to know it? which, if the poor Translator has any Obligations upon the
Sex, he hopes they will own this as an Addition: not to mention that other
Chapter of his, where, like a Gentleman and a Lawyer both, he maintains that
freedom peculiar to our English Ladies, and which with Lawyers leave, I may
call The Courtesy of England, in receiving of Salutes, against the censure of
Rudeness on the one hand, and the suspicion of Wantonness on the other. Though
I must confess also, that some of his Citations in that defense, are so free,
that I thought fit rather to leave them as I found them, than by putting them
into English, to expose the Modesty of the Sex.

I have no more to say, Reader, but to beg thy Excuse, for any thing, wherein I
may appear to have come short of the Weighty and Abstruse Senses of our Great
and Worthy Author, and that I may detain thee no longer from his Conversation,
to bid thee Farewell.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
AND that the Tutelar or Guardian of my threshold may not entertain thee with
unlucky or ill-boding terms, he does freely be speak thee Health and Greeting,
whoever thou art, Dear Reader. Moreover, he is in the humor to declare both
the Occasion of drawing the first Furrow of this Enterprise, and also the Model
and Frame of the whole Work, what it is, finished and completed. It is a long
while ago, considering how young a man I am, since from the first I have made
it my hearty wish, that the ancient Original and Procedure of our Civil Law
might more fairly and clearly be made out; as far, I mean, as the thing will
bear, and as what store we have of public Records affords assistance. (...),
For several men with several things are pleased, as said Archilochus of old;
and I do own for my self, what Seneca the Declaimer says, Senec. controv.
that I take pleasure in going back to Studies of Antiquity, and in looking
behind me to our Grand-sires better times. Which, to say truth, they who do too
much, slight, Lucret. l. 1.
Ardua dum m^tuunt, amittunt ver^ viai. that is, Whilst l^fty passes they do
fear, through sloth
They lose the certain tracks and paths of troth
And, so may the Muses always favor me, they are such things as are --
Anteiqua, sepolta, vetusta,
Eno. Annal. l. 7.
Quai faciunt mores veteresque novosque tenentem
Moltarum veterum Legum, Divomque Hominumque
Prudentem. --
as says another old Latin Poet; that is, such stori^^ as are Antique, buried
in rubbish, old and musty,
Which make one verst in customs old and new,
And of Laws, Gods and Men giving a view,
Render the careful Student skilled and trusty.
Some spare hours have been spent by me in reading over Historians,
Chronologers, Antiquaries, Foreigners and our own Contrymen, those of
Ancient date and the more polite of the Modern sort: those especially who
seemed to make out the quickest course to that Goal and design I spoke of. I
have carefully culled out whatsoever I met with, that looked like the Orders and
Decisions of Praetors or Lord Chief Justices, and whatsoever concerns the Civil
or Profane Law. (Profane I call that, which is not held by the Religion of
the Church; as Sextus Pompeius has taught me.) I did judge that there were a
great many things in those Writers worth the knowing, and which might deserve
to be digested into a kind of Volume according to order of Chronology, I did in
the first place advise, and took that special order with my self, that as to
this undertaking, I might with the greater ease have my Attendants ready at
hand to wait upon my Studies. I went about to give some closure and coment,
such as it is, (i. e. some method and connection) to the scattered and
disjointed bulk, and I brought it to a conclusion; and as soon as it came into
my mind to publish it, I endeavored according to that meanness, which it
appears in, to finish it (that I may make use of a Mathematick term) with its
Complement. I have set the model and frame upon a sure account (not upon mine
own credit neither, who am too apt to take on trust things suspected) and in a
compendious way: I have writ my self compendiously and succinctly; I have
transcribed out of others faithfully. I do on set purpose vouch the credit, I
go upon, to be none of mine, but the Authors, I have taken out of, that I may
not be accused of false dealing by unskilful or careless Readers. I have
applied my self not only to the meaning of the Writers, or to their historical
account, but even to the very words and syllables, which they spoke, and have
inserted them printed in a different character; those, I confess, unless it be
from them of the middle age, many times sufficiently barbarous, that miserably
want polishing, such as Criti^ks cannot away with, and do very well agree with
the Records and Reports of Law, which we converse with. However I would not
have thee disdain in the mean time brimful and wholesome draughts of liquor,
because the Bowl was not made in a Potters shop of Colias a place in Athens, or
in cold Winter to slight a garment which is not made of Attick Wool; Plutar.
de audiende.
as Plutarch has admonished the hearers of Philosophy. Let young Ladies speak
finically with their golden Floweramours, and let them, who have store and
leave at once, court the graces of words and beauties of expression. It Is true,
the care of exact speaking, is a thing befits the Muses, yet how the most
abstruse Mysteries even of the highest Urania, of Divinity it self, are laid
open without it, the Thomists, the Scotists, and what other Sects and Parties
of Schoolmen there are, know well enough. And there are some others also, that
think they know; I mean the inquirers into Heavenly Calculations (Astrologers)
and the Weather-wise-men (Almanack-makers) who in good deed for the most part
rely too much upon the trifling stories of their Masters. Now they, and not
without good reason, have preferred the Arab Writers barbarously translated,
and slovenly Bonatus before Julius Firmicus and modern Pontanus, as spruce as
they are. These two may rather be termed Grammarians, than Astrologers. Nor do
Aristotle's crabbed Lectures of natural Philosophy discourage Interpreters or
procure to themselves any discredit, by reason of the affected obscurity of
speech, they are delivered in: and as to neatness of Poetry, Apollo himself
has been outdone by Sappho, Homer, Hesiod. Plutar. lib. orac. Pyt^.
Though the Matter does often surpass the Workmanship; yet who is there is so
rigid or so fond a Censurer, as to disparage and debase the Matter upon the
account of the Workmanship? Which I would not have be said only of those
passages, which I have brought into this Piece out of those forementioned
Authors, but also of the whole Body of our Common Law. I have, I hope, not
unluckily begun with the very first Inhabitants of this Isle, as far as we can
come to the knowledge of them. Those Authors, whom I have followed in the
original of Story, I have, as it was meet, set down and remarked, adding the
Judgment and Censure of the Learned. Afterward, besides Caesar and Tacitus
there are but few that afford us any help, and that but in few things too. For
the name of Brittany was known but of late to the Greeks, but of late to the
Romans; and the Britans were truly for a long while divided from all the world
besides. But among Foreigners the latter Ages have enquired after them. I speak
of Strabo, Pliny, Ptolomy, others; and a certain Writer of Asia, Marcianus
Heracleotes, not yet, that I know of, turned into Latin, says thus, Albion the
British Isle has in it Thirty Three Nations, Marcian. Heracleot. (...).
Fifty Nine remarkable Cities; and then he subjoyns other things concerning the
number of Rivers, Promontories, Havens and Creeks or Bays. I have stretched out
this Piece to the death of King Henry the Son of Mawd the Empress by Jeoffrey
the Count of Angers in France. In whose time, or near thereabout, are the first
beginnings of our Law, as our Lawyers now account. There come in by the way
Richard called Coeur de Lion and King John; but there is scarce any thing in
that interim to our purpose. I have on purpose passed by Mr. Lambard's
Archaeonomia (or Antiquites of Law) without meddling with it at all, only when
some obvious accasion did sometimes suggest it for the explaining of what is
set down by us. I have divided the whole into two Books; the first closes with
the Saxons; the second begins with the Norman Conquest, the most famous Era or
Date of the English Government in the reckonings of time.

But however to refer the original of our English Laws to that Conquest (as
some make bold to do) is a huge mistake; forasmuch as they are of a far more
ancient Date. Philip. Honor. These. politic. Lat. and Ital.

Machiavell in Principe and comment. ad Live. l. 1. c. 25. and 26.

Cujacius. Al^er. Gentil. l. 3. c. 11. de jure bell.


For it is a remark amongst Statesmen, That new acquired Empires, do run some
hazard by attempting to make new Laws: and the Norman did warily provide
against this danger, by bestowing upon the yielding conquered Nation the
requital of their ancient Law: a requital, I say, but more, as it should seem,
for show than use; and rather to curry favor with the people at the present,
than in good deed for the advantage of the English Name. Wherein he in some
measure followed well near the practice of Alaricus, who having conquered the
Romans, and finding that they took it in dudgeon to be bound up by the Laws of
the Goths, though in other things they were compliant enough, restored to them
the Roman Laws, but by sly interpretations against the sense and meaning of the
Roman Laws he drew these Laws back again to the Gothish. For the times on this
side the Normans entrance, are so full of new Laws, especially such as belong
to the right of Tenancy or Vassalage; though other Laws have been carefully
enough kept up from the time of the Saxons, and perhaps from an earlier date.
For neither did the gliding Decrees of that Blazing-Star, which appeared in the
Easter of that year, so well known for this Victory, prognosticate, as the
change of the Kingdom (a thing which Astrologers affirm) so the abolition of
our Laws; and yet in some sense peradventure an alteration of them both; at
that rate, I mean, as Jerome Cardan writes, H. Cardan. in Ptolem. l. 2. judic.
astron. text. 54.
that the Comet in the year 1533. which appeared in Aries (to which Sign, our
Island according to Ptolomies doctrine is liable) under the North side of the
Milky Way, being of a Jovial, Martial and Mercurial force and efficacy, was the
fore-teller or forerunner of the change of Religion; which happened three
years after in Henry the Eighth's time. But whatever may be thought in other
cases, Christianity is exempt from the Laws and overruling power of the Stars,
and I do but too well perceive, that Cardan's piety is wanting in this and in
other instances, and particularly in casting our Saviors Nativity. And why do
I too much besides my purpose, trouble my self about these things here? Go thy
ways to our Janus, (for thou can hardly choose but own him having two faces)
where to speak of our English British Law ('it is no Treason I trow so to call
it) Nobilitas nec origo latet, sed luce sequente Stat. 1. Silv.

Vincitur. --
That is, It Is noble rise does not lie hid, but tight.
Attending makes it far more clear and bright.
For, Si nobilitas cunctis exordia pandit Claudian. in laud. Serenae uxor.
Stilic.

Laudibus, atque omnes redeunt in semina causae.
That is, If nobleness does first commence all praise,
And all things from their seeds do themselves raise.
However it does not at all boast of its Romulus's, its Numa's, L. 2. Sect. 2.
omnia. C. de vet. jur. en^cl.
its Decemviri, its 2000. Books, its 4000. and 4000. and 4000. Verses, and the
like; which having been digested long since (as it were Virg. Aen. 1.
-- non hos quaesitum munus in usus, That is, A boon not purchased for such use
as this) do far and near bear sway in Courts of Law throughout all Europe; yet
is not the rise and original of our Laws also less to be regarded; nor is it
perchance for distance of time further from Iapetus than they. But go thy
ways, I say, and see that thou do not undertake without reason and good
advice, to fit any thing to the present Age, otherwise than the changes, the
repeals and cancelling parts of Laws, and new emergencies and vicissitudes of
affairs, which were frequent, will give thee leave. Remember Lucretius in this
case alike as in others. Lucret. l. 5. de rer. not.
Quod fuit in pretio, fit nullo denique honor;
Porro aliud succedit, and e contemtibus exit,
Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum
Laudibus, and miro'st mortaleis inter honor.
That is, What was in price, at last has no esteem;
Whilst somewhat else starts up, and gains repute,
And every day grows more in vogue and brute,
And mortals strangely do it highly deem.
According to what that other, and the greatest Philosopher among the Poets
says, Virg. l. 11. Aeneid.
Multa dies, variusque labor mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius. --
That is, Time and the various toil of changing age
Many things betters, and reforms the Stage.
And the Greek sentence, (...). For time to Laws themselves gives Law full often.
without a world of rubs in the way and slips or distances of years, I saw I was
not able to put upon the work the face of a History, and to muster up all
things that are wanting. Very many things are so effaced by injury of time,
several things have been lost through neglect, nor is the Learned World under a
small discontent, or at small variance by reason of this loss. These remains,
which are left us, to be handled upon occasion, I have always accounted
pleasant researches: I, and perhaps one may say, that those Learned Pieces,
which Pomponius, Rivallius, Zasius, Oldendorp, Brissonius, and others, have
published concerning the Twelve Tables, and the Laws written upon Oaken Planks,
upon Elephants Skins, and in former Ages upon Brass, are not of more use and
advantage for the City Spire in Germany, than these Collections may be for
Westminster Hall amongst us. We have said enough and to spare, concerning the
model and frame of the Work. For me now to beg the Readers pardon, that I may
speak a little concerning my self, seeing it was at my own choice, whether I
would give him trouble or no, would be silly. If so be that any one shall show
himself more busy or pragmatical in these Writings of mine, than becomes him;
(...), Aristoph. (...).
Not knowing (as we say) a Pig from a Dog I would not have him ignorant, that I
value it no more than a rush, to be lashed with the flouts of prattle-boxes or
tittle-tatlers, and such creatures as carry the Goddess Nemesis on pickpack.
Nor does any one that is in his wits, when an Ass kicks and flings at him to
little or no purpose, regard an idle oafish affront so as to requite it. I
paint upon my weather-boards Averrunca, i. e. God forefend, (as they did of old
Arse verse upon houses, to preserve them from fire.) May Intercedona, Pilumnus,
and Deverra, drive away Silvanus, and keep him off from doing this tender
Infant any harm. Well! let Ass^s and silly Animals commend, find fault, tune
their pipes, how they will: let the envious and ill natured with their
sneerings, prate and talk; let snotty nosed Fellows and Clowns, that feed upon
cockle bread, appro^^ what I write, or let them flout and fleer, or let them
play Jack of both sides; it is all fiddle faddle to me, nor would I put a straw
between. Hegesand. Delphus ap. Athen. dipnos. 4.
(...),
(...).
Brow-benders, making Nose and Chin to meet,
With dangling Beards like sacks down to your feet.
Ye rigid Cato's and severe Critics, do ye take in good part, what I have
done; nor let me be altogether slighted, if by chance ye shall vouchsafe to
look this way, nor with your skew looks fore-speak my harvest in the blade. I
shall readily and willingly yield the conquest to him that fairly gets it, and
rightfully corrects me. But whoever thou art of that sort of men, Per meos
fines and aprica rura
Horat. Carm. 3. Od. 18.
Lenis incedas, abeasque parvis
Aequus alumnis.
Over my bounds and sunny plain
Take a gentle walk or twain;
Then depart with friendly mind,
To me and my Lambkins kind.
You, Plin. epist. ad Not. Hist.
that are candid and courteous, know, that it is a very hard matter to brighten
things that are grown out of use, to furnish things obscure with light, to set
off things that are disdained, with credit, to make things doubtful pass for
probable, to assign to every thing its own nature, and every thing to its own
nature; and that it is a very brave and gallant thing, as he says, for those
that have not attained their design, yet to have endeavored it; when the Will
( as we say) is accepted for the Deed. But I know too, that every Cone or point
of vision in the Optics differs from a right angle; Senec. praef. ad controver.
and I know how odious a thing a Train or solemn Procession is in the public
Games. Therefore, dear Reader, I bid thee heartily farewell; and with a
fortunate endeavor, fetch out hence, what may make for thy turn. Why do I
delay all this while to let thee in? (...). Go thy ways in, o'Gods name.
Laudamus veteres, sed nostris utimur annis: Ovid. Fast. 1.

Mos tamen est aeque dignus uterque coli.
We praise old times, but make use of our own;
And yet it is fit they both alike be known.
Go in and welcome heartily; and be not unkind to thy Entertainer,

From the Inner Temple London, December. 25. 1610.
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).

In laudem dignissimi Authoris, and politioris literaturae candidati, Carmen.
CUm Jovis effoeti Pallas foret orta cerebro,
Vagitus teneros virgo patrima dedit.
Accurrit, taciteque novam subducere prolem
Tentat, and abstrusis abdere Juno locis.
Jupiter ingenuam solerti indagine natam
Quaeritat, and celeri permeat astra pede;
Stat, cerebrique tuam cernens, Seldene, Minervam
In natae amplexus irruit ille tuae.
Atque suam credit; parilique ab imagine formae
Illa fuit suavis, suavis and illa fuit.
Lisque foret, nisi quae quondam Lucina fuisset,
Musarum testis turba novena fuit.
Quam cognata Jovis tua casta Minerva Minervae est,
Cum tantum fallax lusit imago Deum?
ALIUD.
DUm tuus ambigua Janus, facieque biformi
Respicit antiqua, and posteriora videt:
Archivos Themidis canos, monumentaque legum
Vindicat a veteri semi-sopita situ.
Hinc duplex te Jane manet veterane corona,
Gratia canitie, posteritate decus.
Gulielmus Bakerus Oxon.

ASTRAEAE BRIT.
ULtima caelicolum terras Astraea reliquit.
Tu tamen alma redi and terras Astraea revise:
Astraea alma redi tuis Britannis:
Et diva alma fave tuis Britannis:
Et diva alma fove tuos Britannos:
Et diva alma regas tuos Britannos:
Cantemus tibi sic tui Britanni:
Foelices nimium o tui Britanni:
Tu tandem alma redis divum postrema Britannis:
Ultima coelicolum terras Astraea revisit.
Alma redi. sacro redolent altaria fumo
Et tibi sacratis ignibus. Alma redi.
Alma redi. posuit Liber hic primordia juris
Anglos quo poteris tu regere. Alma redi.
Alma redi. tibi templa struit Seldenus: at aram
Qui tibi nil potuit sanctius. Alma redi.
E. Heyward.

In Epigraphen Libri Carmen.
QUisnam Io mussat? Posuisti Enyo
Arma; jam doctos Iber haut Batavos
Mart turbat; Foedere jam Britannus
Continet Orbem.
Clusium Audax quis reserat latentem?
Falleris. Diae Themidis recludo
Intima. Haec porta melius ferata
Pandit Eanus.
I. S.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. THE counterfeit Berosus with the Monk that put him forth, both
censured. The Story of Samothes the first Celtick King. The bounds of Celtica.
From Samothes, say they, the Britans and Gauls were called Samothei. For which
Diogenes Laertius is falsely quoted; the word in him, being Semnothei, page 1.
CHAP. II. An Account of the Semnothei. Why so called; the opinion of H.
Stephen, and of the Author. Old Heroes and Philosophers went by the names of
Demy-gods. The (...) or Venerable Goddesses, the same as Eumenides, dispensers
of Justice. And by Plutarch and Orpheus they are set for Civil Magistrates.
Judges in Scripture so called Elohim, i. e. Gods. These Semnai theai the same
as Deae Matres in an old British Inscription, p. 3 CHAP. III. One Law of
Samothes out of Basingstoke concerning the reckoning of Time by Nights. Bodinus
his censure of Astrologers for otherwise computing their Planetary Hours. A
brief account of some of Samothes his Successors, Magus, Sarron, Druis, from
whom the Druids, etc. p. 5 CHAP. IV. K. Phranicus 900. Years after Samothes
being to reside in Pannonia, intrusts the Druids with the Government. In the
mean time Brutus, Aeneas his Grandson, arrives and is owned King by the
Britans, and builds T^oynovant, i. e. London. Dunvallo Molmutius 600. years
after is King, and makes Laws concerning Sanctuaries, Roads or Highways and
Plow-lands. K. Belin his Son confirms those Laws, and casts up four great
Cause-wayes through the Island. A further account of Molmutius. p. 6 CHAP. V. A
brief Account of Q. Regent Martia, and of Merchenlage, whether so called from
her, or from the Mercians. Annius again censured for a Forger, and his Berosus
for a Fabulous Writer, p. 7 CHAP. VI. The story of Brutus canvast and taken to
be a Poetic Fiction of the Bards. Jeoffry of Monmouth's credit called in
question. Antiquaries at a loss in their judgments of these frivolous stories,
p. 8 CHAP. VII. What the Trojan Laws were, which Brutus brought in. That
concerning the Eldest Sons Inheriting the whole Estate, confuted. In the first
times there were no Positive Laws; yet mention made of them in some very
ancient Authors, notwithstanding a remark of some ancient Writers to the
contrary, p. 10 CHAP. VIII. An Account of the DRUIDS out of Caesar's
Commentaries, whence they were so called. Their determining in point of Law,
and passing Sentence in case of Crime. Their Award binds all parties. Their way
of Excommunicating or Outlawing. They have a Chief over them. How he is chosen.
Their Privilege and Immunity, p. 12 CHAP. IX. The menage of their Schools
without Writing. On other occasions they might use the Greek Letters, as Caesar
says, yet not have the language. The Greek Letters then were others than what
they are now. These borrowed from the Gauls, as those from the Phoenicians.
Ceregy-Drudion, or the Druids Stones in Wales. This Place of Caesar's
suspected. Lipsius his Judgment of the whole Book, p. 13 CHAP. X. The Druids
reckoning of time. An Age consists of thirty Years. What Authors treat of the
Druids. Their Doctrines and Customs savor of Pythagoras and the Cabbalists.
They were the eldest Philosophers and Lawyers among the Gentiles. Some odd
Images of theirs in Stone, in an Abbey near Voitland, described, p. 15 CHAP. XI.
The Britans and Gauls had Laws and Customs much alike, and whence that came.
Some things common to them both, set down; in relation to the breeding of their
Children, the Marrying of their Wives, the Governing of their Families, burning
Women that killed their Husbands, and burning some Servants with the dead
Master for company. Together with some Remarks of their public Government, p.
16 CHAP. XII. Women admitted to public debates. A large commendation of the
Sex, together with a vindication of their fitness to govern; against the Salick
Law, made out by several examples of most Nations, p. 18 CHAP. XIII. Their
putting themselves under protection by going into great men's service. Their
Coins of money, and their weighing of it. Some sorts of flesh not lawful to be
eaten by them, p. 21 CHAP. XIV. Community of Wives among the Britans, used
formerly by other Nations also. Chalcondylas his mistake from our Civil Custom
of Saluting. A rbuke of the foolish humor of Jealousy, p. 22 CHAP. XV. An
account of the British State under the Romans. Claudius wins a Battle, and
returns to Rome in Triumph, and leaves A. Plautius to order affairs. A Colony
is sent to Maldon in Essex, and to several other places. The nature of these
Colonies out of Lipsius. Julius Agricola's Government here in Vespasian's time,
p. 24 CHAP. XVI. In Commodus his time King Lucy embraces the Christian
Religion, and desires Eleutherius then Pope, to send him the Roman Laws. In
stead of Heathen Priests, he makes three Archbishops and twenty eight Bishops.
He endows the Churches, and makes them Sanctuaries. The manner of Government in
Constantine's time, where ends the Roman account. p. 27 CHAP. XVII. The Saxons
are sent for in by Vortigern against the Scots and Picts, who usurping the
Government, set up the Heptarchy. The Angles, Jutes, Frisons, all called
Saxons. An account of them and their Laws, taken out of Adam of Bremen, p. 29
CHAP. XVIII. The Saxons division of their people into four ranks. No person to
marry out of his own rank. What proportion to be observed in Marriages
according to Policy. Like to like the old Rule. Now Matrimony is made a matter
of money, p. 30 CHAP. XIX. The Saxons way of judging the Event of War with an
Enemy. Their manner of approving a proposal in Council, by clattering their
Arms. The Original of Hundred-Courts. Their dubbing their Youth into Men. The
privilege of young Lads Nobly born. The Morganheb or Wedding-dowry, p. 32
CHAP. XX. Their severe punishments of Adultery, by maiming some parts of the
body. The reason of it given by Bracton. The like practiced by Danes and
Normans, p. 33 CHAP. XXI. The manner of Inheriting among them. Of deadly Feuds.
Of Wergild or Head-money for Murder. The Nature of Country-Tenures and Knights
Fees, p. 36 CHAP. XXII. Since the return of Christianity into the Island. King
Ethelbert's Law against Sacrilege. Thieves formerly amerced in Cattle. A blot
upon Theodred the Good, Bishop of London, for hanging Thieves. The Country
called Engelond by Order of King Egbert, and why so called. The Laws of King
Ina, Alfred, Ethelred, etc. are still to be met with in Saxon. Those of Edward
the Confessor, and King Knute the Dane, were put forth by Mr. Lambard in his
Archaeonomia, p. 37 CHAP. XXIII. King Alfred divides England into Counties or
Shires, and into Hundreds and Tythings. The Original of Decenna or Courtleet,
Friburg, and Mainpast. Forms of Law, how People were to answer for those whom
they had in Borgh or Mainpast, p. 39 CHAP. XXIV. King Alfred first appointed
Sheriffs. By Duns Scotus his advice, he gave Order for the breeding up of Youth
in Learning. By the way, what a Hide of Land is. King Edgar's Law for Drinking.
Prelates investiture by the Kings Ring and Staff. King Knute's Law against any
Englishman that should kill a Dane. Hence Englescyre. The manner of
Subscribing and Sealing till Edward the Confessor's time. King Harold's Law,
that no Welch-man should come on this side Offa's Dike with a weapon, p. 41
CHAP. XXV. The Royal Consorts great Privilege of Granting. Felons Estates
forfeited to the King. Estates granted by the King with three Exceptions of
Expedition, Bridge, and Castle. The Ceremony of the Kings presenting a Turf at
the Altar of that Church, to which he gave Land. Such a Grant of King Ethelbald
comprised in old Verse, p. 43
THE CONTETNS. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. WIlliam the Conquerour's Title. He bestows Lands upon his followers,
and brings Bishops and Abbots under Military service. An account of the old
English Laws, called Merchenlage, Danelage, and Westsaxen-lage. He is prevailed
upon by the Barons, to govern according to King Edward's Laws, and at S. Albans
takes his Oath so to do. Yet some new Laws were added to those old ones, p. 47
CHAP. II. The whole Country enrolled in Doomsday Book. Why that Book so
called. Robert of Glocester's Verses to prove it. The Original of Charters and
Seals from the Normans, practiced of old among the French. Who among the Romans
had the privilege of using Rings to seal with, and who not, p. 51 CHAP. III.
Other ways of granting and conveying Estates, by a Sword, etc. particularly by
a Horn. Godwin's trick to get Boseham of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Pleadings in French. The French Language and Hand when came in fashion.
Coverfeu. Laws against taking of Deer, against Murder, against Rape, p. 54
CHAP. IV. Sheriffs and Juries were before this time. The four Terms. Judges to
act without appeal. Justices of Peace. The Kings payments made at first in
Provisions. Afterward changed into Money, which the Sheriff of each County was
to pay in to the Exchequer. The Constable of Dover and Warder of the Cinque
Ports why made. A disorder in Church Affairs Reformed, p. 56 CHAP. V. William
Rufus succeeds. Annats now paid to the King. Why claimed by the Pope. No one to
go out of the Land without leave. Hunting of Deer made Felony. p. 59 CHAP. VI.
Henry the First why called Beauclerk. His Letters of Repeal. An Order for the
Relief of Lands. What a Hereot was. Of the Marriage of the Kings Homagers
Daughter, etc. Of an Orphans Marriage. Of the Widows Dowry. Of other Homagers
the like. Coynage-money remitted. Of the disposal of Estates. The Goods of
those that dye Intestate, now and long since, in the Churches Jurisdiction; as
also the business of Wills. Of Forfeitures. Of Misdemeanors. Of Forests. Of the
Fee de Hauberk. King Edward's Law restored, p. 60 CHAP. VII. His order for the
restraint of his Courtiers. What the punishment of Theft. Coyners to lose their
Hands and Privy members. Guelding a kind of death. What Halfpence and
Farthings to pass. The right measure of the Eln. The Kings price set for
provisions, p. 63 CHAP. VIII. The Regality claimed by the Pope, but within a
while resumed by the King. The Coverfeu dispensed with. A Subsidy for marrying
the Kings daughter. The Courtesy of England. Concerning Shipwreck. A Tax
levied to raise and carry on a War, p. 65 CHAP. IX. In King Stephen's Reign all
was to pieces. Abundance of Castles built. Of the privilege of Coining.
Appeals to the Court of Rome now set on foot. The Roman Laws brought in, but
disowned. An instance in the Wonder-working Parliament, p. 67 CHAP. X. In King
Henry the Seconds time, the Castles demolished. A Parliament held at Clarendon.
Of the Advowson and Presentation of Churches. Estates not to be given to
Monasteries without the Kings leave. Clergymen to answer in the Kings Court. A
Clergyman convict, out of the Churches Protection. None to go out of the Realm,
without the Kings leave. This Repealed by King John. Excommunicate Persons to
find Surety. Laymen how to be impleaded in the Ecclesiastical Court. A Lay-Jury
to swear there, in what case. No Homager or Officer of the Kings to be
Excommunicated, till He or his Justice be acquainted, p. 69 CHAP. XI.Other Laws
of Church affairs. Concerning Appeals. A Suit betwixt a Clergyman and a
Layman, where to be tried. In what case one, who relates to the King, may be
put under an Interdict. The difference betwixt that and Excommunication.
Bishops to be present at the Trials of Criminals, until Sentence of Death, etc.
pass. Profits of vacant Bishoprics, etc. belong to the King. The next Bishop
to be chosen in the Kings Chapel, and to do Homage before Consecration.
Deforcements to the Bishop, to be righted by the King. And on the contrary,
Chattels forfeit to the King, not to be detained by the Church. Pleas of debts
whatsoever in the Kings Court. Yeomens Sons not to go into Orders without the
Lords leave, p. 72 CHAP. XII. The Statutes of Clarendon mis-reported in Matthew
Paris, amended in Quadrilegus. These Laws occasioned a Quarrel between the King
and Thomas a Becket. Witness Robert of Gloucester, whom he calls Yumen. The same
as Rusticks, i. e. Villains. Why a Bishop of Dublin called Scorch-Uillein.
Villanage before the Normans time, p. 74 CHAP. XIII. The Poet gives account
which of those Laws were granted by Thomas a Becket, which withstood. Leudemen
signifies Laymen, and more generally all illiterate Persons, p. 77 CHAP. XIV.
The Pope absolves Thomas a Becket from his Oath, and damns the Laws of
Clarendon. The King resents it, writes to his Sheriffs, Orders a Seizure.
Penalties inflicted on Kindred. He provides against an Interdict from Rome. He
summons the Bishops of London and Norwich. An account of Peter Pence, p. 79
CHAP. XV. A Parliament at Northampton. Six Circuits ordered. A List of the then
Justices. The Jury to be of twelve Knights. Several sorts of Knights. In what
cases Honorary Knights to serve in Juries. Those who come to Parliament by
right of Peerage, sit as Barons. Those who come by Letters of Summons, are
styled Chevaliers, p. 81 CHAP. XVI. The person convict by Ordeal, to quit the
Realm within Forty days. Why Forty days allowed. An account of the Ordeals by
Fire and Water. Lady Emme cleared by going over burning Coulters. Two sorts of
trial by Water. Learned conjectures at the rise and reason of these customs.
These Ordeals, as also that of single Combat condemned by the Church, p. 84
CHAP. XVII.Other Laws: Of entertaining of strangers. An Uncuth, a Gust, a
Hogenhine; what of him who confesses the Murder, etc. Of Frank pledge. Of an
Heir under age. Of a Widows Dowry. Of taking the Kings fealty. Of setting a
time to do homage. Of the Justices duty. Of their demolishing of Castles. Of
Felons to be put into the Sheriffs hands. Of those who have departed the Realm,
p. 87 CHAP. XVIII. Some Laws in favor of the Clergy. Of forfeitures on the
account of Forest or hunting. Of Knights fees. Who to bear Arms, and what Arms.
Arms not to be alienated. No Jew to bear Arms. Arms not to be carried out of
England. Rich men under suspicion to clear themselves by Oath. Who allowed to
swear against a Freeman. Timber for building of Ships not to be carried out of
England. None but Freemen to bear Arms. Freemen who. Rusticks or Villains not
such, p. 90 CHAP. XIX. Of Lawmakers. Our Kings not Monarchs at first. Several
of them in the same County. The Druids meeting place where. Under the Saxons,
Laws made in a general Assembly of the States. Several instances. This Assembly
under the Normans called Parliament. The thing taken from a custom of the
ancient Germans. Who had right to sit in Parliament. The harmony of the Three
Estates, p. 93 CHAP. XX. The Guardians of the Laws, who. In the Saxons time
seven Chief. One of the Kings among the Heptarchs styled Monarch of all
England. The Office of Lord High Constable. Of Lord Chancellor, ancient. The
Lord Treasurer. Alderman of England, what. Why one called Healfkoning. Aldermen
of Provinces and Graves, the same as Counts or Earls and Viscounts or Sheriffs.
Of the County Court, and the Court of Inquests, called Tourn le Viscount. When
this Court kept, and the original of it, p. 95 CHAP. XXI. Of the Norman Earls.
Their Fee. Their power of making Laws. Of the Barons, i.e. Lords of Manours. Of
the Court Baron. Its rise. An instance of it out of Hoveden. Other Offices much
alike with the Saxons. p. 98
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ENGLISH JANUS. From the Beginning of the BRITISH Story
down to the NORMAN Conquest.
CHAP. I.
The counterfeit Berosus with the Monk that put him forth, both censured. The
Story of Samothes the first Celtick King. The bounds of Celtica. From Samothes,
say they, the Britans and Gauls were called Samothei. For which Diogenes
Laertius is falsely quoted; the word in him, being Semnothei.

THERE came forth, and in Buskins too (I mean, with Pomp and State) some
parcels of years ago, and is still handed about every where, an Author, called
Berosus a Chaldee Priest (take heed how you suffer your self to believe him to
be the same that Flavius Josephus so often up and down quotes for a witness)
with a Commentary of Viterbiensis. Or, rather to say that which is the very
truth, John Annius of Viterbium (a City of Tuscany.) a Dominican Friar, playing
the Leger-de-main, having counterfeited Berosas, to put off his own strange
stories, has put a cheat upon the Lady Muse who is the Governess of
Antiquities, and has hung a Bantling at her back.

After the Genealogies of the Hebrews drawn down by that Author, whoever he be,
according to his own humor and method, for fear he should not be thought to
take in the Kingdoms and Kings of the whole Universe, and the Etymologies of
Proper Names by wholesale, as we say; as if he had been born the next day
after Grandam Ops was delivered of Jupiter, he subjoyns SAMOTHES (the very same
who is ycleped Dis) the Founder of the Celtick Colonies, stuffing up odd
Patcheries of Story to entertain and abuse the Reader.

Now, this I thought fit by the by, not to conceal, that all that space which
is bounded with the River Rhine, the Alps, the Mediterranean Sea, the Pyrenean
Hills, and lastly, the Gascoin and the British Oceans, was formerly termed
Celtogalatia; Ptol. 2. Geogr. and 2. quadrip. and Pausan. l. 1.
nay, that P^olomy has comprised all Europe under the name of Celtica.

Well, as the Commentary of Annius has it, This Samothes was Brother to Gomar
and Tubal by their Father Japhet, from whom first the Britans, then the Gauls
were called Samothei; and especially the Philosophers and Divines that were his
followers. And out of Laertius he tells us, For it is evident, that among the
Persians the Magi flourished, among the Babylonians and Assyrians the Chaldeans
were famous, among the Celts and Gauls the Druids, and those who were called
Samothei; who, as Aristotle in his Magic, and Sotion in his Three and
Twentieth Book of Successions do witness, were men very well skilled in Laws
Divine and Humane, and upon that account were much addicted to Religion; and
were for that reason termed Samothei. These very words you meet with in Annius.

The name of Laertius is pretended, and the beginning of his Volume concerning
the Lives of Philosophers. Why then let us read Laertius himself; and amongst
the Celts and Gauls (says he) the Semnothei as says Aristotle in his Book of
Magic, and Sotion in his Three and Twentieth of Succession. Concerning the
Samothei any other ways there is not so much as one syllable. That they were
men well skilled in Laws Divine and Humane, or that they had their name given
them upon that account, only the Latin and foisted Edition of B. Brognol the
Venetian has told us: whereas in truth, in all the ancient Greek Copies of
Laertius, which that great Scholar Harry Stephen saw and consulted with (and he
says he perused Eight or Nine) there is no mention at all made of that
business.

And yet for all that, I cannot persuade my self, that it was only for want of
care, or by mere chance, that this slipped into the Glosses: It does appear, that
there have been able Lawyers and Master Philosophers not only among the Greeks,
the Gauls, and those of Italy; but also among the Northern Nations, however
Barbarous. Witness the Druids among us, and among the Goths, as Jornandes tells
us, Jornand. de reb. Goth. c. 11.
besides Cosmicus, one Diceneus, who, being at once King of Men, and Priest of
Phoebus, did together with Natural Philosophy and other parts of good Learning,
transmit to posterity a Body of Laws, which they called Bellagines; that is,
Bylaws.

There are some, who in Laertius read Samothei; which is a device of those men,
who with too much easiness (they are Isaac Casaubon's words) that I may say no
worse, suffer themselves to be led by the Nose by that counterfeit Berosus.

CHAP. II.
An Account of the Semnothei. Why so called; the opinion of H. Stephen, and of
the Author. Old Heroes and Philosophers went by the names of Demy-gods. The
(...) or Venerable Goddesses, the same as Eumenides, dispensers of Justice. And
by Plutarch and Orpheus they are set for Civil Magistrates. Judges in Scripture
so called Elohim, i. e. Gods. These Semnai theai the same as Deae Matres in an
old British Inscription.

ANd indeed if the Samothei had any thing to do with truth, or the Semnothei
any thing to do with the ancient Law of the Celts (in as much as they write,
that Britany was once in subjection to the Celtick Kings) I should judge it not
much beside the design of my intended Method to inquire into the name and
nature of them both. But they being both one and the other past all hope, except
such a one as Lucian returning from the Inhabitants of the Sun, or those of the
Moon, would write their History, to speak of them would be more than to lose
ones labor. I dare not to say much of them.

I imagine, says Harry Stephen, they were so called, Steph. ad Laert.
for having the Gods often in their mouths, and that in these words, (...),
that is, The Worshipful Gods; or for that they themselves were accounted
amongst men as a kind of Worshipful Gods: but, writes he, this latter I do not
take to be so likely as the former. But say I for my part, if I might venture
my opinion against the judgment of so great a person, I guess this latter to
be the likelier of the two.

That the old Heroes went by the names of Gods, is a thing we read every where;
nor did Antiquity grudge the bestowal of this honor even upon Philosophers.
Not upon Amphiaraus the Prophet; not upon Aesculapius, not upon Hippocrates,
renowned Physicians; they are reckoned among the middle sort of Gods. Aug. de
Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 14. Laert. lib. 5.
Thus Plato also was accounted by Antistius Labeo for a Demy-god, and Tyrtamus
for his Divine eloquence, had the name of Theophrastus (that is, God-like
Speaker) given him by his Master Aristotle. No wonder then, if thereupon thence
forward great Philosophers were called Semnothei, and as it were Worshipful
Gods. These instances incline me, whilst I only take a view of their
Philosophy; whom, if either the authority of Annius, or the interpretation of
Brognol had sufficiently and fairly made out to have been also at the same time
Students and Masters of Law, I should hardly stick almost to affirm, that I had
found out in what places the true natural spring and source both of their name,
and as I may say, of their delegated power is to be met with.

For I have it in Pausanias (forbear your flouts, because I waft over into
Greece, from whence the most ancient Customs both Sacred and Profane of the
Gentiles came) I say in Pausanias the most diligent searcher of the Greek
Antiquities, I meet upon Mars his Hill at Athens, and also in his Achaicks (or
Survey of Achaia) with Chapels of the Goddesses whom the Athenians styled
(...), that is, Worshipful. He himself also in his Corinthiacks makes mention
of a Grove set thick with a sort of Oaks on the left side of Asopas a River in
Sicyon (a Country of Peloponnesus) where there stood a little Chapel of the
Goddesses, whom the Athenians termed Semnai, the Sicyonians called Eumenides.
The story of Orestes and the Eumenides or Furies that haunted him is known to
every body, nor can you tell me of any little smatterer in Poetry, who does not
know, that they, together with Adrastia, Ramnissia, Nemesis, and other
Goddesses of the same stamp, are pretended to be the Avengers of Villainies, and
continually to assist Jupiter the great God in punishing the wicked actions of
Mortals. They were black ones that met with Orestes, but that there were white
ones too, to whom together with the Graces the Ancients paid their Devotions;
the same Pausanias has left written in his Survey of Arcadia. I let pass that
in the same Author, she whom some called Erinnys, that is a Fury; others called
Themis the Goddess of Justice.

To be brief and plain; the Furies, that is, the Avenging Goddesses sit upon
the skirts of the wicked; but the Eumenides, that is, the kind Goddesses, Soph.
in Oedip. in Colon.
as Sophocles interprets them (for that they were so called properly without
the Figure of Antiphrasis or contradiction he is our Author) do attend the good
and such as are blameless and faultless, and poor suppliants. Plut. in lib. de
Exilio.
Nay, moreover Plutarch writes in a Poetic strain, that Alcmaeon fled from
these Eumenides; meaning in very deed, that he made his escape from the Civil
Magistrates. In a word, the whole business we have been aiming at, Orpheus
compriseth in two Verses of that Hymn he has made upon those Goddesses. Not.
Comes, Mythol. l. 3. c. 10.

Plut. de Iside and Osiride.


(...)
(...).
which in a short Paraphrase speaks thus; But ye with eye of Justice, and a face
Of Majesty survey all humane race,
Judges commissioned to all time and place.


See here plainly out of the most ancient Divine among the Heathens, how Judges
and the Dispensers of Law pass under the notion of these Venerable Goddesses:
and it was a thing of custom to term the Right of the Infernal Powers, as well
as the Doctrine of the Heavenly ones, a thing Holy and Sacred. What hinders
then I pray, but that one may guess, that the Name, and Title, and Attributes
or Characters of the Semnothei sprang forth and flowed from hence; to wit, from
the Semnai theai or Venerable Goddesses?

Odyss. 3.
Homer in his Poems calls Kings (...), that is, persons bred and nourished by
Jove; Exodus 22. Psalm. 82. 2 Paral. 19. Munst. ad Genesis c. 9.
yea, the Eternal and Sacred Scriptures themselves do more than once call Judges
by that most holy name Elohim, that is, Gods. The judgment is Gods, not Man's;
and (as Munster remarks out of Rabbi Kimchi) whatsoever thing Scripture designs
to magnify or express with hight, Plut. de sera Dei vindicta.
it subjoyns to it the name of God. God (as Plutarch has it out of Plato, who
in his Attick styl^ imitates our Moses) has set himself out as a pattern of
the Good, the dreadful syllables of whose very not-to-be-uttered Name (though
we take no notice of the Cabalists art) do strike, move and twitch the ears of
Mortals, and one while when thorough ignorance they straggle out of the way, do
bring them back into the path or track of Justice; another while when they are
stopped up with prejudice, and are overcast with gloomy darkness, do with a
stupendous, dismal and continual trembling shake the poor wretches, and put
them into Ague-sits. Nor let that be any hindrance, that so splendid and so
manly a name is taken from the weaker Sex, to wit, the Goddesses.

Let us more especially have to do with the Britans, as those amongst whom are
those choice and singular Altars, not any where else to be met with in the
whole World, with this Inscription, Camden.
DEIS MATRIBUS, To the Mother-Goddesses. Concerning these Mother-Goddesses,
that excellent Learned Man (that I may hint it by the by) confesses he could
with all his search find out nothing; but if such a mean person as I, may have
leave, What if one should imagine, that those Goddesses, whom Pausanias in his
Attick stories calls (...), were the same as these Mother Goddesses? for so
those Names import. The Mother of the Gods is a Title well known; wherewith not
only Berecynthia, but also Juno, Cybele, Tellus, Ceres, and other She Is among
Mythologists are celebrated and made famous.

Be this, if you will, a thing by the by and out of the way; as he tells us, No
great Wit ever pleased without a pardon. Senec. Epist. 115.
Relying upon that (the Readers Pardon I mean) I undertook this Job, whatever
it is; and upon confidence of that, I come back to the business.

CHAP. III.
One Law of Samothes out of Basingstoke concerning the reckoning of Time by
Nights. Bodinus his censure of Astrologers for otherwise computing their
Planetary Hours. A brief account of some of Samothes his Successors, Magus,
Sarron, Druis, from whom the Druids, etc.

WE do not any where meet with any Law enacted by Samothes his authority. Yet
one only one concerning the account of times, Basingstoke the Count Palatine, a
very modern Historian, attributes to him. He defined, says he, the spaces or
intervals of all time, not by the number of days, but of nights (the same
thing, says Caesar of the Gauls, and Tacitus of the Germans) and be observed
birth-dayes, and the commencements of months and years in that order, that the
day should come after the night. Truth is, the Britans do at this time observe
that fashion, which is most ancient, and highly agreeable to Nature. And the
Evening and the Morning was the first day, and so on, Genesis 1.
says the Hebrew Writer, whose Contrymen the Jews also followed this custom.

The Peripateticks (i. e. the followers of Aristotle) do also at this rate
reckon Privation in the number of their three Principles; and hereupon John
Bodin adventures to censure the common Astrologers, that they, Bodin. l. 3.
daemononian.
according to the course of the Planets as they order it, and repeat it over
and over, begin their unequal hours, from the rising, rather than the setting
of the Sun.

They write, that after this Samothes, there came in play Magus, Sarran, Druis,
Bardus, and others more than a good many, in order of succession. Sarron was
not addicted to make Laws ('it is Stephanus Forcatulus helps us to this) but to
compose them, Forcat. l. 1. de Gall. Imp.
to put them into order, and to recommend them to practice, as one who reduced
those Laws, which his Grandfather Samothes, and afterward his Father Magus had
made, into one Volume, and with severe Menaces gave order for the keeping of
them.

From Druis or Druides they will have the Druids so called, a sort of
Philosophers so much famed and talked of in Caesar, Pliny and others: believe
it who list for me. The whole business of the Druids at present I put off till
Caesar's times.

CHAP. IV.
K. Phranicus 900. Years after Samothes being to reside in Pannonia, intrusts
the Druids with the Government. In the mean time Brutus, Aeneas his Grandson,
arrives and is owned King by the Britans, and builds Troynovant, i. e. London.
Dunvallo Molmutius 600. years after is King, and makes Laws concerning
Sanctuaries, Roads or Highways and Plow-lands. K. Belin his Son confirms
those Laws, and casts up four great Cause-wayes through the Island. A further
account of Molmutius.

ABout Nine hundred years after Samothes, King Phranicus (take it from the
British story, and upon the credit of our Jeoffry) intrusts the Druids with the
management of affairs, whilst he himself resided in Pannonia or Hungary.

In the mean time Brutus, the Son of Sylvius Posthumus King of the Latins,
Serve. ad 6. Aeneid.
and Grandchild to Aeneas (for Servius Honoratus in his Comment upon Virgil,
makes Sylvius to be the Son of Aeneas, not of Ascanius) being happily arrived
by Shipping, with Corinus one of the chief of his company, and coming to land
at Totnes in Devonshire, the Britans salute and own him King. He after he had
built New Troy (that is, London) gave Laws to his Citizens and Subjects; those
such as the Trojans had, or a Copy of theirs.

A matter of Six hundred years after Dunvallo Molmutius being King, ordained
(my Authors besides Jeoffry of Monmouth, are Ralph of Chester in his
Polychronicon, and Florilegus) that their Ploughs, Temples and Roads that led
to Cities, should have the privilege to be places of refuge. But because some
time after there arose a difference concerning the Roads or Highways, they
being not distinguished by certain Limits and Bounds, King Belin Son of the
foresaid Molmutius, to remove all doubt, caused to be made throughout the
Island four Royal Highways to which that privilege might belong; to wit, the
Fosse or Dike, Watlingstrete, Ermingstrete, and Ikeniltstrete. (But our Learned
Countryman and the great Light of Britan, William Camden, Clarenceaux King at
Arms is of opinion, these Cause-wayes were cast up by the Romans; a thing that
Tacitus, Bid and others do more than intimate.)

Moreover, so says Jeoffry, he ordained those Laws, which were called
Molmutius his Laws, which to this very time are so famed amongst the English.
Forasmuch as amongst other things, which a long time after, Gildas set down in
writing, he ordained, that the Temples of the Gods, and that Cities should have
that respect and veneration, that whatsoever runagate Servant, or guilty person
should fly to them for refuge, he should have pardon in the presence of his
enemy or prosecutor. He ordained also, That the Ways or Roads which led to the
aforesaid Temples and Cities, as also the Ploughs of Husbandmen should be
confirmed by the same Law: Afterward having reigned Forty years in peace, he
dyed and was buried in the City of London, then called Troynovant, near the
Temple of Concord (by which Temple, Norden in Brit. Specul.
there are not wanting those who understand that Illustrious College on the
Bank of Thames, consecrated to the Study of our Common Law, now called the
Temple and) which he himself had built for the confirmation of his Laws. At
this rate Jeoffry tells the story; but behold also those things which Polydore
Virgil has gathered out of ancient Writers, whereof he wanted no store.

He first used a Golden Crown, appointed Weights and Measures for selling and
buying of things, punished Thieves and all mischievous sorts of men with the
greatest severity; made a great many High ways; and gave order, how broad they
should be, and ordained by Law, that the right of those Ways belonged only to
the Prince; and set dreadful Penalties upon their heads, who should violate
that right, alike as upon theirs who should commit any misdemeanour in those
ways. Moreover, that the Land might not lie barren, nor the people be
frequently oppressed or lessened through Dearth or want of Corn, if Cattle
alone should possess the Fields, which ought to be tilled by men, he appointed
how many Ploughs every County should have, and set a penalty upon them by whose
means that number should be diminished: And he made a Law, That Laboring
Beasts which attended the Plough, should not be distrained by Officers, nor
assigned over to Creditors for money that was owing, if the Debtor had any
other Goods left. Thus much Polydore.

CHAP. V.
A brief Account of Q. Regent Martia, and of Merchenlage, whether so called
from her, or from the Mercians. Annius again censured for a Forger, and his
Berosus for a Fabulous Writer.

THe Female Government of Martia, Widow to King Quintiline, who had undertaken
the Tuition of Sisillius Son to them both, he being not as yet fit for the
Government, by reason of his Nonage; found out a Law, which the Britons called
the Martian Law. This also among the rest (I tell you but what Jeoffry of
Monmouth tells me) King Alfred translated, which in the Saxon Tongue he called
Merchenlage. Whereas nevertheless in that most elaborate Work of Camden,
wherein he gives account of our Country, Merchenlage is more appositely and
fitly derived from the Mercians, and they so called from the Saxon word Mearc,
that is, a Limit, Bound or Border.

These are the Stories, which Writers have delivered to us concerning those
times, which were more ancient than the History of the Romans; but such as are
of suspected, o^ doubtful, that I may not say of no credit at all. Among the
more Learned, there is hardly any Critic, who does not set down Annius in the
list of Forgers. And should one go to draw up the account of Times, and to
observe that difference which is so apparent in that Berosus of Viterbium from
Sacred Scriptures, and the Monuments of the Hebrews, one would perhaps think,
that he were no more to be believed, than another of the same name, who from a
perpendicular position of the wandering Stars to the Center of the World in the
Sign of Cancer, adventured to foretell, that all things should be burnt; and
from a like Congress of them in Capricorn, Senec. Not. quaest. l. 3 c. 29
to say, there would be an universal Deluge. The story is in Seneca.

CHAP. VI.
The story of Brutus canvast and taken to be a Poetic Fiction of the Bards.
Jeoffry of Monmouth's credit called in question. Antiquaries at a loss in their
judgments of these frivolous stories.

SOme have in like manner made enquiry concerning our British History, and
stumbled at it. From hence we had Brutus, Dunvallo and Queen Martia: There are
some both very Learned and very Judicious persons, who suspect, that that story
is patched up out of Bards Songs and Poetic Fictions taken upon trust, like
Talmudical Traditions, on purpose to raise the British name out of the Trojan
ashes. For though Antiquity, as one has it, is credited for a great witness;
yet however it is a wonder, that this Brutus, who is reported to have killed his
Father with an Arrow unluckily aimed, and to have been fatal to his Mother at
her very delivery of him (for which reason Richard Vitus now after so many Ages
makes his true name to be (...), that is, Mortal) should be mentioned by none
of the Romans: a wonder, I say, that the Latin Writers should not be acquainted
with the name of a Latin Prince, who gave both Name and Government to Britany.
Did Euemerus Messenius alone ever since the World began, sail to the Panchoans
and the Triphyllians? Indeed it is an ordinary thing for Poets, to ingraft
those whom they celebrate in their Poems, into Noble Stocks and Illustrious
Families, and by the assistance of their Muses heightning every thing above the
truth, to feign and devise a great many stories. And what else were the Bards,
Athen. dipnos. l. 6.
as Athenaeus tells us out of Possidonius; but Poets reciting men's praises in
song? How many things are there in that Fabulous Age (which in Joseph
Scaliger's account would more aptly be called the Heroic Age of the World,
Jos. Scal. in Elench. Orat. Chroa. D. Par.
I mean) down from that much talked of Deluge of Pyrrha to the beginning of
Iphitus his Olympiads; how many idle stories are there mixed with true ones, and
afterward dressed up and brought upon the stage? Very many Nations, says
Trithemius, as well in Europe as in Asia, Trithem. lib. de secundis.
pretend they took their original from the Trojans; to whom I have thought good
to lend so much faith, as they shall be able to persuade me of truth by
sufficient testimony. They are frivolous things which they bring concerning
their own Nobility and Antiquity, having a mind as it were openly to boast, as
if there had been no people in Europe before the destruction of Troy; and as if
there had been no one among the Trojans themselves of ignoble birth.

He who made the Alphabetical Index to Jeoffry of Monmouth (who was Bishop of
St. Asaph too) as he is printed and put forth by Ascensius, propt up the
Authors credit upon this account, that, as he says, he makes no mention any
where in his Book, of the Franks; by reason forsooth, that all those things
almost, which he has written of, were done and past before the Franks arrival
in France. This was a slip surely more than of memory. Go to Jeoffry himself,
and in his Nineteenth Chapter of his first Book you meet with the Franks in the
time of Brennus and Belinus among the Senones, a people of France: a gross
misreckoning of I know not how many hundred years. For the Franks are not known
to have taken up their quarters on this side the River Rhine, till some
Centuries of years after Christ's Incarnation. For howbeit by Poetic license
and Rhetorical figure Aeneas be said to have come to the Lavinian Shores,
(which had not that name till some time after) yet it were much better, that,
both in Verse and Prose, those things which appertain to History, should be
expressed according to that form of Ovid; where at the burning of Rhemus his
Funeral Pile he says, Tunc Juvenes nondum facti flevere Quirites, Ovid. 4.
Fast.
that is, The young men then not yet Quirites made,
Wept as the body on the Pile they laid.
And at this rate Jeoffry might and ought to have made his Translation, if he
would have been a faithful Interpreter.

But as to our Brutus whence the Britans, Saxo whence the Saxons, Bruno whence
those of Brunswick, Freso whence those of Friseland, and Bato whence the
Batavians had their rise and name, take notice what Pontus Heuterus observes,
as others have done before him. Heuter. de Vet. Belgio. l. 2. c. ^.
Songs or Ballads, says he, and Rhymes made in an unlearned Age, with ease
obtruded falsehoods for truths upon simple people, or mingling falsehoods with
truths imposed upon them. For three or four hundred years ago there was nothing
that our Ancestors heard with greater glee, than that they were descended from
the adulterous Trojans, from Alexander of Macedonia the Overthrower of
Kingdoms, from that Manqueller Hercules of Greece, or from some other disturber
of the World. And indeed that is too true which he says, Ovid. Metam. 12.
-- Mensur aque fictis
Crescit, and auditis aliquid novus adjicit auctor.
which in plain English speaks this sense. Thus Stories nothing in the telling
lose,
The next Relater adding still to the News.
But I will not enlarge.

To clear these points aright, Antiquaries, who are at see-saw about them, will
perhaps eternally be at loss, like the Hebrews in their mysterious debates, for
want of some Elias to come and resolve their doubts.

CHAP. VII.
What the Trojan Laws were, which Brutus brought in. That concerning the Eldest
Sons Inheriting the whole Estate, confuted. In the first times there were no
Positive Laws; yet mention made of them in some very ancient Authors,
notwithstanding a remark of some ancient Writers to the contrary.

WEll! Suppose we grant there was such a Person ever in the World as Brutus: He
made Laws, they say, and those taken out of the Trojan Laws; but what I pray
were those Trojan Laws themselves? There is one, I know well enough, they speak
of, concerning the Prerogative of the eldest Sons, by which they inherited the
whole Right and Estate of their deceased Father. Herodot. in Euterpe.
Herodotus writes it of Hector, Son and Heir to King Priam, and Jeoffry
mentions it; but did this Law cross the Sea with Brutus into Brittany? How then
came it, that the Kingdom was divided betwixt the three Brothers, Locrinus,
Camber, and Albanactus? betwixt the two, Ferrix and Porrix? betwixt Brennus and
Belinus? and the like of some others. How came it, that in a Parliament of
Henry the Eighth, Stat. 37 Hen. ^. c. 26.
provision was made, that the Free-holds of Wales should not thence-forward
pass according to that custom, which they call Gavelkind? And anciently, if I
be not mistaken, most Inheritances were parted among the Children, as we find
in Hesiods works. (...). -- i. e. We had already parted the Estate. And to the
same purpose many like passages there are in old Poets, and in Holy Writ. But,
as I said, what are those Trojan Laws? Perhaps the same with those, by which
Nephelococcygia, the City of the Birds in Aristophanes, (or, as we use to say,
Vtopia) is Governed.

The gravest Writers do acknowledge, that those most ancient times were for the
most part free from positive Laws. The people, so says Justin, Justin hist. l.
1.
were held by no Laws: The Pleasures and Resolves of their Princes past for
Laws, or were instead of Laws. Natural Equity, like the Lesbian Rule in
Aristotle, being adapted, applied, Arist. 5. Eth.
and fitted to the variety of emergent quarrels, a^^ strifes, ordered,
overruled, and decided all Controversies. And indeed at the beginning of the
Roman State, as Pomponius writes, the people resolved to live without any
certain Law or Right, ff. de Orig. jur. l. 2.
and all things were governed by the hand and power of the King: For they were
but at a little distance from the Golden Age, when -- vindice nullo Metam. 1.
and Lucr. l. 5. cum Poetarum turba.

Sponte sua sine lege fidem rectumque colebant.
That is to say, when -- People did not grudge
To be plain honest without Law or Judge.
That which the Heresy of the Chiliasts heretofore affirmed, concerning the
Sabbatick or seventh Millenary, or thousand years of the World. August. de civ.
Dei l. 19. c. 14.
And those Shepherds or Governors of the people, to whom -- (...)
(...) -- Hom. Iliad. 9.

that is, -- Into whose hand
Jove trusts his Laws and Scepter for Command.
did Govern them by the guidance of virtue, and of those Laws which the
Platonicks call the Laws of second Venus. Not out of the ambition of Rule, as
St. Austin has it, but out of duty of Counsel; nor out of a domineering pride,
but out of a provident tenderness. Do you think the Trojans had any other Laws?
Only except the worship of their Gods and those things which belong to
Religion. It was duty, Senec. ep. 91. Plut. de Isid. and Osirid.
says Seneca, not dignity, to Reign and Govern: And an Eye and a Scepter among
the Egyptians, were the absolute Hieroglyphics of Kings.

What? that there is not so much as the word (...), that is Law, to be met with
in those old Poets, Orpheus, Musaeus, or Homer, (who was about an hundred and
fifty years after the destruction of Troy) as Josephus against Appio, Plutarch,
and several modern Writers have remarked: Joseph. adv. App. l. 2.

Plut. in lib. de Homero.


I confess, if one well consider it, this remark of theirs is not very
accurate. For we very often read in Homer and Hesiod, the word (...), which
signifies Laws; and in both of them the Goddess Eunomia from the same Theme as
(...). (...),
(...). --
which being interpreted, is But they by legal methods bear the sway
In The City famed for Beauties. --
which is a passage in Homers hymn to Mother Tellus, Plut. lib. de Musica.
and (...), i. e. the Law of Song, (which Musicians might not transgress) is
mentioned in his hymn to Apollo. Plato in Minoc.
Nay great Plato, one beyond all exception, has left it in writing, that Talus
(who had the management of the Cretan Commonwealth committed to him, together
with Rhadamanthus, the Son of Jupiter, by King Minos) that he did thrice every
year go the circuit through the whole Island (which was the first Country, as
Polyhistor tells us, Sol. Polyhist. cap. 6.
that joined the practice of Laws with the study of Letters) and kept Assizes,
giving Judgment according to Laws engraven in brass. I say nothing of Phoroneus
King of the Argives, or of Nomio the Arcadian; and in good time leave this
Subject.

I could wish I might peruse Jupiters Register, wherein he has recorded humane
affairs. I could wish, that the censure of some breathing Library and living
study (which might have power over the Ancients, as we read in Eunapius that
Longinus had) or that the memory of some Aethalides might help us sufficiently
to clear and make out the truth. Eunap. in vit. Porphyr.


Hence our next passage is to the Classick Writers of the Latin style and story.

CHAP. VIII.
An Account of the DRUIDS out of Caesar's Commentaries, whence they were so
called. Their determining in point of Law, and passing Sentence in case of
Crime. Their Award binds all parties. Their way of Excommunicating or
Outlawing. They have a Chief over them. How he is chosen. Their Privilege and
Immunity.

CAjus Julius Caesar was the first of the Romans, who has committed to writing
the Religious Rites, the Laws and the Philosophy of the DRVIDS. Their name is
of a doubtful origination, by no means were they so called from that Druis or
Druides we meet with in Berosus: But whether they were so termed from a Greek
word (...), that signifies an Oak, in that they performed none of their
devotions without oaken leaves, Plin. not. hist. l. 16. c. 44.

Gorop. in Gal.


as Pliny and those that follow him are of opinion; or from the Dutch
True-wise, as Goropius Becanus will have it; or from Trutin, a word which with
the ancient Germans signified God, as Paulus Merula quotes it out of the Gospel
of Othfred (though in the Angels salutation, Paul. Merula, in Cosmogr. part. 2.
lib. 3.
in the Magnificat, in Zachariahs Song and elsewhere, Trutin rather denotes
Lord than God; and see whether there does not lie somewhat of the Druid in the
name of St. Truien, among the people of Liege, some having exploded St. Drudo)
whencesoever they had their name, these Gown men among the Gauls, I and the
Britans too, were the Interpreters and Guardians of the Laws. The discipline of
these Druids was first found in Britany, and so far as it regards the Civil
Court, we shall faithfully subjoyn it out of the forenamed Caesar.

1. They order matters concerning all controversy, public and private. So in
the Laws of the twelve Tables at the same rate the knowledge of cases, of
precedents, of interpreting was in the College of Pontiffs or High Priests,
and such plainly our Druids were.

If any ill prank had been played, if murder committed, if there were a
controversy about Inheritance, about bounds of Land, these were the men that
determined it, these amerced rewards and punishments.

2. If any private person or body of men do not stand to their award, they
excommunicate him, that is, forbid him to come to sacrifice, which among them
is the most grievous punishment.

3. Those who are thus excommunicated, are accounted wicked and ungodly
wretches, every body goes out of their way, and shuns their company and
conversation for fear of getting any harm by contagion. Neither have they the
benefit of the Law when they desire it, nor is any respect shown to them.

4. The Druids have one over them, who has the chiefest authority amongst them.

5. When he dies, if there be any one that is eminent above the rest, he
succeeds in place: But if there be several of equal merit, one is chosen by
majority of Votes.

6. The Druids were wont to be excused from personal attendance in War, nor did
they pay taxes with the rest; they were freed from Military employ, and had an
immunity of all things. Number. 1.49. Ezra 7.24.
The Levites among the Hebrews, who were the most ancient Priests in the world,
enjoyed the same privilege.

CHAP. IX.
The menage of their Schools without Writing. On other occasions they might use
the Greek Letters, as Caesar says, yet not have the language. The Greek
Letters then were others than what they are now. These borrowed from the Gauls,
as those from the Phoenicians. Ceregy-Drudion, or the Druids Stones in Wales.
This Place of Caesar's suspected. Lipsius his Judgment of the whole Book.

7. UPon the account of that privilege, they had in their Schools (which were
most of them in Britany) a great confluence of youth. They are said to learn
without Book, says Caesar, a great number of Verses: Therefore some of them
spend twenty years in the discipline. Nor do they judge it meet to commit such
things to writing, whereas generally in all other, whether public affairs or
private accounts, they make use of Greek letters.

What? Greek letters? so we read Greek ones. Why! Marseilles, a City of France,
which was a Greek Colony of the Phocians, had made the Gauls such lovers of
Greeks, that, as Strabo the Geographer tells us, Strab. Geogr. lib. 4.
they writ their very Contracts and Covenants, Bargains and Agreements, in
Greek. The forementioned Julius Caesar also writes, that there were Tablets
found in the Camp of the Switzers, made up of Greek letters. Caes. de bello
Gall. l. 1.


But, for all that, I would not have any one from hence rashly to gather, that
the Greek Language was in use to that Age and People, or to these Philosophers
and Lawyers. They made use of Greek letters, therefore they had the Greek
Tongue too; this truly were a pitiful consequence. At this rate the Targum or
Chaldee Paraphrase, as Paulus Merula has it, and Goropius before him, would
consist of the Hebrew Language, because it is Printed in Hebrew Characters: And
the like may be said of the New Testament in Syriack, done in Hebrew letters.

What? that those very Letters of the Greeks in Caesar's time, and as we now
write them, are rather Gallick (as borrowed from the Gauls) than Greek? He was
acquainted with those Greek letters, but did not yet know the Gallick ones,
which learned men do think the Greeks took for their Copy, after the Phoenician
letters, which were not altogether unlike the Hebrew, were grown out of use.
Consult for this Wolfgangus Lazius his Celtae, Becanus his Gallica, and if thou
have a mind, Annius his Archilochus, Xenophons Aequivoca, and what others write
concerning Linus, Cadmus, Palamedes, and Simonides, the first Inventors of the
Alphabet.

In the mean time take this from me, that those ancient and rude Gothic
Characters, which Bonaventure Vulcanius of Bruges, lately put forth, Vulcan. in
app. ad Jornand. Goth. Munst. Cosm. l. 4.
with a little comentary of one without a name, do very much resemble the Greek
ones (as also the Russian Characters do at this day) and that those which are
now Latin letters, were at first brought over into Italy out of Arcadia, along
with Nicostrata the Mother of Evander, who was banished his Country.

Caes. bell. Gal. l. 5.
But that which seems to put the matter out of all dispute, Caesar being about
to write to Quintus Cicero, who was then besieged somewhere in Flanders, among
the Nervians, by great rewards persuades a Chevalier, that was a Gaul, to carry
the Letter for him: He sends it written in Greek, lest peradventure it being
intercepted, the Enemy should come to know their design. To what purpose should
he have done this, if that Chevalier, who was a Gaul, or if the Gauls, or if
the very Druids themselves, who had the management of State, had been skilled
in Greek?

Among the Western Hills of Denbeigh, a County in North Wales, there is a
place, as I read in our famous Chorographer, commonly called Ceregy-Drudion,
that is, the Druids Stones, and some small pillars are seen at Yvoellas,
inscribed with foreign Characters, which some suspect to have been those of the
Druids. Who if they have reason so to suspect, I would to God, Time, with his
rusty teeth, had spared those Pillars, that so some light might shine from
thence to clear this quarrel

If so be our interpretation of that form of Caesar's speaking, which we
brought, do not please (as to Strabo's testimony, that respects somewhat later
times, and perhaps mainly concerns those who lived near the Seaside) why may
not thou, Flotoman. c. 2. Franco-galliae.
with that great Scholar Francis Hotoman be of opinion, that the word Graecis
crept into this Story, either by the carelessness or confidence of Transcribers?
For elsewhere in that very Author, where it is said, dextris humeris exertis,
Justus Lipsius, the Prince of Critics, remarks, that the word humeris is
plainly redundant, thrust in perchance by the Vamper of that Story, Caes. bell.
Gal. l. 7.
Julius Celsus.

And what so great a man, of so great a judgment as he was, did censure of
those Commentaries of Caesar, Lips. Elect. lib. 2. cap. 7. and quaest.
Epistolic. l. 2. c. 2.
in his Book called Electa, or Choice Pieces, take from himself thus. I see
many patches stitched into that Purple; nor does the expression it self there
every where breath to my Nostrils that golden (as I may so say) Gum, or liquid
myrrh, of pure antiquity. Read it, read it over again, you will find many
things idly said, disjoynted, intricate, vampt, said over and over, that it is
not unreasonable to think, but that some Novel and unskilful hand was added to
this, as it were, statue of ancient work. Therefore we may be easily cheated,
if we stand upon such little scruples of words, as we shall meet with in one
Julius or other, Caesar or Celsus.

CHAP. X.
The Druids reckoning of time. An Age consists of thirty Years. What Authors
treat of the Druids. Their Doctrines and Customs savor of Pythagoras and the
Cabalists. They were the eldest Philosophers and Lawyers among the Gentiles.
Some odd Images of theirs in Stone, in an Abbey near Voitland, described.

8. THe Druids begun their Months and Years from the sixth Moon (so says Pliny)
and that which they called an Age after the thirtieth year. In the Attick
account an Age or Generation, Plin. not. hist. l. 16. c. 44.
and that of a man in his prime and strength, Plut. de orac. def. Herod. Euterp.

Eustath. ad 1. Iliad.


was comprised within the same terms, according to the opinion of Heraclitus,
and as it is in Herodotus; nor had Nestor's triple Age a larger compass, if one
may believe Eustathius.

Tiberius drove these Druids out of the two Gallia's, Senec. in Apocol.

Plin. l. 30. c. 1.


Claudius banished them out of Rome, and the worship of the true God Christ,
sped them out of Britany.

What further appertains to the sacred Rites and Doctrine of the Druids, (not
to speak further of Caesar) Strabo, Pliny, Diodorus Siculus, (by the way his
Latin Version we do not owe to Poggius of Florence, as the Books published
would make us believe, Br. Tuin. Apolog. antiq. Academ. Oxon. l. 3.. 329.
but to John Frea formerly Fellow of Baliol College in Oxford, if we may
believe an Original Copy in the Library of the said College.) Beside these,
Lucan, Pomponius Mela, Ammianus Marcellinus, and very lately Otho Heurnius, in
his Antiquities of Barbarous Philosophy, and others have, with sufficient
plainness, delivered, yet so, that every thing they say savours of Pythagoras
(and yet I am never a whit the more persuaded that Pythagoras ever taught in
Merton-hall at Oxford, or Anaxagoras at Cambridge, as Cantilep and Lidgate have
it) I and of the Cabalists too (for John Reuchlin has compared the discipline
of Pythagoras, and that of the Cabalists, as not much unlike.) Whether the
Druids, says Lipsius, Reuch. l. 2. de art Cabalist. Lips. Stoic. physiolog l.
3. dissert. 12. and vide Forcatulum l. 1. de Gall. Imperio.
had their Metempsychosis or transmigration of Souls, from Pythagoras, or he
from them, I cannot tell.

The very same thing is alike to be said, concerning their Laws, and the
Commonwealths which they both of them managed: They have both the same
features as like as may be, as it was with Cneius Pompey, and Caius Vibius. For
the Samian Philosopher did not only teach those secrets of Philosophy which are
reserved, and kept up close in the inner shrine; but also returning from Egypt
he went to Croton, a City of Italy, and there gave Laws to the Italians, (my
Author is Laertius) and with near upon three hundred Scholars, governed at the
rate, Laert. l. 8. and Plut. orat 2. de Esu carnium.
as it were of an Aristocracy. The Laws of Zaleucus and Charondas are commended
and had in request. These men, says Seneca, did not in a Hall of Justice,
Senec. Epist. 91.
nor in an Inns of Court, but in that secret and holy retirement of Pythagoras,
learn those Institutes of Law, which they might propose to Sicily and to
Greece, all over Italy, both at that time flourishing. That holy and silent
recess was perchance borrowed of the Druids: Forasmuch as what Clement of
Alexandria witnesses, Clem. l. 1. Strom.
heretofore the more secret and mysterious Arts were derived from the
Barbarians to the Greeks.

However the business be, it appears hence plainly, that the Druids were of the
oldest standing among the Philosophers of the Gentiles, and the most ancient
among their Guardians of Laws. For grant they were of Pythagoras his School,
yet even at that rate they are brought back at least to the fiftieth or
sixtieth Olympiad, or if thou will, to the Tyranny of the Tarquins, which is
about two and twenty hundred years ago. It Is true, Pliny, Cicero, Austin,
Eusebius disagree in this point; nor will I catch that mistake by the handle,
which draws him, meaning Pythagoras, back to Numa's time.

To what has been said, I shall not grudge to subjoyn a Surplage out of
Conradus Celtes. He is speaking of some ancient Images of stone, which he had
seen in a certain Abbey at the foot of a Hill that bears Pines, commonly called
Vichtelberg, in the Neighborhood of Voitland, which he conceives did by way of
Statue represent the Druids. They were six in number, Apud P. Merulam in
Cosmogr. part 2. lib. 3.
says he, at the door of the Temple niched into the Wall, of seven foot a piece
in height, barefooted, having their Heads uncovered, with a Greekish Cloak on,
and that Hooded, and a Satchel or scrip by their side, their Beard hanging down
to their very Privities, and forked or parted in two about their Nostrils; in
their Hands a Book and a Staff like that of Diogenes, with a severe Forehead
and a melancholy Brow, stooping down with their Head, and fastening their Eyes
on the ground. Which description, how it agrees with those things which are
recounted by Caesar and Strabo, concerning the Golden adornments, the dyed and
colored Vestures, the Bracelets, the shaved Cheeks and Chin of the Britans,
and other things of the like kind, let them who are concerned look to that.

CHAP. XI.
The Britans and Gauls had Laws and Customs much alike, and whence that came.
Some things common to them both, set down; in relation to the breeding of their
Children, the Marrying of their Wives, the Governing of their Families, burning
Women that killed their Husbands, and burning some Servants with the dead
Master for company. Together with some Remarks of their public Government.

BUt forasmuch as Britanny gave the beginnings and improvements to the
discipline of these Druids, and both Britans and Gauls had their Government,
Customs, Language, Rites sacred and profane, every thing almost the same, or
much alike, as Mr. William Camden has some while since most learnedly made
out, Camden.
O Mr. Camden, with what respect shall I name thee! In freta dum fluvii
current, dum montibus umbrae
Lustrabunt convexa, ac dum Cynosura Britannos,
Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.
Which in hearty English makes this acknowledgment of his worth, As long as
Rivers run into the Main,
Whilst Shades on Mountains shall the Welkin hide,
And Britans shall behold the Northern Wain,
Thy Honor, Name, and Praise shall still abide.


And it is evident, that a great part of Britany was once under the Government
of Divitiacus King of the Soissons, a People of France. Therefore these
following Remarks I thought not amiss to set down as British, whether they were
imparted to this Isle by the ancient Gauls (by reason of its nearness) or
whether the Gauls owed them to the Britans.

9. They do not suffer their Children to come to them in open sight, (they are
Caesar's words) but when they are grown up to that Age, that they may be able
to undergo Military duty and to serve in War.

10. The men, what money they receive with their Wives upon account of portion,
they lay down so much out of their own Estate upon an appraisement made to make
a joint stock with the portion. There is an account jointly kept of all this
money, and the profits of it are reserved; the longer liver is to have both
shares, with the profits of the former times.

11. The men have power of life and death over their Wives, as well as over
their Children. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 4.
Hereupon Bodin charges Justinian with a falsehood, for affirming that other
people had not the same Fatherly power as the Romans had.

12. When a Master of a Family, who is of higher birth and quality, dies, his
Kindred meet together, that if the manner of his death were suspicious, they
may by torture, as Servants were used, examine the Wife concerning the
business, and if she be found guilty, they torment her miserably and burn her
alive. To this story that most excellent Lawyer, and worthy Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, In praesat. ad l. 6. Relat.
Sir Edward Coke, refers the antiquity of that Law, which we at this day use of
devoting to the flames those wicked Baggages, who stain their hands with the
nefarious murder of their Husbands.

13. Those Servants and Dependents, who were known to have been beloved by
their Master in his life time, were, when the Funeral Rites were prepared,
burnt with him for company.

14. It was ordered, that if any one by flying report or common fame had heard
any thing from the borders, that might concern the Commonwealth, he was to
make it known to some Magistrate, and not impart it to any body else.

15. The Magistrates conceal those things they think fit, and what they judge
may be of use to the Public, they discover to the populace.

16. No body has leave to speak of the Commonwealth, or of public affairs,
but in Council or Parliament.

17. They came armed into the Council or to Parliament. So the custom of the
Nation was, says Livy; and Tacitus, Live. lib. 21.
the like of the Germans.

CHAP. XII.
Women admitted to public debates. A large commendation of the Sex, together
with a ^indication of their fitness to govern; against the Salick Law, made out
by several examples of most Nations.

18. IT was grown a custom amongst them (we meet with this in Plutarch) that
they treated of Peace and War with their women in company, Plut. de virtut.
musicr.
and if any questions arose betwix^ them and their Allies, they left it to them
to determine.

The same custom the Cecropians, (that is, the people of Athens) once had, as
Austin relates it out of Varro, Aug. de Civ. D^i l. 18. c. 9.
before the women by majority of Vote carried it for Minerva against Neptune.

Away with you, Simonides, and whosoever you are, scoundrels, that unworthily
abuse the finer and brighter Sex. Good Angerona, thou Goddess of Silence,
Athenaeus.
wash, nay stop Eubulus his foul mouth, who denies there were ever any good
women more than two in the world, to wit, chaste Penelope, and Alcestis, who
died in her Husbands stead.

How large an honor was paid to the counsels, the prudence, the virtue of the
Gaulish Ladies in their chiefest affairs, and not without their desert? How
much honor even at this day, is yearly paid at Orleance, on the eighth of May,
to the Statue of Joan Darcy of Lorain, that stands on the bank of the River
Loir; Paul. Aemil. hist. Franc. l. 10.
who obliged her dear Country with a Victory wonderfully got, when all had been
lost.

To pass by other arguments, Antiquity holds this Sex to be equally divine as
the Male. In Heaven, Sea, Earth, together with Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, who
were the Gods that shared the world, there governed Juno, Salacia, Proserpina,
their Goddesses. Marry! in Varro's three fold Divinity, there are more she-Gods
than he-Gods.

Ovid. de art amandi l. 3.
Ipsa quoque and cultu est, and nomine foemina Virtus. Uirtue her self, however
it came,
Is Female both in Dress and Name.
But I do not go to act over Caius Agrippa's part, by declaiming upon Female
excellency. The thing it self speaks more than I can, and the subject is its
own best Orator.

Tac. in vit. Agric. and Annal. l. 14.
I must add one thing which Cornelius Tacitus tells us of the Britans, that they
were wont to war under the conduct of women, and to make no difference of Sex
in places of Command and Government. Which places yet there are some who
stiffly deny, that Women by right should have the charge of; as being, what
Euripides says of them, (...). that is, Eurip. in Medea.
But ill for the stout feats of War,
Who scarce to look on Iron dare.


But those Authors especially, who, propped up with the Salick Law (as they
call it) write, that Males only are by right of inheritance capable of the
Government of the French, they do hold and maintain this argument tooth and
nail, with all the unkindness and spite as may be to the English Law, which
admits of Women to the Throne. They urge, that not only the Laws of Pharamond,
but Nature her self is on their side. Bodin. de repub. l. 6. c. 5.
The Government of women ('it is Bodin of Anjou says it) is contrary to the Laws
of Nature, which has bestowed upon men discretion, strength of body, courage
and greatness of Spirit, with the power of Rule, and has taken these things
from women.

But, sweet Mr. Bodin, are not discretion, strength, courage and the arts of
Government, more to be desired and required in those who have the Tuition of
Kings in their Minority, than in the Kings themselves till they are come to
age? Truly I am of that mind. For why then, pray tell me, did not that reason
of yours wring the Guardianship of St. Louis out of the hands of the
Queen Mother Blanch? why not out of Isabella's hands under Charles the Sixth?
why not of Catharine de Medicis, whilst the two Brothers Francis and Charles
her Pupils were incircled with the Crown? why not out of the hands of Mary,
Louis the Thirteenth being at this very time King?

Were the Jews, that I may go back to stories more ancient, blind, that they
could not see the defects of Women's nature, in the Government of Debora, who
triumphed over Sisera, and is sufficiently commended in Holy Writ? Were the
Italians blind under the Government of the most prudent Amalasincta? the
Halicarnassians, under that of the most gallant Artemisia? the Egyptians, Pomp.
Mela, l. 1. c. 9.
among whom heretofore their Women managed Law-Courts and business abroad, and
the men looked to home and minded huswifery? and the Aethiopians under their
Nicaula, whom being very desirous of wisdom, King Solomon, the wisest man that
has been ever since the world was, honorably entertained? were the Assyrians,
under the Government of their magnificent Semiramis? the Massagetes, under that
of the revengeful Dame Thomyris? the Palmyrenes, under that of the most chaste
Zenobia? and that I may make an end once, under that of other excellent women,
all Nations whatever, none excepted but the Franks? who, as Goropius will have
it, came to throw off and slight female Government upon this account, Gorop. in
Francicis.
that in Vespasian's time they had seen the affairs of their neighbors the
Bructeri in East Friseland, whilst that scornful Hag Velleda ruled the roast,
came to no good issue.

I do very well know, that our perjured Barons, when they resolved to exclude
Queen Mawd from the English Throne, made this shameful pretense, That it would
be a shame, for so many Nobles to be subject to a woman. And yet you shall not
read, that the Iceni (our Essex-men, etc.) got any shame by that Boadicia, whom
Gildas terms a Lioness, or that the Brigantes (i. e. York-shire-men, etc.) got
any by Chartismandua. You will read, that they got glory and renown by them
both.

Reader, thou can not here choose but think of our late Sovereign of Ever
Blessed Memory, the Darling of Britan, Q. ELIZABETH, nor can thou, whosoever
thou art, but acknowledge, That there was not wanting to a Woman (what
Malmesbury writes of Sexburga the Queen Dowager of Cenwalch King of the West
Saxons) a great Spirit to discharge the duties of the Kingdom; Malmesb. gest.
reg. l. 1. c. 2.
she levied new Armies, kept the old ones to duty; she governed her Subjects
with Clemency, kept her Enemies quiet with threats; and in a word, did every
thing at that rate, that there was no other difference betwixt her and any King
in management, but her Sex. Of whose (I mean Elizabeth's) superlative and truly
Royal Virtues a rare Poet, and otherwise a very Learned man, has sung
excellently well, Connub. Tam. and Is^s.
Si quasdam tacuisse velim, quamcunque tacebo
Major erit: primos actus veteresque labores
Pros^quar? ad sese revocant praesentia mentem.
Justitiam dicam? magis at Clementia splendet.
Victrices referam vires? plus vicit inermis.
It Is pity these are not well rendered into English. However take them as they
are in blank Verse. Should I in silence some her Uertues pass,
Which e're I so pass over, will greater be:
Shall I her first deeds and old facts pursue?
Present affairs to them call back my mind.
Shall I her Justice in due numbers sing?
But then her Clemency far brighter shines.
Or shall I her victorious Arms relate?
In peace unarmed she has got more to the State.


What did the Germans our Ancestors? they thought there was in that Sex
something of Sanctity and foresight, nor did they slight their counsels, nor
neglect the answers they gave, when questions were put to them about matters of
business; and as Superstition increased, held most of them for Goddesses.

Let him then, whatever dirty fellow it was, be condemned to the Crows (and be
hanged to him) who is not ashamed out of ancient Scrolls, to publish to the
world, that they (Women) agree with Soldiers (Bully-Rocks and Hectors) mainly
in this, That they are continually very much taken up with looking after their
body, and are given to lust, that Soldiers themselves are not, nor endeavor
to be more quick and sudden in their Cheats and Over-reachings, that Soldiers
deceive people at some distances of time, but women lie always at catch,
chouse and pillage their Gallants all the ways they can; bring them into
Consumptions with unreasonable sittings up; And other such like mad rude
expressions he uses, not unfitting for a Professor in Bedlam College.

Plato de rep. lib. 5. Arist. Polit. l. 1. c. ult.
Plato allowed Women to govern, nor did Aristotle, (whatever the Interpreters
of his Politics foolishly say) take from them that privilege. Virtue shuts no
door against any body, any Sex, but freely admits all. Trismegist.
And Hermes Trismegistus that Thrice great man in his Poemander according to
his knowledge of Heavenly concerns (and that sure was great in comparison of
what the Owl-ey'd Philosophers had) he ascribes the mystical name of
Male-Female to the great Understanding, to wit, God, the Governor of the
Universe.

They (the good women I have been speaking of) from their Cradle (at this rate
men commonly talk of them) do too much love to have the Reins of Government,
and to be uppermost. Well! be it so, that they do love to govern? and who is it
does not love them? Now a sin and shame be it for Lovers to grudge to their
beloved, that which is most desired and wished by them: nor could I forbear out
of conscience with my suffrage, to assist as far as I could, that Sex, which is
so great and comfortable an importance to mankind, so sweet a refreshment
amidst our sharpest toils, and the vicissitudes of life; and in a word, is the
dearest gift that Dame Nature could bestow upon Man.

But let us now return to Caesar's Gauls again.

CHAP. XIII.
Their putting themselves under protection by going into great men's service.
Their Coins of money, and their weighing of it. Some sorts of flesh not lawful
to be eaten by them.

19. VEry many of them, when they are oppressed with Debt or with great Taxes, or
with the injurious oppression of great men, put themselves out to service to
the Nobles. Over such they have the same Right or Authority, as Masters have
over their Servants or Slaves.

These things following are expressly related also of the Britans themselves.

20. They use Brass Coin or Rings (some read it, Plates) of Iron proportioned
to a certain weight, instead of money. But, (says Solinus, Solin. Polyhist.
cap. 35.
a more modern Historian) they dislike and disallow of Markets or Fairs or
Money; they give and take Commodities by way of Barter.

Camden is of opinion, that the custom of Coining Money, came in along with the
Romans among the Cattieuchlani, that is, the people of Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire and Hartfordshire. He takes notice out of William the Conqueror's
Book of Rates or Doomsday Book (which is seasonable to mention upon this Head
of Coins) that as amongst the old Romans, so amongst our Ancestors, money was
weighed (as Gervase of Tilbury also tells us) and so told out and paid down.
Now they paid Customs to the Romans; and for this purpose they had Coins
stamped and marked with various shapes of living Creatures and Vegetables,
which ever and anon are dug up out of the ground. V. Plut. quaest.
centuriat. Romans 41.
And we read in a very ancient Chronicle of the Monastery of Abendon, which had
two Kings Cissa and Ina for its founders, that at the laying the first
foundations, Br. Tuin. apolog. Oxon. l. 2.. 77.
there were found very old Coins engraven with the Pictures of Devils and
Satyrs. One may very well suppose them to be British Coins.

21. They do not think it lawful to taste of the flesh of Hare, or Hen, or
Goose, V. Plut. Sympos. l. 4. c. 5.
and yet they keep these Creatures for pleasure and divertisement sake. Why
they forbore only Hare, and Hen, and Goose, I am not able to give the reason. I
perceive something of Pythagoras, and something of the Jewish Discipline mixed.
Laert. l. 8.
For that Philosopher of Samos abstained from the eating of Flesh, not in
general from all, but with a certain choice from that of some particular
Creatures. Plut. symp. l. 8. c. 8.


CHAP. XIV.
Community of Wives among the Britans, used formerly by other Nations also.
Chalcondylas his mistake from our Civil Custom of Saluting. A rebuke of the
foolish humor of Jealousy.

22. THey have ten or twelve of them Wives in common amongst them, and
especially Brothers with Brothers, and Fathers with their Sons; but what
children are born of such Mothers, they are fathered upon them by whom they
were first lain with, when they were Maids. O villainy and strange confusion of
the rights of Nature! Georgic. 3.
Dii meliorae piis, erroremque hostibus istum! which in Christian English speaks
thus. Good God! For the pious better things devise,
Such Ill as this I wish not to Enemies.


However let not this Platonic community of Wives be more reproach to the
Britans, than that promiscuous Copulation which was used by the Thuscans, and
before Cecrops his time (who for appointing Marriage, that is, joining one Man
and one Woman together, was termed (...), i.e. as one may say Two-shaped) by
the Athenians, (as Theopompus, Suidas and Athenaeus report it) was to them.
Athen. dipnos. l. 12. and 13. Suid. in (...).

Eusebius. praepar. Evang. l. 6.


Besides, Eusebius in his Evangelical Preparation writes, that our people for
the most part were contented with one single Marriage.

Did not, may one think, Chalcondylas mistake Caesar's meaning, who a hundred
years ago and upwards setting himself to write History at Athens, and
peradventure over-carelesly drawing ancient Customs down to the last Age,
ventured to affirm of the Britans his Contemporaries, Apud Abrah. Ortel. in
Theat. Mundi.
That when any one upon invitation enters the house of a friend, the Custom is,
that he first lie with his friends Wife, and after that he is kindly
entertained? Or did that officious kiss, the Earnest of welcome, which is so
freely admitted by our Women from strangers and guests, which some take
particular notice of as the custom of our Country, Munster. Boemus, etc.
put a trick upon Chalcondylas, and bring him into that mistake? Theocr.
Eidyll. 3.
(...). says Theocritus of old, that is, In empty kisses there is sweet
delight. And, Qui vult cubare, pangit saltem suavium, Plaut. Cur^^
says the Servant in Plautus, He that would a woman win,
With a kiss he does begin.
And that other fellow,

Quaero deinde illecebram stupri, principio eam suavium posco. Id. Amphitr.
And Et jam illud non placet principium de osculo, Id. Casina.
says jealous Amphitruo to his wife Alcumena. And Agesilaus mistrusting his
wanton Genius, refused the buss or salute of a handsome beautiful youth. For as
he says, Plut. de and. Poet.
-- Parva leves capiunt animos, Ovid. de art. am. l. 1.
that is, Small matters kindle the desire.
And a loose Spirit's soon on fire.
This our Grecian knew well enough, and perchance thought of that unlucky hint,
-- Si non and caetera sumpsit,
Haec quoque, quae sumpsit, perdere dignus erat.


Moreover, that great Philosopher of Lawyers Baldus, Bald. l. 5. consil. 78.
Alber. Gentil. de nupt. l. 2. c. 13.
has set it down for a rule, that the Fathers consent and betrothal is
ratified and made good by the Daughters admitting the Wooer to kiss her. Which
point of Law it would be very ridiculous to imagine should concern us, with
whom both Maids and married Women do easily afford, and civilly too, them that
salute them a kiss, not such as Catullus speaks of Billing like Doves, hard
Busses or wanton Smacks, but slight modest chaste ones, and such as Sisters
give to Brothers. These civilities, when omitted, are always signs of
Clownishness; when afforded, seldom are accounted signs of Whorishness. Nor do
the Husbands in this case (unless it be perhaps some Horn-mad-Cuckold) with a
wrinkled Forehead shake their Bull-feathers, or so much as mistrust any thing
as upon jealousy of this custom.

It may be Chalcondylas being a little pur-blind, saw these passages as it were
through a grated Lattice, and made ill use of his mistake: I mean, whilst he
compared our Britans, who upon a Matrimonial confidence trust their Mates
honesty, with the jealous Italians, Venetians, Spaniards, and even his own
Contrymen. Which people, it is a wonder to me, they should so warily, with
so much diligence and mistrust set pinfolds, cunning Spies and close
attendance, Locks and Keys, and Bars and Bolts upon their Madonna's Chastity
(most commonly in my conscience all to no purpose) when that which he has said
is as good as Oracle, though a wanton one. Ovid. amor. l. 2. eleg. 19. Id. l.
3. eleg. 4. Id. de remed. amor. l. 2.
Quod licet, ingratum est: quod non licet, acrius urit.
Ferreus est, siquis, quod sinit alter, amat.
Siqua, metu dempto, casta est, ea denique casta est:
Quae, quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit.
Qui timet, ut sua sit, nequis sibi subtrahat illam;
Ille Machaonia vix open sanus erit.
In English thus, What Is free, 's unpleasant; what is not, moves desire.
He Is thick skull'd, who does things allowed admire.
Who, fear aside, is chaste, she is chaste indeed;
Who, cause she cannot, forbears, commits the deed.
Who Is Wife mistrusts, and plays the jealous Whelp,
Is mad beyond Physicians art and help.


Who does not know, that Natures bias runs to things forbidden? and he who
attempts unlawful things, does more often lose those which are lawful. Marry!
that free usage of the hot Baths of Baden in Germany, Men and Women together,
is much safer than being jealous. Virg. in Ceiri.
-- Quis non bonus omnia malit
Credere, quam tanto sceleri damnare puellam?
That is, What good man would not take all in best sense,
Rather by living undisturbed and free;
Than by distrustful foolish Jealousy
His Lady force to quit her Innocence?
But we have taken that pains upon a thing by the By, as if it were our proper
business.

CHAP. XV.
An account of the British State under the Romans. Claudius wins a Battle, and
returns to Rome in Triumph, and leaves A. Plautius to order affairs. A Colony
is sent to Maldon in Essex, and to several other places. The nature of these
Colonies out of Lipsius. Julius Agricola's Government here in Vespasian's time.

JVlius Caesar gave a sight of Britanny to posterity, rather than made a full
discovery or a delivery of it. Malmesb. de. gest. reg. l. 1. c. 1.
However Malmsbury says, that he compelled them to swear obedience to the
Latin Laws, certainly he did scarce so much as abridge the inhabitants from the
free use of their own Laws; for the very Tributes that were imposed upon them,
they in a short time shook off, by revolting from the Roman yoke. The same
liberty they used and enjoyed to all intents and purposes during Augustus,
Tiberius and Caligula's Reigns.

Aulus Plautius as General by order of Claudius Caesar, brought an Army into
Britany. Dio hist. Romans l. 60.
(...) (so says Dio) (...) that is, The inhabitants at that time were subject
to diverse Kings of their own. He overcame in battle Prince Cradock and
Togodunus the two Sons of King Cunobellinus; afterward Claudius himself came
over into the Island, fought a set battle; and having obtained the Victory, he
took Maldon in Essex, the Royal City of Cunobellinus, disarmed the inhabitants,
left the government of them, and the subduing of the rest of the people to
Plautius, and went back himself to Rome, where he was honored with a most
splendid and stately Triumph. For this was he, of whom Seneca the Tragoedian
speaks: Cuique Britanni terga dedere, Senec. in Octav. act.

Ducibus nostris ante ignoti,
Jurisque sui. --
which may be thus Englished, To whom bold Britans turned their back,
TO our Captains formerly unknown,
And governed by Laws of their own.


The Island being reduced great part under the Romans power, and into a
Lieutenancy, a Colony is brought down to Maldon (in Essex) as Tacitus and Dio
has it, with a strong party of Veterans, and is planted up and down in the
Country they had taken, Tac. annal. l. 12.

Dio hist. l. 60.


as a supply against those that would rebel, and to train up their fellows or
Allies to the duties of the Laws. An old Stone speaks thus of that Colony, CN.
MUNATIUS M. F. PAL. AURELIUS. BASSUS PROC. AUG. PRAEF. FABRO. PRAEF. COH. III.
SAGITARIORUM. PRAEF. COH. ITERUM. II. ASTURUM. CENSITOR. CIVIUM. ROMANORUM.
COLONIAE. VICTRICENSIS. QUAE. EST. IN. BRITANNIA. CAMALODUNI. Camden. and Lips.
ad l. 12. Tac. number. 75.
Besides, there was a Temple built and dedicated to Claudius Ara (or as Lipsius
reads it Arra) Aeternae dominationis; that is, the Altar or Earnest of an
eternal Government. But you will say, all this makes little to our purpose:
yes, very much; as that which brings from abroad the Roman Orders, Laws,
Fashions, and every thing into Britany. Near St. Albans, a Town in
Hartfordshire, there was sure enough the seat of Cassibellinus called Verulams,
and the Burghers, Agell. l. 16. c. 13.
as we learn from Agellius, were Citizens of Rome infranchized, out of their
Corporations, using their own Laws and Customs, only partaking the same
honorary privilege with the people of Rome: but we have the Colony of Maldon
in Essex, which upon another nearer account had all the Rights and Orders of
the people of Rome derived to it from the freedom of that City, and was not at
its own disposal, or to use its own Laws. And the like was practiced in this
Island in more than one place. The Reverse of Severus the Emperors Coin shows
it. Camden.
COL. EBORACUM. LEG. VI. VICTRIX. and the Coin of Septimius Geta on either side.
COL. DIVANA. LEG. XX. VICTRIX. This old Divana (which is the very same with
Deunana in Ptolomy) if you make it English, is Chester the chief City of the
Cornavians, that is, the people of Cheshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, etc.
Again, there is a piece of an old Stone in the Walls of Bath in Somersetshire
near the North Gate has this Inscription upon it, DEC. COLONIAE. GLEV. VIXIT.
ANN. LXXXVI.

Colonia castri, whence the River called Coln. Senec. ad Alb. c. 7.
Glevum was that then which Gloucester is now. It may be Colchester had the same
right of privilege, unless you had rather derive its name from the River Coln
that runs aside it. In a word (says Seneca to Albina) How many Colonies has
this people of ours sent into all Provinces? Where ever the Roman conquers, he
dwells. See what abundance there was of them in British Province; whose form of
Government, and other Laws, that they were different from that of the Britans,
we may plainly perceive from that very form of their constitution after their
detachment; which I shall present you with out of that famous Antiquary, and
every way most Learned and Celebrious person Justus Lipsius.

Their manner and method was (says he) That the Lands should be divided to man
by man, and that by three grave discreet persons, whom they used to choose for
this purpose, Lips. de mag. Romans l. 1. c. 6.
who did set out their particular Seats and Grounds, and the Town it self (if
there were one to be built) and prescribed them Rules and Rights, and the form
as it were of a new Commonwealth: Yet in that manner, that all things might
bear a resemblance of Rome and the Mother City; and that in the very places
themselves the Courts of Law, the Capitols, the Temples, the State-houses or
Town-halls might be according to that model, and that there might be in the
Government or Magistracy two persons as Bailiffs in most places, like the two
Consuls at Rome; in like manner Surveyors and Scavengers, Aldermen of the Wards
and Headboroughs, instead of a Senate or Common Council as we may call it.
Gild. in Epist. de excid. Brit.
) This is Lipsius his account; so that Beatus Gildas is not much out of the
way, when he says, it was reckoned not Britannia, but Romania. And an ancient
Copy of Verses, which Joseph Scaliger has rescued out of its rust and
mouldiness, has it: Mars pater, and nostrae gentis tutela Quirine,
Et magno positus Caesar uterque polo;
Cernitis ignotos Latia sub Lege Britannos, etc.
that is, in English, Sire Mars, and Guardian of our State
Quirinus hight after thy fate,
And Caesar's both placed near the Pole
With your bright Stars ye do behold,
And the unknown Britans aw,
TO observe the Roman Law.


The stately Seraglio or Building for the Emperors Women at Venta Belgarum (a
City at this day called Winchester) and other things of that kind I let pass.
Notitia Provinc.


In the time of the Emperors Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, Julius Agricola,
Tacitus his Wives Father, was Lord Deputy Lieutenant here. Tacit. vit. Agric.
He encouraged the Barbarous people to Civil fashions, insomuch that they took
the Roman habit for an honor, and almost every body wore a Gown; and as
Juvenal has it in his Satyr, Gallia Causidicos docuit facunda Britannos.
Juvenal. Sat. 6.
The British Lawyers learnt of yore,
From the well-spoken French their lore:
T'imply, hereafter we should see
Our Laws themselves in French would be.


CHAP. XVI.
In Commodus his time King Lucy embraces the Christian Religion, and desires
Eleutherius then Pope, to send him the Roman Laws. In stead of Heathen Priests,
he makes three Archbishops and twenty eight Bishops. He endows the Churches,
and makes them Sanctuaries. The manner of Government in Constantine's time,
where ends the Roman account.

IN Commodus the Emperors time the Light of the Gospel shone afresh upon the
Britans. Lucius the first King of the Christians (for the Romans, as in other
places, so in Britany, made use of even Kings for their instruments of slavery)
by the procurement of Fugatius and Damianus did happily receive from Pope
Eleutherius the Seal of Regeneration (that is, Baptism) and the Sacred Laws of
eternal salvation. Plati^. in vit. Eleutherii.
He had a mind also to have the Civil Laws thence, and desired them too. Ovid
long since had so prophesied of Rome: Juraque ab hac terra caetera terra petet.
Ovid. Fast. l. 1.
that is, And from this Country every other Land
Their Laws shall fetch, and be at her command.


Jo. Fox Hist. Eccles. l. 1.
Now Eleutherius wrote him this answer: You have desired of us, that the Roman
and Caesarean Laws may be sent over to you; that you may, as you desire, use
them in your Kingdom of Britanny. The Roman and Caesarean Laws we may at all
times disprove of, but by no means the Law of God. For you have lately through
Divine mercy taken upon you in the Kingdom of Britanny the Law and Faith of
Christ; you have with you in the Kingdom both pages of Holy Writ, (to wit, the
Old and New Testament). Out of them, in the name and by the favor of God, with
the advice of your Kingdom, take your Law, and by it through Gods permission,
you may govern your Kingdom of Britanny. Now you for your part are Gods
Vicegerent in your Kingdom.

Howsoever by injury of time the memory of this great and Illustrious Prince
King Lucy has been imbezill'd and smuggled, this upon the credit of the
ancient Writers appears plainly, that the pitiful fopperies of the Pagans, and
the Worship of their Idol-Devils did begin to flag, and within a short time
would have given place to the Worship of the true God, and that Three
Arch-Flamens and Twenty Eight Flamens, i. e. Arch-Priests, being driven out,
there were as many Archbishops and Bishops put into their rooms (the Seats of
the Archbishops were at London, at York and at Caerleon in Wales) to whom, as
also to other Religious persons, the King granted Possessions and Territories
in abundance, and confirmed his Grants by Charters and Patents. But he ordered
the Churches (as he of Monmouth and Florilegus tell us) to be so free, that
whatsoever Malefactor should fly thither for refuge, there he might abide
secure, and no body hurt him.

Zofim. l. 2.
In the time of Constantine the Emperor (whose Pedigree most people do refer to
the British and Royal Blood) the Lord President of France was Governor of
Britanny. He together with the rest, those of Illyricum or Slavonia, of the
East and of Italy, were appointed by the Emperor. Notit. Provinc. utr. Imper.
l. 1. comm. c. 5. and l. 2. comm. Pancir. c. 69.
In his time the Lord Deputy of Britanny, (whose Blazonry was a Book shut with
a green Cover) was honored with the Title of Spectabilis. There were also
under him two Magistrates of Consular Dignity, and three Chief Justices
(according to the division of the Province into five parts) who heard and
determined Civil and Criminal Causes.

And here I set up my last Pillar concerning the Britans and the Roman Laws in
Britanny, so far forth as those Writers which I have, do supply me with matter.

CHAP. XVII.
The Saxons are sent for in by Vortigern against the Scots and Picts, who
usurping the Government, set up the Heptarchy. The Angles, Jutes, Frisons, all
called Saxons. An account of them and their Laws, taken out of Adam of Bremen.

Afterward the Scots and Picts making incursions on the North, and daily
havoc and waste of the Lands of the Provincials, (that is, those who were
under the Roman Government) they send to desire of the Romans some Auxiliary
Forces. In the mean time, Rome by a like misfortune, was threatened with
imminent danger, by the fury of the Goths: all Italy was in a fright, in an
uproar. For the maintaining of whose liberty, the Empire being then more than
sinking, was with all its united strength engaged and ready prepared. So this
way the Britans met with a disappointment. Wherefore Vortigern, who was
Governor in Chief, sent for supplies from the neighboring Germans, and
invited them in. But according to the Proverb, Carpathius leporem; He caught a
Tartar: for he had better have let them alone where they were. Upon this
account, the Saxons, the Angles, the Jutes, the Frieslanders arrive here in
their Gally-Foists in the time of Theodosius the younger. At length being taken
with the sweetness of the soil (a great number of their Contrymen flocking
over after them, as there were at that time fatal flittings and shiftings of
quarters all the World over) and spurred on with the desire of the chief
command and rule, having struck up a League with the Picts, they raise a sad
and lamentable War against their new entertainers, in whose service they had
lately received pay: and to make short, in the end having turned the Britans
out of their Ancestors Seats they advanced themselves into an Heptarchy of
England, so called from them.

Albeit they pass by various names, yet in very deed they were all of them none
other but Saxons. A name at that time of a large extent in Germany; which was
not, as later Geographers make it, bounded with the Rivers of the Elb, of the
Rhine and the Oder, and with the Confines of Hessen and Duringen, and with the
Ocean; but reached as far as into the Cimbrian Chersonesus now called Jutland.
It is most likely, that those of them that dwelt by the Seaside, came over by
Ship into Britanny. To wit, at first Horsus and Hengistus came over out of
Batavia, or the Low Countries, with a great company of Saxons along with them;
after that out of Jutland the Jutes (for Janus Douza proves, Ja. Douz. annal.
Holland. l. 1. and 6.
that the Danes under that appellation seized our Shores, in the very beginning
of the Saxon Empire:) out of Angela, according to Camden about Flemsburg a City
of Sleswick, came the Angles; Procop. bell. Goth. l. 4.
out of Friseland (Procopius is my Author) the Frizons. One may without any
wrong call them all Saxons; unless Fabius Quaestor Aethelwerd also did his
Nation injury, by calling them so. He flourished Six hundred and fifty years
ago, being the Grandchild or Nephew of King Aethelulph, Aethelwerd. lib. 1.
fo. 474.
and in his own words discourses, That there was also a people of the Saxons
all along the Seacoast from the River Rhine up to the City Donia, which is now
commonly called Denmark. For it is not proper here to think of Denmark in the
neighboring Territories of Vtrecht and Amsterdam, by reason of the narrowness
of that tract.

Adam Brem. hist. eccles. Brem. and Hamburg. c. 5. ex bibliotheca Henr.
Ranzovii.
Those few Observes then, which Adam of Bremen has copied out of Einhard
concerning the Saxons, forasmuch as our Ancient Saxons I suppose, are concerned
in them, I here set down in this manner and order.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Saxons division of their people into four ranks. No person to marry out of
his own rank. What proportion to be observed in Marriages according to Policy.
Like to like the old Rule. Now Matrimony is made a matter of money.

23. THe whole Nation consists of four different degrees or ranks of men; to
wit, of Nobles, of Freemen born, of Freemen made so, Nithard. l. 4.
and of Servants or Slaves. And Nithard speaking of his own time, has divided
them into Ethelings, that is, Nobles, Frilings, that is, Freemen, and Lazzos,
that is, Servants or Slaves.

It was enacted by Laws, That no rank in cases of Matrimony do pass the bounds
of their own quality; but that a Nobleman marry a Noble-woman, a Freeman take
a Freewoman, a Bondman made Free be joined to a Bondwoman of the same
condition, and a Manservant match with a Maidservant. And thus in the Laws of
Henry Duke of Saxony, Emperor Elect, concerning Justs and Tournaments, When
any Nobleman had taken a Citizen or Countrey-woman to Wife, he was forbid the
exercise of that sport to the third Generation, Munst. Cosmog. l. 3.
as Sebastian Munster relates it. The Twelve Tables also forbad the marriage of
the Patricii or Nobles with the Plebeians or Commons; which was afterward
voided and nulled by a Law which Canuleius made, when he was Tribune of the
people. For both Politicians and Lawyers are of opinion, That in marriages we
should make use of not an Arithmetical proportion, which consists of equals;
nor of a Geometrical one, which is made up of likes; but of a Musical one,
which proceeds from unlike notes agreeing together in sound. Let a Nobleman
that is decayed in his estate, marry a Commoner with a good fortune; if he be
rich and wealthy, let him take one without a fortune: and thus let Love, Plut.
in sympos.
which was begot betwixt Wealth and Poverty, suite this unlikeness of
conditions into a sweet harmony; and thus this disagreeing agreement will be
fit for procreation and breed. For he had need have a good portion of his own,
and be nearer to Crassus than Irus in his fortunes, who, by reason of the many
inconveniences and intolerable charges of Women, which bring great Dowries,
does, with Megadorus in Plautus, Plaut. In Aulul. act. 3.
court a Wife without a Portion; according to that which Martial says to
Priscus: Vxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim Martial. l. 8. Epig. 12.

Quaeritis? Vxori nubere nolo meae.
Inferior Matrona suo sit, Prisce, Marito:
Non aliter fiunt foemina virque pares.
Which at a looser rate of Translation take thus, Should I a Wife with a great
fortune wed,
You Will say, I should be sweetly brought to bed.
Such fortune will my Liberty undo.
Who brings Estate, will wear the Breeches too.
Unhappy match! where e're the potent Bride
Has the advantage wholly on her side.
Blessed pairs! when the Men sway, the Women truckle,
There Is good agreement, as 'twixt Thong and Buckle.
And according to that of the Greek Poet, -- (...). Callimach. epig. 1.
Take, if you will be ruled by me,
A Wife of your own degree.


But there is little of our Age fashioned to the model of this sense: Height of
Birth, Virtue, Beauty, and whatsoever there was in Pandorae of Good and Fair,
do too too often give place to Wealth; Plaut. in Asinar.
and that I may use the Comedians word, to a Purse crammed with Money. And as
the merry Greek Poet says, (...), Anacreon. carm. (...).

(...),
(...).
To be Noble or highborn,
Is no argument for Love:
Good Parts of Breeding lie forlorn;
It Is Money only they approve.
I come back now to my friend Adam.

CHAP. XIX.
The Saxons way of judging the Event of War with an Enemy. Their manner of
approving a proposal in Council, by clattering their Arms. The Original of
Hundred-Courts. Their dubbing their Youth into Men. The privilege of young
Lads Nobly born. The Morganheb or Wedding-dowry.

Et Tacit.
24. THey take a Prisoner of that Nation, with which they are to have a War, by
what way soever they can catch him, and chose out one of their own
Contrymen; and putting on each of them the Arms of their own Country, make
them two fight together, and judge of the Victory, according as the one or the
other of them shall overcome. This very thing also Tacitus himself has to whom
Einhard sends his Reader. For though he treat in general of the Germans, yet
nevertheless without any question, our Saxons brought over along with them into
this Island very many of those things, which are delivered to us by those who
have wrote concerning the Customs of the Germans. Among which, take these
following.

25. In Councils or public Assemblies, the King or Prince, ( i.e. a chief
person) according as every ones Age is, according to his Nobility, according to
his Reputation in Arms, according to his Eloquence, has audience given him,
where they use the authority of persuading, rather than the power of
commanding. If they dislike what he says, they disapprove it with a Hum and a
rude noise. If they like the proposal, they shake and rustle their Spears or
Partisans together. It is the most honorable kind of assent, to commend the
Speaker with the clattering of their Arms. From hence perhaps arose the ancient
right of Wapentakes.

26. There are also chosen at the same Councils or Meetings, chief persons (as
Justices) to administer Law in the several Villages and Hamlets. Each of those
have a hundred Associates out of the Commonalty for their Counsel and
Authority. This is plainly the pourtraict of our Hundreds, which we still have
throughout the Counties of England.

27. They do nothing of public or private affair, but with their Arms on; but
it is not the custom for any one to wear Arms, before the City or Community
approve of him as sufficient for it. Then in the Council it self, either some
one of the Princes or chief persons, or the Father of the young man or some
Kinsman of his in token of respect, give him a Shield and a Partisan. This with
them stands for the Ceremony of the Gown; this the first honor of youth
arriving at manhood; before this be done, they seem but a part of the Family:
but after this is over, they are a part of the Commonwealth.

The right ancient pattern of dubbing Knights, if any where else to be found.
Caes. de bell. Gall. l. 6.
Julius Caesar says almost the very same thing of the Gauls. They do not
suffer their Children, to come in public to them, till they be come to Age,
that they be able to undergo the Duties of War.

28. A remarkable Nobleness of descent, or the high merits of their Fathers,
procure even to young Lads the dignity and esteem of a Prince.

For, as the Philosopher says, Senec. de benefic. l. 4. c. 30.
We owe this regard to Virtues, that we respect them, not only whilst present,
but also when they are taken away out of our sight; and in the Wise man's
account, The glory of Parents, is the honor of their Children. Proverb. 17.


29. The Wife does not bring the Husband a Portion, but the Husband gives the
Wife a Dowry. Contrary to what the Roman Law says, That custom is still in use
with the English, as Morgangheb in other places.

CHAP. XX.
Their severe punishments of Adultery, by maiming some parts of the body. The
reason of it given by Bracton. The like practiced by Danes and Normans.

30. THe Husband if his Wife plays the Whore, cuts off her hair, strips her
naked, and turns her out of doors in presence of her Kindred, and drives her
through the Streets, lashing or beating her as she goes along.

They were formerly in this Northern part of the World, most severe punishers
of Adultery, and they had such Laws as were -- ipsis Marti Venerique timenda;
Juvenal. Sac.
that is, such as would Put Mars and Venus in a trance
Of fear, amidst their dalliance.
King Knute ordered, That a Wife, Canut. legi can. 50.
who took another Passenger on board her than her Husband, and (...). Often times
in the nights away she hies,
And into other harbor flies. Theognis.

(Well speed thee and thine, fair Venus; nor do I willingly bring these ill
tidings to thy tender Ducklings.) should have her Nose and ears cut off.

I remember, Odyss. 18.22.
Antinous in Homer threatens Irus with the chopping off his Nose, Ears and
Privities; and Ulysses inflicts that very punishment upon his Goat-herd
Melanthius, for his having been too officious in his pimping attendance upon
the Gallants, that haunted the house in his absence. How any one should deserve
this penalty, which so disfigures Nature, I do not yet sufficiently understand.

In Allegoriis Homeric.
Heraclides Ponticus informs us, That Lawmakers were wont to maim that part
especially which committed the misdemeanour. In testimony of this, he mentions
Tytius his Liver as the Shop and Workhouse of Lust; and it were no hard matter
to bring in other more pertinent instances; and Pereant parts, quae nocuerc.
says some Poet, The parts that did the hurt,
Let them even suffer for it.


However it was not Melanthius his Ears, and by no means his Nose that
offended; no nor the good Wives neither that commits the fact: as Martial the
merry Wag tells a certain Husband, Martial. l. 3. Epig. 43.
Quis tibi persuasit nares abscindere moecho?
Non hac peccata est part, marite, tibi.
that is, with modesty to render it, What made thee, angry man, to cut
The Nose of him, that went to rut?
'Twas not that part, that did the offense:
Therefore to punish that, what sense?


But who does not see, that a Woman has no other parts of her body so liable
to maiming or cutting off? Both those parts make much for the setting her off;
nor are there any others in the whole outward frame of the Microcosm, which
being cut off, do either more disparage beauty, or withal less afflict the
animal virtue, as they call it, by which life is maintained. Now for those, who
of old time did unluckily, that is, without the favor of those Heathen Gods
Prema and Mutinus, to whose service they were so addicted, offer violence to
untainted chastity; the loss of members did await the lust of such
persons,.that there might be member for member (they are the words of Henry
Bracton, Bracton. de Corona l. 3. c. 28.
a very ancient Writer of our Law, and they are clear testimonies, that the
English have practiced the Law of like for like) quia virgo, cum corrumpitur,
membrum amittit, and ideo corruptor puniatur in eo in quo deliquit: An. 18 Ed.
3. fol. 20. a Briton. cap. 25.
oculos igitur amittat propter aspectum decoris, quo virginem concupivit;
amittat and testiculos, qui calorem stupri induxerunt So long ago, Ovid.
Metamor. l. 7.
Aut linguam aut oculos aut quae tibi membra pudorem
Abstulerant, ferro rapiam.
says Progne to her Sister Philomele, speaking of the filthy Villain Tereus,
who had ravished her, I Will cut out his eyes or tongue,
Or those parts which did thee the wrong.
and Plautus in his Play called Paenulus, Sy. Facio quod manifesto moechi haud
ferme solent. Mi. Ruid id est? Sy. Refero vasa salva.

I remember I have read that Jeoffry de Millers a Nobleman of Norfolk, Matthew.
Paris in H. 3. page 1000.
for having enticed the Daughter of John Briton to an Assignation, and engaged
her with venereal pledges; being betrayed and trepanned by the Baggage,
underwent this execution; and suffered besides, whatsoever a Fathers fury in
such a case would prompt him to do: But withal, that King Henry the third was
grievously offended at it, dis-inherited Briton, banished him, and gave order
by Proclamation, Vid. l. 2. art. 8.
that no one should presume, unless it were in his Wives case, to do the like.
But these passages are of later date, and since the Normans time and from them;
unless you will bring hither that which we meet with in Alured's Law concerning
a Man and a Maidservant. Aluted. leg. can. 25.


From whence we slide back again to Tacitus.

CHAP. XXI.
The manner of Inheriting among them. Of deadly Feuds. Of Wergild or Head-mony
for Murder. The Nature of Country-Tenures and Knights Fees.

31. EVery ones Children are their Heirs and Successors, and there was no Will
to be.

Nor was it lawful with us down to our Grandfathers time, to dispose of Country
Farms or Estates by Will, unless it were in some Buroughs, that had a peculiar
Right and Privilege of their own. If there be no Children, then, says he, the
next of kin shall inherit; Brethren, or Uncles by the Fathers or Mothers side.
Those of the ascending Line are excluded from Inheritances, and here appears
the preference of the Fathers side: A Law at this very day usual with the
English.

32. To undertake the Enmities rather than the Friendships, whether of ones
Father or Kinsman, is more necessary. Capital enmities, which they call Deadly
Feuds, are well known to our Northern people. Nor do they hold on never to be
appeased: For even Murder is expiated by a certain number of some head of
Cattle, and the whole Family of the murdered Person receives satisfaction.
Murders formerly were bought off with Head-mony called (...); though one had
killed a Nobleman, nay the King himself, as we may see in Athelstan's
Constitutions: But good manners, I suppose, have prevailed above Laws.

33. The Lord imposes upon his Tenant a certain quantity of Corn or Cattle, or
Clothes. We see here clearly enough the nature of Country Land-holders, Fees or
Tenures. As to military or Knights Fees, give me leave to set that down too.
Dion. Halic. lib. 1.

Flor. Hist. Romans l. 3. c. 3.

Lamprid. V. Bodin. de rep. l. 2. c. 2. and Franc. Hotom. disp. feud. cap. 2.


Dionysius Halicarnasseus gives us a very ancient draught and model of them in
the Trojans and Aborigines: Florus in the Cymbrians, and Lampridius in
Alexander Severus. Both the Northern people and the Italians do owe them to the
Huns and Lombards; but these later according to a more modern form.

Let these things suffice out of Cornelius Tacitus, which belong to this Head.

CHAP. XXII.
Since the return of Christianity into the Island, King Ethelbert's Law against
Sacrilege. Thieves formerly amerced in Cattle. A blot upon Theodred the Good,
Bishop of London, for hanging Thieves. The Country called Engelond by Order of
King Egbert, and why so called. The Laws of King Ina, Alfred, Ethelred, etc.
are still to be met with in Saxon. Those of Edward the Confessor, and King
Knute the Dane, were put forth by Mr. Lambard in his Archaeonomia.

BEfore that the Christian Doctrine had driven out and banished the Saxon
Idolatry, all these things I have hitherto been speaking of, were in use.
Ethelbert (he that was the first King, not only of Kent, but of all England,
except Northumberland) having been baptized by Austin the Monk, the Apostle, as
some call him, of the English) amongst other good things which by Counsel and
Grant he did to his Nation, ('it is venerable Bede speaks these words) he did
also with the advice of wise men, Bed. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 5.
appoint for his peoples use the orders of their proceedings at Law, according
to the examples of the Romans. Which having been written in the English tongue
(says he) are hitherto, or to this time kept and observed by them. Among which
orders or decrees he set down in the first place, after what manner such an one
should make amends, who should convey away by stealth any of those things that
belonged to the Church, or to a Bishop, or to the rest of the Orders. In the
Laws of some that came after him, as those of King Alured (who culled out of
Ethelbert's Acts to make up his own) and those of King Athelstan, Thieves make
satisfaction with money; accordingly as Tacitus says of the Germans, That for
lighter offenses those that were convicted are at the rate of their penalties
amerced such a number of Horses or other Cattle. For, as Festus has it, before
Brass and Silver were coined, Fest. verbo Pecul. and verbo Ovibus.
by ancient custom they were fined for their faults so much Cattle: But those
who meddled with any thing sacred, we read had that hand cut off with which they
committed the theft.

Well! but am I mistaken, V. Inae leg. cap. 13.
or was Sacrilege even in the time of the Saxon Government punished as a
Capital crime? There is a passage of William of Malmsbury, in his Book de
Gestis Pontificum, Malmsb. de gest. Pontif. l. 1.

Ranulph. Higden in Polychron.

Joan. Carnotens^s de nugis curial. l. 6. c. 17.

Caxt. cap. 96*


that inclines me to think so. Speaking of Theodred, the Bishop of London when
Athelstan was King, he says, That he had among the common people got the
surname of Theodred the Good; for the eminence of his virtues: Only in one
thing he fell short, which was rather a mistake than a crime, that those
Thieves which were taken at St. Edmunds, whom the holy Martyr had upon their
vain attempts tied with an invisible knot (he means St. Edmundsbury in Suffolk;
which Church these Fellows having a design to rob, are said by miracle to have
stood still in the place, as if they had been tied with Cords: These Thieves I
say) were by his means or sufferance given up to the severity of the Laws, and
condemned to the Gallows or Gibbet. Let not any one think that in this middle
Age, this Gallows or Gibbet I spoke of, was any other thing than the Roman
Furca, upon which people hang and are strangled till they die.

34. Egbert King of the West Saxons (I make use of Camdens words) having gotten
in four Kingdoms by conquest, and devoured the other two also in hope, that
what had come under the Government of one, might likewise go under one name;
and that he might keep up the memory of his own people the Angles, he gave
order by Proclamation, that the Heptarchy which the Saxons had possessed, should
be called Engelond. John Carnotensis writes, that it was so called from the
first coming in of the Angles; and another some body says it was so named from
Hengist a Saxon Prince.

There are a great many Laws of King Ina, Alfred, Edward, Athelstan, Edmund,
Edgar, Ethelred, and Knute the Dane, written in the Saxon language; which have
lasted till these very times. For King Knute gave order ('it is William of
Malmsbury speaks) that all the Laws which had been made by former Kings, and
especially by his Predecessor Ethelred, should under pain of his displeasure
and a Fine, be constantly observed: For the keeping of which, even now in the
time of those who are called the Good, people swear in the name of King Edward;
not that he appointed them, but that he observed them. The Laws of Edward, who
for his piety has the surname of Confessor, are in Readers hands. These of the
Confessor were in Latin; those others of Knute were not long since put into
Latin by William Lambard a learned man, and one very well versed in Antiquity;
who has recovered them both, and published the Saxon Original with his
Translation over against it, Printed by John Day at London, Anno 1567. under
the Title of Archaeonomia, or a Book concerning the ancient Laws of the
English. May he have a good harvest of it as he deserves.

From Historians let us borrow some other helps for this service.

CHAP. XXIII.
King Alfred divides England into Countyes or Shires, and into Hundreds and
Tythings. The Original of Decenna or Courtleet, Friburg, and Mainpast. Forms of
Law, how People were to answer for those whom they had in Borgh or Mainpast.

35. INgulph the Abbot of Crowland, writing of King Alfred says: Rotulus
Wintoniae.
That he was the first of all that changed the Villages or Lordships and
Provinces of all England into Counties or Shires. Before that it was reckoned
and divided according to the number of Hides or Plough-lands by little
districts or quarters. He divided the Counties into Hundreds and Tythings; (it
was long before that Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, Hist. Cantuariensis.
had parted the Country into Parishes; to wit, Anno 636.) that every Native
home-born lawful man, might be in some Hundred and Tything (I mean whosoever
was ^ull twelve years of age) and if any one should be suspected of Larceny or
Thest, Canut. leg. 19.
he might in his own Hundred or Ward, being either condemned or giving security
(in some Manuscripts it is being acquitted) he might either incur or avoid the
deserved penalty. William of Malmsbury adds to this, that he that could not
find security was afraid of the severity of the Laws; and if any guilty person,
either before his giving security or after, should make his escape, all of that
Hundred and Tything should incur the Kings fine.

Here we have the Original of Decenna or a Court Leet, of Friburg, and perhaps
of Mainpast: Which things though grown out of use in the present Age; yet are
very often mentioned, not only in the Confessors Laws, Leg. Fdw. Confess. cap.
20.

Bract. de corona, l. 3. c. 10.


but also in Bracton and in other Records of our Law.

What Decenna was, the word it self does almost show: And Ingulph makes out,
that is, a Dousin or Courtleet.

Friburg or Borgh signifies a Surety; for Fri is all one as free.

He who passes his word for another good behavior, or good a bearing, and is
become his security; is said to have such a one in his Borgh: Being engaged
upon this account to the Government, to answer for him if he misbehave himself.
And hence it is, that our people in the Country call those that live near them,
or as I may say at the next door, Neighbors: When yet those that would find
out the reason why the people of Liege in the Low Countries are called
Eburones, do understand that Burgh, which is the same as Borgh, to stand for a
Neighbor; and this is plainly affirmed by Pontus Heuterus, Pont. Heut. de vet.
Belg. l. 1. c. 13.
in other Originations of the like kind.

Manupastus is the same thing as a Family: As if one would say, fed by hand.
Just in the like sense Julius Pollux, Jul. Pollux. l. 3. c. 8.
in Greek terms a Master of a Family, Trophimos; that is, the feeder of it.

That the Rights of Friburg and Manupast were in use with the English some five
or six Generations ago, is manifest. 3. Edw. III. Itin. North. tit. Coron. 293.

6 Edw. 2. Itin. Cant.


Curio a Priest is fined by Edward the third, because there had been one of his
Family a Murderer. And the ancient Sheets concerning the Progress or Survey of
Kent under Edward the second, do give some light this way. Ralph a Milner of
Sandon, and Roger a Boy of the said Ralph in Borgh of Perhaps it should be
Tincham.
Twicham; (Critic whoever you are, I would not have you to laugh at this
homespun Dialect) came by night to the Mill of Harghes, and then and there
murdered William the Milner; and carried away his Goods and Chattels and
presently fled: It is not known whither they are gone, and the Jury mistrusts
them the said Ralph and Roger concerning the death of the aforesaid William;
therefore let them be driven out and outlawed. They had no Chattels, but the
aforesaid Ralph was in Borgh of Simon Godwin of Twicham, who at present has him
not; and therefore lies at mercy: And Roger was not in Borgh, but was of the
Mainpast of Robert Archbishop of Canterbury deceased; there being no
Engleshire presented, the Verdit is, the murder upon the Hundred. The first
discoverer of it and three Neighbors are since dead; and Thomas Broks, one of
the Neighbors, comes and is not mistrusted; and the Villages of Wimesbugewelle
and Egestoun did not come fully to the Coroners Inquest and are therefore at
mercy. And about the same time, Solomon Rois of Ickham came to the House of
Alice the Daughter of Dennis Whenes, and beat her and struck her upon the Belly
with a staff; so that she dyed presently. And the foresaid Solomon presently
fled, and the Jury mistrust him concerning the death aforesaid; therefore let
him be driven out and be outlawed. He had no Chattels, nor was he in Borgh
because a Vagrant: The Verdit, the murder lies upon the Hundred. etc. And
according to this form more such Instances.

But let it suffice to have hinted at these things, adding out of Henry
Bracton; Bract. lib. 3. de Corona c. 10.
If out of Frank-pledge an Offender be received in any Village, the Village
shall be at mercy; unless he that fled be such an one, that he ought not to be
in Leet and Frank-pledge; as Nobles, Knights, and their Parents (their eldest
Sons it is in the yearly Records of Law in Edward the first's time; An. 21. Ed.
1.
and we may take in Daughters too) a Clergyman, a Freeman, (I fear this word
has crept in) and the like, according to the custom of the Country; and in
which case he, of whose Family and Mainpast they were, shall be bound in some
parts, and shall answer for them; unless the custom of the Country be
otherways, that he ought not to answer for his Mainpast, as it is in the County
of Hertford, where a man does not answer for his Mainpast for any offense,
unless he return after Felony, or he receive him after the offense committed,
as in the Circuit of M. de Pateshull in the County of Hertford, in such a year
of King Henry the fifth.

In sooth these usages do partly remain in our Tythings and Hundreds, not at
all hitherto repealed or worn out of fashion.

CHAP. XXIV.
King Alfred first appointed Sheriffs. By Duns Scotus his advice, he gave Order
for the breeding up of Youth in Learning. By the way, what a Hide of Land is.
King Edgar's Law for Drinking. Prelates investiture by the Kings Ring and
Staff. King Knute's Law against any Englishman that should kill a Dane, Hence
Englescyre. The manner of Subscribing and Sealing till Edward the Confessor's
time. King Harald's Law that no Welch-man should come on this side Offa's Dike
with a weapon.

36. THe Governors of Provinces who before were styled Deputy Lieutenants (we
return to Ingulph and King Alfred) He divided into two Offices; that is, into
Judges, whom we now call Justices, and into Sheriffs, who do still retain the
same name. Away then with Polydore Virgil, who fetches the first Sheriffs from
the Norman Conqueror.

37. John Scot Erigena advised the King, that he would have his Subjects
instructed in good Letters; and that to that end he would by his Edict take
care of that which might be for the benefit of Learning. Alured. Rhivallens.
ap. Tuin. Apol. ant. Oxon. l. 2.. 207.
Whereupon he gave strict order to all Freemen of the whole Kingdom, who did at
least possess two Hides of Land, that they should hold and keep their Children
till the time of fifteen years of their Age, to learning; and should in the
mean time diligently instruct them to know God.

A Hide of Land, that I may note it once for all, and a Plough-Land (that is as
much Land as can be well turned up and tilled with one Plough every year) are
read as synonymous terms of the same sense, in Huntingdon, Matthew Paris,
Thomas Walsingham; and expressly in a very old Charter of Dunstan. Although some
take a Hide for an hundred Acres, and others otherwise; do thou, if thou had
rather so do, fancy it to be as much ground as one can compass about with a
Bull-hide cut into Thongs, as Queen Dido did at Carthage: There are some who
are not unwilling to have it so understood.

38. King Edgar like a King of good Fellows, or Master of Revels, made a Law
for Drinking. He gave order that studs or knobs of Silver or Gold (so Malmsbury
tells us) should be fastened to the sides of their Cups or drinking Vessels,
that when every one knew his mark or boundary, he should out of modesty, not
either himself covet or force another to desire more than his stint. This is
the only Law before the first Parliament under King James, has been made
against those Swill-bowls, (...), Dionysius. Aeneus.
Swabbers of drunken Feasts and lusty Rowers,
In full brimm'd Rummers that do ply their Oars.
who by their carowses (tippling up Nestor's years, as if they were celebrating
the Goddess Anna Perenna) do at the same time drink others Healths, and
mischief and spoil their own and the Public.

39. There was no choice of Prelates (these are the words of Ingulph again)
that was merely free and canonical; but the Court conferred all Dignities, as
well of Bishops as of Abbots, by the Kings Ring and Staff, according to his
good pleasure. The Election or choice was in the Clergy and the Monks; but they
desired him whom they had chosen, of the King. Edmund, in King Ethelred's time,
was after this manner made Bishop of the Holy Island on the Coast of
Northumberland: And King Edgar in his Patent, Malmsb. lib. 3. de Pontif. and de
gest. Reg. 2.
which he signed to the Abbey of Glastenbury, retained to himself and his Heirs,
the power of bestowing the Pastoral Staff to the Brother Elect.

40. To as many as King Knute retained with him in England (to wit, to the
Danes; for by their hands also was the Scepter of this Kingdom managed) it was
granted, that they should have a firm peace all over; so that if any of the
English killed any of those men, whom the King had brought along with him; if
he could not clear himself by the Judgment of God (that is, Bract. lib. 3. de
Coron. cap. 15.
by Ordeal) to wit, by water and burning hot iron, Justice should be done upon
him: But if he run away and could not be taken, there should be paid for him
sixty six marks; and they were gathered in the Village where the Party was
slain, and therefore because they had not the murderer forth coming; and if in
such Village by reason of their poverty, they could not be gathered, then they
should be gathered in the Hundred, to be paid into the Kings Treasure. In this
manner writes Henry Bracton, who observes that hence the business of
Englishshire came into fashion in the Inquests of murder.

Ingulphus.
41. Hand-Writings ( i.e. Patents and Grants) till Edward the Confessors time,
were confirmed by the subscriptions of faithful Persons present; a thing
practiced too among the Britans in King Arthur's time, as John Price informs us
out of a very ancient Book of the Church of Landaff. Joh. Pris. defens. hist.
Brit.
Those subscriptions were accompanied with Golden Crosses, and other sacred
Seals or like stamps.

42. King Harald made a Law, that whosoever of the Welsh should be found with a
Weapon about him without the bound which he had set them, to wit, Offa's dike;
he should have his Right Hand cut off by the Kings Officers. This dike our
Chorographer tells us was cut by Offa King of the Mercians, Camdenus e
Sarisburiensi.
and drawn along from the mouth of the River Dee to the mouth of the River Wye
for about eighty miles in length, on purpose to keep the English and Welsh
asunder.

CHAP. XXV.
The Royal Consorts great Privilege of Granting. Felons Estates forfeited to
the King. Estates granted by the King with three Exceptions of Expedition,
Bridge, and Castle. The Ceremony of the Kings presenting a Turf at the Altar of
that Church, to which he gave Land. Such a Grant of King Ethelbald comprised in
old Verse.

THe Donations or Grants of the Royal Consort, though not by the Kings
Authority, contrary to what the Privilege of any other Wife is, were ratified
also in that Age, as they were by the Roman Law: Which by the Patent of
Aethelswith, C. de donat. inter virum and uxorem. l. 26.
Wife to Burghred King of the Mercians, granted to Cuthwuls in the year 868.
has been long since made out by Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas: Where also King Ethelred's ancient Charter proves, that the
Estates of Felons (those I mean who concern themselves in Burglaries and
Robberies) are forfeited to the King. In Epist. ad l. 6. Relat.


Having already mentioned those Hand-writings or Grants, which are from one
hand and the other, conveyances of Tenure (the fuel of quarrels) I have a mind,
over and above what has been said, to set down also these Remarks, as being to
our purpose; and taken from the Saxons. As for instance, that those are most
frequent whereby Estates are conveyed to be held with the best and fairest
right; yet most commonly these three things excepted, to wit, Expedition,
Repairing of Bridges, and Building of Castles: And that those to whom the
Grants were made, were very seldom acquitted upon this account. These three
exceptions are noted by the term of a three-knotted necessity in an old
Charter, wherein King Cedwalla granted to Wilfrid (the first Bishop of Shelsey
in Sussex) the Village of Paganham in the said County. Anno Dom. 680.
For though in the Grants of King Ethelulph the Church be free (says Ingulph)
and there be a concession of all things for the release of our Souls, Ingulph.
and pardon of our sins to serve God alone without Expedition, and building of
Bridge, and fortifying of Castle; to the intent that the Clergy might wholly
attend Divine Service: Yet in that public debate of Parliament, in the Reign
of Henry the third, concerning the ancient State, Freedom, and Government of
the English Church; and concerning the hourly exactions of the Pope and the
Leeches, Jugglers and Decoys of Rome, that strolled up and down the Country to
pick Peoples Pockets, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth; they did
indeed stand for the privilege of the Church, and produced as Witnesses
thereof the Instruments and Grants of Kings; who nevertheless were not so much
inclined to countenance that liberty of the Church, but that, as Matthew Paris
observes, Matthew. Paris hist. major. page 838.
They always reserved to themselves for the public advantage of the Kingdom,
three things; to wit, Expedition, and the repairing or making up of Bridge or
Castle; that by them they might withstand the incursions of the Enemy. Ingulph.
And King Ethelbald has this form: I grant that all the Monasteries and
Churches of my Kingdom be discharged from public Customs or Taxes, Works or
Services, and Burdens or Payments or Attendances, unless it be the building and
repairing of Castles or Bridges, which cannot be released to any one.

I take no notice how King Ethelred the twelfth perhaps (but by no means the
fifteenth, Ralph Holinshed in Hen. 7.
wherein an Historian of ours has blundred) has signed the third year of his
Reign by the term of an Olympiad, after the manner of the Greek computation or
reckoning: As likewise I pass other things of the like kind, which are many
times used and practiced according to the fancy of the Clerks or Notaries.
However the last words, which are the close of these Grants and Patents, are
not to be slighted. These we may see in that of Cedwalla, King of the
South Saxons, Chart. Archiep. Cant.
made to Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 687. thus.

See the Charter of Edw. Conf. in English Rhyme, Camden in Essex.
For a further confirmation of my grant, I Cedwalla have laid a Turf of the
Land aforesaid upon the holy Altar of my Savior: And with my own hand, being
ignorant of Letters, have set down and expressed the mark or sign of the Holy
Cross. Concerning Withred and a Turf of Land in Kent, Camden has the same
thing; And King Ethelulph is said to have offered his Patent, Ingulph.
or Deed of Gift, on the Altar of the holy Apostle St Peter.

For a conclusion, I know no reason why I may not set underneath, the Verses of
an old Poet, wherein he has comprised the instrument or Grant of founding an
Abbey, Ingulph.
which Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, gave to Kenulph Abbot of Crowland:
Verses, I say, but such as were made without Apollo's consent or knowledge.
Istum Kenulphum si quis vexaverit Anglus,
Rex condemno mihi cuncta catella sua.
Inde meis Monachis de damnis omnibus ultra
Vsque satisfaciat; carcere clausus erit.
Adsunt ante Deum testes hujus dationis
Anglorum proceres Pontificesque mei.
Sanctus The Saint, to whom the Monastery was dedicated.
Guthlacus Confessor and Anachorita
Hic jacet, in cujus auribus ista loquor.
Oret pro nobis sanctissimus iste Sacerdos,
Ad tumbam cujus haec mea dona dedi.
Which in Rhyme dogrel will run much after this hobling rate. If any English
vex this Kenulph, shall
I King condemn to me his Chattels all.
Thenceforth, until my Monks he satisfy,
For damages, in Prison he shall lie.
Witnesses of this Gift here in Gods sight
Are English Peers and Prelates of my Right.
Saint Guthlac Confessor and Anchoret,
Lies here, in whose Ears these words I speak yet.
May he pray for us that most holy Priest,
At whose Tomb these my Gifts I have addressed.


Thus they closed their Donations or Grants; thus we our Remarks of the Saxons,
being now to pass to the Normans.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ENGLISH JANUS. From the NORMAN Conquest, to the Death
of King Henry II.
CHAP. I.
William the Conqueror 's Title. He bestows Lands upon his followers, and
brings Bishops and Abbots under Military Service. An account of the old English
Laws, called Merchenlage, Danelage and Westsaxen-lage. He is prevailed upon by
the Barons, to govern according to King Edward's Laws, and at S. Albans takes
his Oath so to do. Yet some new Laws were added to those old ones.

WILLIAM Duke of Normandy upon pretense of a double Right, both that of Blood
(inasmuch as Emme the Mother of Edward the Confessor, was Daughter to Richard
the first Duke of the Normans) and withal that of Adoption, having in Battle
worsted Harald the Son of Godwin Earl of Kent, obtained a large Inheritance,
and took possession of the Royal Government over all England.

After his Inauguration he liberally bestowed the Lands and Estates of the
English upon his fellow soldiers; that little which remained (so says Matthew
Paris) he put under the yoke of a perpetual servitude. Upon which account, some
while since the coming in of the Normans, there was not in England except the
King himself, any one, who held Land by right of Freehold (as they term it:)
since in sooth one may well call all others to a man only Lords in trust of
what they had; as those who by swearing fealty, and doing homage, did
perpetually own and acknowledge a Superior Lord, of whom they held, and by whom
they were invested into their Estates.

All Bishoprics and Abbacies, which held Baronies, and so far forth had
freedom from all Secular service (the forecited Matthew is my Author) he
brought them under Military service, enrolling every Bishopric and Abbacy
according to his own pleasure, how many Soldiers he would have each of them
find him and his Successors in time of Hostility or War.

Having thus according to this model ordered the Agrarian Law for the division
and settlement of Lands, he resolved to govern his Subjects (we have it from
Gervase of Tilbury) by Laws and Ordinances in writing: Gerv. Tilb. de scacc.
cap. 32.
to which purpose he proposed also the English Laws according to their
Tripartite or threefold distinction; that is to say, Merchenlage, Danlage and
Westsaxenlage.

Merchenlage, that is, the Law of the Mercians; which was in force in the
Counties of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxford, Chester, Salop and
Stafford.

Danlage, that is, the Law of the Danes; which bore sway in Yorkshire, Derby,
Nottingham, Leicester, Lincoln, Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, Hertford,
Essex, Middlesex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon.

Westsaxenlage, that is, the Law of the West Saxons; to which all the rest of
the thirty two Counties (which are all that Malmesbury reckons up in Ethelred's
time) did belong; to wit, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Berks, Southampton, Winton,
Somerset, Dorset and Devon.

Some of these English Laws he disliked and laid aside; others he approved of,
and added to them, some from beyond Sea out of Neustria (he means Normandy,
which they did of old, term Neustria corruptly, instead of Westrich, as being
the more Western Kingdom of the Franks, and given by Charles the Simple to
Rollo for his Daughter Gilla her portion) such of them as seemed most effectual
for the preserving of the Kingdoms peace. This says he of Tilbury.

Now this is no rare thing among Writers for them to devise, that William the
Conqueror brought in as it were a clear new face of Laws to all intents and
purposes. It Is true, this must be acknowledged, that he did make some new ones
(part whereof you may see in Lambard's Archaeonomia, and part of them here
subjoyned) but so however that they take their denomination from the English,
rather than from the Normans; although one may truly say, according to what
Lawyers dispute, that the English Empire and Government was overthrown by him.
That he did more especially affect the Laws of the Danes (which were not much
unlike to those of the Norwegians, to whom William was by his Grandfather
allied in blood) I read in the Annals of Roger Hoveden. And that he openly
declared, that he would rule by them; at hearing of which, all the great men of
the Country, who had enacted the English Laws, were presently struck into
dumps, and did unanimously petition him, That he would permit them to have
their own Laws and ancient Customs; in which their Fathers had lived, and they
themselves had been born and bred up in; forasmuch as it would be very hard for
them to take up Laws that they knew not, and to give judgment according to
them. But the King appearing unwilling and uneasy to be moved, they at length
prosecuted their purpose, beseeching him, that for the Soul of King Edward, who
had after his death given up the Crown and Kingdom to him, and whose the Laws
were, and not any others that were strangers, he would hearken to them and
grant that they might continue under their own Country Laws. Whereupon calling
a Council, he did at the last yield to the request of the Barons. From that day
forward therefore the Laws of King Edward, which had before been made and
appointed by his Grandfather Adgar, seeing their authority, were before the
rest of the Laws of the Country respected, confirmed and observed all over
England. But what then? Does it follow that all things in William's time were
new? How can a man choose but believe it? The Abbot of Crowland says this of
it, I have brought with me from London into my Monastery the Laws of the most
Righteous King Edward, which my Renowned Lord King William has by Proclamation
ordered, under most grievous penalties, to be authentic and perpetual, to be
kept inviolably throughout the whole Kingdom of England, and has recommended
them to his Justices, in the same language wherein they were at first set forth
and published. And in the Life of Fretherick Abbot of S. Albans you have this
account: After many debates, Archbishop Lanfrank being then present (at
Berkhamstead in Hartfordshire) the King did for the good of peace, take his
Oath upon all the Relics of the Church of S. Alban, and by touching the holy
Gospels, Camden.
Fretherick the Abbot administering the Oath, that he would inviolably observe
the good and approved ancient Laws of the Kingdom, which the holy and pious
Kings of England his Predecessors, and especially King Edward had appointed.

But you will much more wonder at that passage of William le Rouille of Alencon
in his Preface to the Norman Customs. Guil. le Rouille Alencon.
That vulgar Chronicle, says he, which is entitled the Chronicle of
Chronicles, bears witness, that S. Edward King of England, was the Maker or
Founder of this Custom; where he speaks of William the Bastard Duke of
Normandy, alias King of England, saying, that whereas the foresaid S. Edward
had no Heirs of his own Body, he made William Heir of the Kingdom, who after
the Defeat and Death of Harald the Usurper of the Kingdom, did freely obtain
and enjoy the Kingdom upon this condition, to wit, that he would keep the Laws
which had before been made by the forementioned Edward; which Edward truly had
also given Laws to the Normans, as having been a long time also brought up
himself in Normandy.

Where then, I pray you, is the making of new Laws? Why! without doubt,
according to Tilbury, we are to think, that together with the ratifying of old
Laws, there was mingled the making of some new ones: and in this case one may
say truly with the Poet in his Panegyric: Claudian. in 4. cons. Honorii.
Firmatur senium Juris, priscamque resumunt
Canitiem leges, emendanturque vetustae,
Acceduntque novae. --
which in English speaks to this sense; The Laws old age stands firm by Royal
care,
Statutes resume their ancient gray hair.
Old ones are mended with a fresh repair;
And for supply some new ones added are.
See here! we impart unto thee, Reader, these new Laws, with other things,
which thou may justly look for at my hands in this place.

CHAP. II.
The whole Country enrolled in Doomsday Book. Why that Book so called. Robert
of Glocester's Verses to prove it. The Original of Charters and Seals from the
Normans, practiced of old among the French. Who among the Romans had the
privilege of using Rings to seal with, and who not.

1. HE caused all England to be described, and enrolled (a whole company of
Monks are of equal authority in this business, but we make use of Florentius of
Worcester for our witness at this time) how much Land every one of his Barons
was possessed of, Doomsday.
how many Soldiers in fee, how many Ploughs, how many Villains, how many living
Creatures or Cattle, I, and how much ready money every one was Master of
throughout all his Kingdom, from the greatest to the least; and how much
Revenue or Rent every Possession or Estate was able to yield.

That breviary or Present State of the Kingdom being lodged in the Archives for
the generality of it, containing entirely all the Tenements or Tenures of the
whole Country or Land was called Doomsday, as if one would say, The day of
Doom or Judgment.

For this reason, says he of Tilbury, we call the same Doomsday Book: Not
that there is in it sentence given concerning any doubtful cases proposed; but
because it is not lawful upon any account, to depart from the Doom or Judgment
aforesaid.

Reader, If it will not make thy nice Stomach wamble, let me bring in here an
old fashioned Rhyme, which will hardly go down with our dainty finical
Verse-wrights, of an historical Poet Robert of Gloucester: One whom, for his
Antiquity, I must not slight concerning this Book.

The K. W. vor to wite the worth of his land
Let enqueri streitliche thoru al Engelonde,
Hou moni plou land, and hou moni hiden also
Were in everich sire, and wat hii were wurth yereto:
And the rents of each town, and of the waters echone,
That wurth, and of woods eke, that there ne bileved none,
But that he wist wat hii were wurth of al Engelonde,
And wite al clean that wurth thereof ich understond
And let it write clean inou, and that scrit dude iwis
In the Tresorie at Westminster there it yut is.
So that ure Kings suth, when hii ransom took
And ready wat folc might give, hii fond there in yor book.
Considering how the English Language is every day more and more refined, this
is but a rude piece, and looks scurvily enough. But yet let us not be unmindful
neither, that even the fine trim artifices of our quaint Masters of Expression,
will themselves perhaps one day, in future Ages, that shall be more critical,
run the same risk of censure, and undergo the like misfortune: And that, Horat.
art. poetic.
Multa renascentur quae nunc cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor; --
As Horace the Poet born at Venusium, tells us: That is, Several words which
now are fallen full low,
Shall up again to place of Honor start;
And words that now in great esteem, I trow,
Are held, shall shortly with their honor part.


2. The Normans called their Writings given under their hand, Charters (I speak
this out of Ingulph) and they ordered the confirmation of such Charters with an
impression of Wax, by every ones particular Seal, under the Testimony and
Subscription of three or four Witnesses standing by.

But Edward the Confessor had also his Seal, though that too from Normandy. For
in his time, as the same Writer says, Many of the English began to let slip
and lay aside the English Fashions, bringing in those of the Normans in their
stead, and in many things to follow the customs of the Franks; all great
persons to speak the French Tongue in their Courts, looking upon it as a great
piece of gentility, to make their Charters and Writings alamode of France; and
to be ashamed of their own Country usages in these and other like cases. Nay,
and if Leland, Leland.
an Eyewitness, may be believed, our great Prince Arthur had his Seal also,
which he says he saw in the Church of Westminster with this very inscription.
PATRITIUS. ARTHURIUS. BRITANNIAE.
GALLIAE. GERMANIAE. DACIAE. IMPERATOR.
That is, The Right Noble, ARTHUR, Emperor of Britanny, France, Germany, and
Transylvania.

But that the Saxons had this from the Normans, is a thing out of all question.
Their Grants or Letters Patents signed with Crosses, and subscribed with
Witnesses names, do give an undoubted credit and assurance to what I have said.
John Ross informs us that Henry Beauclerk was the first that made use of one of
Wax; and Matthew of Canterbury, that Edward the first did first hang it at the
bottom of his Royal Writings by way of Label; Matthew. Cantu. in Antiq. Eccles.
Britan.
whereas before, his Predecessors fastened it to the left side. Such a writing
of Henry the first in favor of Anselm, the last Author makes mention of; and
such an one of William's Duke of the Normans, though a very short one and very
small written; Brian Twine in his Apology for the Antiquity of the famous
University of Oxford (the great Study and support of England, Tuin. apol. ant
Oxon. lib. 1.. 81.
and my ever highly honored Mother) says, he had seen in the Library of the
Right Honorable my Lord Lumley.

But let a circumcised Jew, or who else will for me, believe that story
concerning the first Seal of Wax, and the first fastening of it to the Writing:
A great many waxen ones of the French Peers (that I may say something of those
in wax) and Golden ones of their Kings (to wit, betwixt the years 600 and 700)
we meet with fashioned like Scutcheons or Coats of Arms in those Patterns or
Copies which Francis de Rosieres has in his first Tome of the Pedigree or
Blazonry of the Dukes of Lorain, set down by way of Preface. Nor was it
possible that the Normans should not have that in use, which had been so
anciently practiced by the French. Let me add this out of the ancient Register
of Abendon: That Richard Earl of Chester (who flourished in the time of Henry
the first) ordered to sign a certain Writing with the Seal of his Mother
Ermentrude; Camden in Ord. Angl.
seeing that (being not girt with a Soldiers Belt, i. e. not yet made Knight)
all sorts of Letters directed by him, were enclosed with his Mothers Seal.

How? what is that I hear? Had the Knightly dignity and Order the singular
privilege, as it was once at Rome, to wear Gold-Rings? For Rings (as it is
related out of Ateius Capito) were especially designed and engraven for Seals:
Let Phoebus, who knows all things, Macrob. Saturn. lib. 7. cap. 13.
out of his Oracle tell us. For ^ervants or Slaves (so says Justus Lipsius, and
remarks it from those that had been dug up in Holland) and common Soldiers were
allowed iron ones to sign or to seal with (which therefore Flavius Vopiscus
calls annulos sigillaricios, Vopisc. in Aurel.
i. e. seal-Rings) and so your ordinary Masters of Families had such, with a
Key hanging at it to seal and lock up their provision and utensils. But, says
Ateius of the ancient time, Lips. ad 2. Annal. Tacit. number. 4.
Neither was it lawful to have more than one Ring, nor for any one to have one
neither but for Freemen, whom alone trust might become, which is preserved
under Seal; and therefore the Servants of a Family had not the Right and
Privilege of Rings. I come home to our selves now.

CHAP. III.
Other ways of granting and conveying Estates, by a Sword, etc. particularly by
a Horn. Godwin's trick to get Boseham of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Pleadings in French. The French Language and Hand when came in fashion.
Coverfeu-Laws against taking of Deer, against Murder, against Rape.

3. AT first many Lands and Estates were collated or bestowed by bare word of
mouth, Ingulph.
without Writing or Charter, only with the Lords Sword or Helmet, or a Horn or
a Cup; and very many Tenements with a Spur, with a Currycomb, with a Bow, and
some with an Arrow: But these things were in the beginning of the Norman Reign,
in after times this fashion was altered, says Ingulph.

I, and these things were before the Normans Government. Let King Edgar his
Staff cut in the middle, M^lmsb. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and given to Glastenbury Abbey for a testimony of his Grant, be also here for
a testimony. And our Antiquary has it of Pusey in Berkshire, That those who go
by the name of Pusey do still hold by a Horn, which heretofore had been
bestowed upon their Ancestors by Knute the Danish King. A. Chapter 780.
In like manner, to the same purpose an old Book tells this story: That one
Vlphus the Son of Toraldus, turned aside into York, and filled the Horn that he
was used to drink out of, with Wine; and before the Altar upon his bended
knees, drinking it, gave away to God and to St. Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles, all his Lands and Revenues. Which Horn of his, says Camden, we have
been told was kept or reserved down to our Fathers memory. We may see the
conveyance of Estate, how easy it was in those days, and clear from the
punctilio's of Law, and withal how free from the captious malice of those
petty-foggers who would entangle Titles and find flaws in them, and from the
swelling Bundles and Rolls of Parchments now in use.

But commend me to Godwin Earl of Kent, who was, to use Hegesander's word,
Guil. Mapaeus. Camden.
too great a (...), catcher at Syllables, and as the Comedian says, more
shifting than a Potters wheel: Give me (says he to the Archbishop of
Canterbury) Boseham. The Archbishop admiring what it was he would be at in
that question, says, I give you Boseham. He straight upon the confidence of
this deceit, without any more ado entered upon an Estate of the Arch Bishops of
that name on the Seacoasts of Sussex, Lib. feud. 2. tit. 2.
as if it had been his own by Inheritance: And with the testimony of his people
about him, spoke of the Archbishop before the King as the donor of it, and
quietly enjoyed it. Those things I spoke of before (to wit, of Sword, Horn,
etc.) smell of that way of investing into Fees which we meet with in Obertus de
Orto; but are very unlike to that solemn ceremony which is from ancient time
even still used in conveying of an Estate and delivering possession, wherein a
green Turf or the bough of a growing Tree is required.

4. They did so much abhor the English tongue ('it is the Abbot of Crowland says
it) that the Laws of the Land, and the Statutes of the English Kings, Stat. 36
Ed. 3. cap. 15.
were handled or pleaded in the French language. For till the thirty sixth year
of Edward the third, all businesses of Law were pleaded in French. That also in
Schools the Rudiments of Grammatical Institution, were delivered to Boys in
French and not in English. Also that the English way and manner of Writing was
laid aside, and the French mode was made use of in all Charters or Instruments
and Books.

Indeed it was such a fault to be ignorant in the French, or not to be able to
speak it; that mainly upon this account, Matthew. Paris.
in the Reign of William Rufus, Vlstan Bishop of Worcester was censured as
unworthy of his place, and deprived of his dignity, who as to other things
according to the simplicity of that Age, was Scholar enough. The Abbot whom I
quoted, speaks thus of the French Character: The Saxon hand was used by all the
Saxons and Mercians in all their hand-writings, till the time of King Alfred,
who had by French Tutors been very well trained up in all Literature; but from
the time of the said King, it did by disuse come to be of little account; and
the French hand, because it being more legible and more delightful to sight,
had the pre-eminence, grew more and more every day in vogue and use among all
the English. Nevertheless however this business went, we are told that in the
memory of our Fathers, and that by an ancient order, there were Lectures of the
English-Saxon language, read at Tavistock Abbey in Devonshire.

5. That his new Kingdom might not be disturbed by Riots and disorders in the
night, he ordered that at the Ringing of a Bell (which they called the
Curfew-Bell) all the Lights and Fires should in every little Cottage, a little
after the dusk of the Evening, be put out. Polydorus. Coverfeu.


6. He that should take a Deer, or aprum, a Boar (so says Huntingdon, but
perhaps it is caprum, a Buck) or a Roe, was to have his eyes thrust or plucked
out, says Matthew Paris.

7. If any one had slain any one ('it is Huntingdon writes this) be it upon what
cause or occasion soever, he was sentenced to a Capital punishment, he was to
die for it.

8. If one had forced any woman (so I read aliquam any woman, not aliquem any
man, as it is in the common Prints) he was to have his Privities cut off. Forced
her? I, sure enough; and perhaps he that lay with a woman with her consent, was
notwithstanding that, served in the same kind too. And in this case I would
have you hear what that great Lawyer Albericus Gentilis, his opinion is. This I
say, says he, Alberic. Gentil. de jure bell. lib. 1. c. 20.
that a man has a greater injury done him, if the woman were not ravished per
force, but were debauched and made willing: because in this case her mind is
estranged from her Husband; but in that other, not.

CHAP. IV.
Sheriffs and J^ries were before this time. The four Terms. Judges to Act
without Appeal. Justices of Peace. The Kings payments made at first in
Provisions. Afterward changed into Money, which the Sheriff of each County was
to pay in to the Exchequer. The Constable of Dover and Warden of the Cinque
Ports why made. A disorder in Church Affairs Reformed.

POlydore Virgil brings in at this time the first Sheriffs of Counties, and
here places the beginning of Juries, or determining of Trials by the judgment
of Twelve; but is out in them both. This of Juries is convinced by a Law of
Ethelred in Lambard's explications of Law-terms, and by those irrefragable
arguments which the famous Sir Edward Coke brings against it. That other
mistake of Sheriffs is confuted by what we have formerly noted out of Ingulph,
and by what we shall hereafter somewhere have occasion to remark. August. de
Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 10.

Pausan. Atticis.


Mars being impleaded in the Areopagus, the place of Judgment at Athens, for
the murder of Halirothius the Son of Neptune, whom he had slain for Ravishing
his Daughter Alcippa; upon his Trial by twelve Gods, was acquitted by six
Sentences or Votes: For if the number were equal and no majority, the Person
was not condemned but discharged. My meaning why I put in this Story, is to
show the most ancient use of this number of twelve in Trials elsewhere, as well
as amongst us. An Italian might well mistake in a concern of England; yet take
it not ill at my hands, that I have given you this upon his credit.

9. He appointed that four times every year, there should be kept Conventions
or Meetings for several days, Terms.
in such place as he himself should give order: In which Meetings the Judges
sitting apart by themselves, should keep Court and do Justice. These are our
four Terms.

10. He appointed other Judges, who without appeal should exercise Jurisdiction
and Judgment; from whom as from the bosom of the Prince, all that were engaged
in quarrels, addressing thither, might have right done them, and refer their
controversies to them.

11. He appointed other Rulers or Magistrates, who might take care to see
misdemeanors punished; Justices of Peace.
these he called Justices of Peace.

Now one may well imagine, that this name of Office is most certainly of a
later date, and a foreign Writer is to be excused by those rights which are
afforded to Guests and Strangers (since acting a Busiris his part against them,
would be downright barbarous) I say he is to be excused so far, as not to have
his mistakes in the History of the English Nation, too heavily charged upon him.

12. In the Primitive State of the Kingdom after the Conquest ( Gervase of
Tilbury in his Dialogue of the Exchequer, says, this is a thing handled down
from our Forefathers) the Kings had payments made them out of their Lands, not
in sums of Gold or Silver, but only in Victuals or Provisions: Out of which the
Kings house was supplied with necessaries for daily use; and they who were
deputed to this service (the Purveyors) knew what quantity arose from each
several land. But yet as to Soldiers pay or donatives, and for other
necessaries concerning the Pleas of the Kingdom, or Conventions, as also from
Cities and Castles where they did not exercise Husbandry or Tillage; in such
instances, payments were made in ready money. Wherefore this Institution lasted
all the time of William the First, to the time of King Henry his Son, so that I
my self ( Gervase flourished in the Reign of Henry the second) have seen some
people, who did at set times carry from the Kings Lands, victuals or provisions
of food to Court. And the Officers also of the Kings house knew very well,
having it upon account, which Counties were to send in Wheat, which to send in
several sorts of flesh, and Provender for the Horses. These things being paid
according to the appointed manner and proportion of every thing, the Kings
Officers reckoned to the Sheriffs by reducing it into a sum of pence; to wit,
for a measure of Wheat to make bread for a hundred men, one shilling; for the
body of a pasture-fed Beef, one shilling; for a Ram or a Sheep four pence; for
the allowance of twenty horses likewise four pence: But in process of time,
when as the said King was busy in remote parts beyond Sea to appease Tumults
and Insurrections; it so happened, that ready money was highly necessary for him
to supply his occasions. In the mean time, there came in multitudes, a great
company of Husbandmen with complaints to the Kings Court, or which troubled him
more, they frequently came in his way as he was passing by, holding up their
Ploughshares, in token that their Husbandry was running to decay; for they were
put to a world of trouble, upon occasion of the provisions which they carried
from their own quarters through several parts of the Kingdom. Thereupon the
King being moved with their complaints, did by the resolved advice of his
Lords, appoint throughout the Kingdom such persons, as he knew were, for their
prudence and discretion, fit for the service. These persons going about, and
that they might believe their own eyes, taking a view of the several Lands,
having made an estimate of the provisions which were paid out of them, they
reduced it into a sum of pence. But for the total sum, which arose out of all
the Lands in one County, they ordered, that the Sheriff of that County should
be bound to the Exchequer: Adding this withal, that he should pay it at the
Scale. Now the manner of paying, the trial of the weight and of the metal by
Chemical operation, the Melter or Coyner, and the surveyor of the Mint, are
more largely handled and explained by my self in some other work of mine.

13. That he might the more firmly retain Kent to himself, that being accounted
as it were the Key of England; ('it is the famous Mr. Camden tells the Story) he
set a Constable over Dover-Castle, and made the same person Warden of the
Cinque Ports, according to the old usage of the Romans. Those are Hastings,
Dover, Hith, Rumney, and Sandwich; to which are joined Winchelsey and Rye as
Principals, and other little Towns as Members.

14. To put the last hand to William, I add out of the Archives, this Law, not
to be accounted among the last or least of his. A. M. 66. In Bot. chart. 2
Rich. 2. pro decan. and capit. Eccles. Lincoln.
William, by the Grace of God, King of the English, to all Counts or Earls,
Viscounts or Sheriffs, and to all French born, and English men, who have Lands
in the Bishopric of Remigius, greeting.

This Remigius was the first who translated the Episcopal See from Dorchester
to Lincoln.

Be it known unto you all, and the rest of my Liege Subjects, who abide in
England; that I, by the common advice of my Archbishops, and the rest of the
Bishops and Abbots, and all the Princes of my Kingdom, have thought fit to
order the amendment of the Episcopal Laws, which have been down to my time, in
the Kingdom of the Angles, not well, nor according to the Precepts of the holy
Canons, ordained or administered: Wherefore I do command, and by my Royal
Authority strictly charge; that no Bishop or Archdeacon, do henceforth hold
Pleas in the Hundred concerning Episcopal Laws; nor bring any cause which
belongs to the Government of Souls ( i.e. to spiritual affairs) to the judgment
of secular men; but that whosoever, according to the Episcopal Laws, shall for
what cause or fault soever be summoned, shall come to a place which the Bishop
shall choose and name for this purpose; and there make answer concerning his
cause, and do right to God and his Bishop, not according to the Hundred, but
according to the Canons and Episcopal Laws. For in the time of the Saxon
Empire, there were wont to be present at those Country Meetings (the Hundred
Courts) an Alderman and a Bishop, Leg. Edgar. cap. 5.
the one for Spirituals, the other for Temporals, as appears by King Edgar's
Laws.

CHAP. V.
William Rufus succeeds. Annats now paid to the King. Why claimed by the Pope.
No one to go out of the Land without leave. Hunting of Deer made Felony.

AFter the death of William, his second Son WILLIAM surnamed RUFUS succeeded in
his room. All Justice of Laws (as Florentius of Worcester tells us) was now
hushed in silence, and Causes being put under a Vacation without hearing, money
alone bore sway among the great ones, Ipsaque majestas auro corrupta jacebat.
Petron. Arbit.
that is; And Majesty it self being bribed with gold,
Lay, as a prostitute, exposed to the bold.


15. The right or duty of First Fruits, or, as they are commonly called, the
Annats, which our Kings claimed from vacant Abbeys and Bishoprics, Polydor
Virgil will have to have had its first original from Rufus. Now the Popes of
Rome laid claim to them anciently; a sort of Tribute, which upon what right it
was grounded, Basil. council. sess. 21.

Duaren. de Benef. l. 6. c. 3. Vid. Platin. in Joh. 22. vita.


the Council of Basil will inform us, and by what opinion and resolution of
Divines and Lawyers confirmed, Francis Duarenus in his Sacred Offices of the
Church will instruct us. It Is certain, that Chronologers make mention, that at
his death the Bishoprics of Canterbury, Winchester and Salisbury, and twelve
Monasteries beside, being without Prelates and Abbots, paid in their Revenues
to the Exchequer.

16. He forbad by public Edict or Proclamation (says the same Author) that
any one should go out of England without his leave and Passport. We read, that
he forbad Anselm the Archbishop, that he should not go to wait upon Pope
Urban; but that he comprehended all Subjects whatsoever in this his Royal
order, I confess I have not met with any where in my reading, but in Polydor.

17. He did so severely forbid hunting of Deer (says William of Malmesbury)
that it was Felony, and a hanging matter to have taken a Stag or Buck.

CHAP. VI.
Henry the First why called Beauclerk. His Letters of Repeal. An Order for the
Relief of Lands. What a Hereot was. Of the Marriage of the Kings Homagers
Daughter, etc. Of an Orphans Marriage. Of the Widows Dowry. Of other Homagers
the like. Coynage-money remitted. Of the disposal of Estates. The Goods of
those that dye Intestate, now and long since, in the Churches Jurisdiction; as
also the business of Wills. Of Forfeitures. Of Misdemeanors. Of Forests. Of the
Fee de Hauberk. King Edward's Law restored.

WIlliam, who had by direful Fates been shown to the World, was followed by his
Brother Henry, who for his singular Learning, which was to him instead of a
Royal Name, was called Beau-clerk. He took care of the Commonwealth, by
amending and making good what had slipped far aside from the bounds of Justice,
and by softning with wholesome remedies those new unheard of, and most grievous
injuries, which Ralph afterward Bishop of Durham (being Lord Chief Justice of
the whole Kingdom) plagued the people with. He sends Letters of Repeal to the
High Sheriffs, to the intent, that the Citizens and people might enjoy their
liberty and free rights again. See here a Copy of them, as they are set down in
Matthew Paris.

HENRY by the Grace of God King of England, to Hugh of Bockland, High Sheriff,
and to all his Liege people, as well French as English in Herefordshire,
Greeting. Know ye, that I through the mercy of God, and by the common advice of
the Barons of the Kingdom of England have been crowned King. And because the
Kingdom was oppressed with unjust exactions, I out of regard to God, and that
love which I bear toward you all, do make the holy Church of God free, so that
I will neither sell it, nor will I put it to farm, nor upon the death of
Archbishop, or Bishop, or Abbot, will I take any thing of the domain of the
Church, or of the men thereof, till a Successor enter upon it. And all evil
Customs, wherewith the Kingdom of England was unjustly oppressed, I do
henceforward take away; which evil usages I do here in part set down.

18. If any one of my Barons, Counts or others that hold of me, shall dye, his
Heir shall not redeem his Land, as he was wont to do in the time of my Father,
but relieve it with a lawful and due relief. In like manner also shall the
Homagers or Tenants of my Barons relieve their Lands from their Lords with a
lawful and just relief. Canut. leg. cap. 69. and Ed. Confess. Bracton. lib. 2.
cap. 35.

(...) in Novell. Lev. 13. Hotoman. in verbo Feudal. Beleu.


It appears, that in the times of the Saxons a Hereot was paid to the Lord at a
Tenants death, upon the account of provision for War (for here in Saxon
signifies an Army:) and that which in our memory now in French is called a
Relief (Henry of Bracton says, it is an engagement to recognize the Lord) does
bear a resemblance of the ancient Hereot. Thereupon it is a guess, says
William Lambard, that the Normans being Conquerors, did remit the Hereot to the
Angles whom they had conquered and stripped of all kind of Armor, and that for
it they exacted money of the poor wretches. To this agrees that which is
mentioned in the State of England concerning the Nobles of Berkshire. A Tain or
Knight of the Kings holding of him, did at his death for a Relief part with all
his Arms to the King, and one Horse with a Saddle and another without a Saddle.
And if he had Hounds or Hawks, they were presented to the King, that if he
pleased he might take them. And in an ancient Sanction of Conrade the First,
Emperor of Germany, Carol. Sigon. de reg. Ital. lib. 8.

V. Hotom. comm. ad 3. lib. Feud. Mariana hist. Hispan. lib. 5. cap. 11.


If a Soldier that is Tenant or Lessee happen to dye, let his Heir have the
Fee, so that he observe the use of the greater Vavasors, in giving his Horses
and Arms to the Seniors or Lords. John Mariana takes notice, that the word
Seniors in the Vular Languages, Spanish, Italian and French, signifies Lords,
and that to have been in use from the time of Charlemain's Reign. But these
things you may have in more plenty from the Feudists, those who write
concerning Tenures.

19. If any of my Barons or other men (Homagers or Tenants) of mine (I return
to King Henry's Charter) shall have a mind to give his Daughter, or Sister, or
Niece, or Kinswoman in marriage, let him speak with me about it. But neither
will I take any thing of his for this leave and license, nor will I hinder him
from betrothing her, except he shall have a design of giving her to an enemy of
mine.

20. If upon the death of a Baron, or any other Homager of mine, there be left
a Daughter that is an Heiress, I will bestow her with the advice of my Barons
together with her Land.

21. If upon the death of the Husband, his Wife be left without Children, she
shall have her Dowry and right of Marriage, as long as she shall keep her body
according to Law; and I will not bestow her, but according to her own liking.
And if there be Children, either the Wife, or some one else near of kin shall
be their Guardian and Trustee of their Land, who ought to be just.

22. I give order, that my Homagers do in like manner regulate themselves
toward the Sons and Daughters and Wives of their Homagers.

23. The common Duty of Money or Coinage, which was taken through all Cities
and Counties, which was not in the time of King Edward, I do utterly forbid
that henceforward this be no more done.

24. If any one of my Barons or Homagers shall be sick and weak, according as
he himself shall give or order any one to give his money, I grant it so to be
given; but if he himself being prevented either by Arms or by Sickness, has
neither given his money, nor disposed of it to give, then let his Wife, or
Children, or Parents, and his lawful Homagers for his souls health divide it,
as to them shall seem best. And in Canutus his Laws, Canut. cap. 68
Let the Lord or Owner at his own discretion make a just distribution of what
he has to his Wife and Children and the next of kin.

But at this time, and long since, Church men have been as it were the
Distributors and Awarders of the Goods of such persons as dye Intestate, or
without making their Wills, and every Bishop as Ordinary in his own Diocese, is
the chief Judge in these cases.

2 Rich. 3. tit. Testament. 4.
John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury says it, and it is averred in the
Records of our Law, that this Jurisdiction also concerning Wills, was of old
long time ago in an ancient Constitution, entrusted to the Church by the
consent of the King and Peers. However, in what Kings time this was done,
neither does he relate, nor do I any where find, as William Lindwood in his
Provincial acknowledges. Lind provin. constit. de testam. c. Stae^urum. and de
immun. Eccles. c. Accidit, verb. Abolim. Glanvil. l. 7. c. ^.

C. de testam. l. Consulta divalia.


It is a thing very well known, that after Trial of right, Wills were wont to
be opened in the Ecclesiastical Court even in the Reign of Henry the Second (
Ralph Glanvill is my witness) contrary to what order was taken in the Imperial
Decrees of the Romans. And peradventure it will appear so to have been before
Glanvill, as he will tell you, if you go to him* although you have, quoted by
my self some where, a Royal Rescript or Order to a High Sheriff, That he do
justly and without delay cause to stand ( i. e. appoint and confirm) a
reasonable share to such an one; that is, that the Legatee may obtain and enjoy
his right, what was bequested to him by the Sheriffs help. I come back now to
my track again.

25. If any one of my Barons or Homagers shall make a forfeit, he shall not
give a pawn in the scarcity of his money, as he did in the time of my Brother
or my Father, but according to the quality of his forfeiture: nor shall he make
amends, as he would have done heretofore in my Brothers or Fathers time.

26. If he shall be convicted of perfidiousness or of foul misdemeanors, as his
fault shall be, so let him make amends.

27. The Forests by the common advice of my Barons, I have kept in mine own
hand, in the same manner as my Father had them.

28. To those Soldiers or Knights who hold and maintain their Lands by Coats
of Male (that is, Hotom. Feud. Hauber^ic. in Diction.
per fee de Hauberke, that they may be ready to attend their Lords with
Habergeons or Coats of Male completely armed Cap a pee) I grant the
Plough-lands of their Domains acquitted from all Gelds, and from every proper
Gift of mine, that, as they are eased from so great a Charge and Grievance, so
they may furnish themselves well with Horse and Arms, that they may be fit and
ready for my service, and for the defense of my Realm.

29. I restore unto you the Law of King Edward, with other amendments,
wherewith my Father amended it.

Those amendments are put forth by Lombard. Hitherto out of those Royal and
general Letters, directed to all the Subjects.

CHAP. VII.
His order for restraint of his Courtiers. What the punishment of Theft.
Coyners to lose their Hands and Privy-members. Guelding a kind of death. What
Halfpence and Farthings to pass. The right measure of the Eln. The Kings price
set for provisions.

30. HE did by his Edict or Proclamation, restrain the Rapines, Thefts, and
Rogueries of the Courtiers; ordering, that those who were caught in such
pranks, should have their Eyes with their Stones pulled out. This Malmesbury
supplies us with. But Florentius of Worcester and Roger Hoveden give the
account, that he punished Thieves with Death and Hanging, otherwise than that
pleasant and curious man Thomas Moor in his Vtopia would have his people to be
dealt with. Morus in Utopia, l. 2.
Yet I am inclined rather to believe Malmesbury; not only upon the authority of
the man, in comparison of whose Rose-beds (if you well weigh the Learning of
that Age) the other pack of Writers are but sorry low shrubs; but also upon the
account of a nameless Monk* who in his Book of the Miracles of S. Thomas of
Canterbury, De mirac. Thom. ap. Fox hist. eccles. lib. 4.
tells us a story of one Eilward, a poor mean fellow of Kingsweston in
Berkshire, who being in the Reign of King Henry the Second condemned of Theft
(he had it seems stolen a pair of Country Gloves and a Whetstone) was punished
by losing his Eyes and Privities; who coming with devotion to S. Thomas his
Tomb, got an entire restitution of his disappearing Members and Faculties, and
was as good a man as ever he was. Perchance in this he is no witness of
infallible credit. Let the story of Iphis and Ianthis, and that of Ceneus try
Masteries with this for the Whetstone; to our purpose the Writer is trusty
enough. But in the first times of the Normans, I perceive, that the Halter was
the ill consequence of Theft. Let it be lawful for the Abbot of that Church, if
he chance to come in in the God speed, to acquit an High-way-man or Thief from
the Gallows. They are the words of the Patent with which William the
Conqueror, to expiate the slaughter of Harald, consecrated a Monastery to S.
Martin near Hastings on the Seacoast of Sussex, and privileged it with choice
and singular rights.

31. Against Cheats, whom they commonly call Coyners ('it is Malmesbury speaks
again) he showed his particular diligence, permitting no cheating fellow to
escape scot-free, without losing his Fist or Hand, who had been understood to
have put tricks upon silly people with the traffic of their falsehood. For all
that, he who has tackt a supplement to Florentius of Worcester, and William
Gemeticensis give out, that the Counterfeiters and Imbasers of Coin had, Guli.
Gemetic. de ducib. Norm. lib. 7. cap. 23.
over and above those parts cut off, which Galen accounts to be the principal
instruments for propagating of the kind. To whom Hoveden agrees, who writes in
the Life of Henry the First, That Coyners by the Kings order being taken, had
their right H^nds and their Privy-members cut off. Upon this account sure, that
he that was guilty of such a wicked crime, should have no hope left him of
posterity, nor the Commonwealth be in any further fear of those who draw
villainous principles from the loins of those that beget them.

Now at this very time and in former Ages too, this piece of Treason was
punished with Halter and Gallows; and that also of Theft not only in England,
Fest. Latro. Heb. (...) latro a (...) latus.

Bodin. de rep. l. 6. c. 6. Did. 55. c. 4. ff. Ad leg. Corn. de Sicar. l. 4..
ult.

Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. c. 23. and Stams. plac. Coron. l. 1. c. 38.


but almost in all Countries, especially Robbery upon the Highway, which is
committed by those who lay wait to surprise Passengers as they travel along
upon one or other side of them; whence not only in the Latin, but in the holy
Language also, a High-way-man has his name. And truly among the Ancients
guelding was looked upon as a kind of death. The Apostles Canons give him the
character and censure of a Manslayer, who cuts off his own Privities (who lives
all his life a Bachelor, say the Talmudists) and he who cuts off another man's,
is in danger of the Cornelian Law concerning Murderers and Cutthroats; and so
was it heretofore among the English.

32. He ordered (they are Hoveden's words) that no halfpenny, which also he
commanded should be made round, or farthing also, if it were entire, should be
refused.

33. He corrected the Merchants false Eln (so says the Monk of Malmesbury)
applying the measure of his Arm, and proposing that to all people over England.

34. He gave order to the Courtiers, in whatsoever Cities or Villages he were,
how much they were to take of the Country people gratis, and at what price to
buy things; punishing offenders herein either with a great Fine of money, or
with loss of life.

CHAP. VIII.
The Regality claimed by the Pope, but within a while resumed by the King. The
Coverfeu dispensed with. A Subsidy for marrying the Kings Daughter. The
Courtesy of England. Concerning Shipwreck. A Tax levied to raise and carry on
a War.

35. ANselm Archbishop of Canterbury labors earnestly with the Pope and his
party, and at length obtains it with much ado, that from that time forward (you
have it in Florilegus after other Writers) never any one should be invested
with a Pastoral Staff or a Ring into a Bishopric or Abbacy by the King, or any
Lay-person whatsoever in England, (added out of Malmesbury) retaining however
the privilege of Election and Regality. There was a sharp bickering about this
business betwixt the King and Anselm; and so between the Popes Paschalis and
Calixtus and Henry about that time Emperor. Both of them at least pretendedly
quit their right; our King humouring the Scene according to the present
occasion. For after Anselm's death, he did invest Rodulphus that came in his
room by a Ring and a Pastoral Staff.

36. He restored the Night-Torches or Lights which William the First had
forbidden; Stow, and v. Malmesb. l. 5. de gest. reg. fol. 88.
forasmuch as he now had less reason to apprehend any danger from them, the
Kingdom being in a better and firmer posture.

37. To make up a portion for Mawd the Kings Daughter, married to Henry the
Emperor, every Hide of Land paid a Tribute of Three Shillings. Here Polydore
makes his descant. Afterward, says he, The rest of the Kings followed that
course of raising Portions for the bestowal of their Daughters; so tenacious
has posterity always been of their own advantages. It is scarce to be doubted,
that the right of raising money for the marrying of the Lords Daughters by way
of Aid or Subsidy upon the Tenants or Dependants, is of a more ancient
original. Neither would I fetch it from the mutual engagement of Romulus his
Patrons and Clients, or Landlords and Tenants, or from Suetonius his Caligula:
rather from the old Customs of the Normans, more ancient than King Henry: where
that threefold Tribute is explained by the name of Aid, which the Patent
granted by King John in favor of public liberty mentions in these words: I
will impose no Escuage or Aid in our Realm, but by the common advice of our
Realm; unless it be to ransom our Body, and to make our firstborn Son a
Soldier or Knight, and to marry our eldest Daughter once.

38. Some ascribe that Law to Henry, Spec. Just. cap. des articles, etc.
which Lawyers call the Courtesy of England; whereby a man having had a Child
by his Wife, when she dies, enjoyes her Estate for his life.

39. He made a Law, that poor shipwrackt persons should have their Goods
restored to them, if there were any living creature on Shipboard, that escaped
drowning. Lamb. Itinerar. Cant. West. 1. c. 4.
Forasmuch as before that time, whatsoever through the misfortune of shipwreck
was cast on Shore, was adjudged to the Exchequer; except that the persons who
suffered shipwreck and had escaped alive, did themselves within such a time
refit and repair the Vessel. So the Chronicle of the Monastery of S. Martin de
Bello. This right is called Wreck, or if you will, Uareck, of the Sea. How
agreeable to the Law of Nations, I trouble not my self to enquire. That more
ancient Custom, is as it were suitable to the Norman usage. Now at this time
our Lawyers (and that the more modern Law of Edward the First) pass judgment
according to the more correct Copy of King Henry. And they reckon it too among
the most ancient Customs of the Kingdom. Pat. 46 Ed. 3.
Did therefore King Richard order, or did Hoveden relate this to no purpose, or
without any need? If one who suffers shipwreck dye in the Ship, let his Sons or
Daughters, his Brethren or Sisters have what he left, according as they can
show and make out that they are his next heirs. Or if the deceased have neither
Sons nor Daughters, nor Brothers nor Sisters, the King is to have his Chattels.
Can one imagine, that this Law he made at Messina, when he was engaged in War,
was calculated only for that time or place? Certainly in the Archives there is
elsewhere to be met with as much as this.

40. That he might with a stout Army bear the brunt of Baldwin Earl of Flanders
and Louis King of France, who had conspired, being bound by mutual Oaths to one
another with the Duke of Anjou, to take away from King Henry by force of Arms
the Duchy of Normandy, he first of all (it is Polydore avers it) laid a heavy
Tax upon the people, to carry on the new War; which thing with the Kings that
followed after, grew to be a custom.

He was the last of the Normans of a Male descent, and as to the method of our
undertaking, here we treat of him last.

CHAP. IX.
In King Stephen's Reign all was to pieces. Abundance of Castles built. Of the
privilege of Coining. Appeals to the Court of Rome now set on foot. The Roman
Laws brought in, but disowned. An instance in the Wonder-working Parliament.

AS of old, unless the Shields were laid up, there was no Dancing at Weddings;
so except Arms be put aside, there is no pleading of Laws. That Antipathy
betwixt Arms and Laws, England was all over sensible of, if ever at any time,
in the Reign of K. STEPHEN, Count of Blois, King Henry's Nephew by his Sister
Adela. For he did not only break the Law and his Oath too to get a Kingdom, but
also being saluted King, by those who perfidiously opposed Mawd the right and
true heir of King Henry, he reigned with an improved wickedness. For he did so
strangely and odly chop and change every thing (it is Malmsbury speaks it) as
if he had sworn only for this intent, that he might show himself to the whole
Kingdom, a Dodger and Shammer of his Oath. But, as he says, -- perjuros merito
perjuria fallunt? Ovid. Art. Am. lib. 1.
that is, Such men as Perjuries do make their Trade,
By their own Perjuries most justly are betrayed.
They are things of custom to which he swore, and such as whereby former
privileges are ratifed, rather than new ones granted. However, some things
there are, that may be worth the transcribing.

41. Castles were frequently raised ('it is Nubrigensis relates it) in the
several Counties by the bandying of parties; and there were in England in a
manner as many Kings, or rather as many Tyrants, as Lords of Castles, having
severally the stamping of their own Coin, and a power of giving Law to the
Subjects after a Royal manner. Then was the Kingdom plainly torn to pieces, and
the right of Majesty shattered, which gains to it self not the least luster
from stamping of Money. Though I know very well, that before the Normans, V.
Leg. Athelstan. 14.
in the City of Rochester, Canterbury, and in other Corporations and Towns,
Abbots and Bishops had by right of privilege their Stampers and Coiners of
Money.

42. Next to the King, Theobald Arch Bishop of Canterbury presided over the
Council of London (where there were also present the Peers of the Realm) which
buzzed with new appeals. For in England (it is Henry of Huntington says it)
appeals were not in use, till Henry Bishop of Winchester, when he was Legate,
cruelly intruded them to his own mischief. Wherefore what Cardinal Bellarmin
has writ, Bellarm. l. 2. de Romans Poutif. c. 21.
beginning at the Synod of Sardis, concerning the no body knows how old time of
the universal right of appealing to the Pope of Rome, does not at all, as to
matter of fact, seem to touch upon this Kingdom of ours by many and many a fair
mile.

43. In the time of King Stephen (so it is in the Polycraticon of John of
Salisbury) the Roman Laws were banished the Realm, Polycrat. l. 8. c. 22.
which the Horse of the Right Reverend Theobald Lord Primate of Britanny had
fetched or sent for over into Britanny. Besides, it was forbidden by Royal
Proclamation, that no one should retain or keep by him the Books. If you
understand the Laws of the Empire (I rather take them to be the Decrees of the
Popes) it will not be much amiss, out of the Parliament Records to adjoyn these
things of later date. In the Parliament holden by Richard of Bourdeaux, which
is said to have wrought Wonders, Upon the Impeachment of Alexander Nevil
Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Uere Duke of Ireland, Michael Pole Earl of
Suffolk, Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundel, Thomas Beauchamp
Earl of Warwick, and others, That they being entrusted with the management of
the Kingdom, by soothing up the easy and youthful temper of the King, did
assist one another for their own private interest, more than the public, well
near to the ruin and overthrow of the Government it self; the Common Lawyers
and Civilians are consulted with, about the form of drawing up the Charge;
which they answer all as one man, was not agreeable to the rule of the Laws.
But the Barons of Parliament reply, That they would be tied up to no rules, nor
be led by the punctilioes of the Roman Law, but would by their own authority
pass judgment; Rot. Parl. 11 Rich. 2.
pur ce que la royalme d' Angleterre n' estoit devant ces heures, n'y a l'
intent de nostre dit Seigneur le Roy and Seigneurs de Parliament unque ne serra
rules ne gouvernes per la Loy Civil: that is, inasmuch as the Realm of England
was not before this time, nor in the intention of our said Lord the King and
the Lords of Parliament ever shall be ruled or governed by the Civil Law. And
hereupon the persons impleaded are sentenced to be banished.

But here is an end of Stephen: He fairly dyed.

CHAP. X.
In King Henry the Seconds time, the Castles demolished. A Parliament held at
Clarendon. Of the Advowson and Presentation of Churches. Estates not to be
given to Monasteries without the Kings leave. Clergymen to answer in the Kings
Court. A Clergyman convict, out of the Churches Protection. None to go out of
the Realm, without the Kings leave. This Repealed by King John. Excommunicate
Persons to find Surety. Laymen how to be impleaded in the Ecclesiastical Court.
A Lay-Jury to swear there, in what case. No Homager or Officer of the Kings to
be Excommunicated, till He or his Justice be acquainted.

AT length, though late first, Henry the Son of Jeoffry Plantagenet, Count of
Angers by the Empress Mawd, came to his Grandfatherrs Inheritance. Having
demolished and levelled to the ground, the Castles which had, in King Stephen's
time, been built, to the number of eleven hundred and fifteen; and having
retrieved the right of Majesty into its due bounds, he confirmed the Laws of
his Grandfather. Moreover, at Clarendon in Wiltshire, near Salisbury, John of
Oxford being President, by the Kings own Mandate, there being also present the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and Peers of the Realm,
other Laws are recognized and passed; whilst at first those who were for the
King on one side, those who were for the Pope on the other, with might and main
stickle to have it go their way; these latter pleading, that the secular Court
of Justice did not at all suit with them, upon pretense that they had a
privilege of Immunity. But this would not serve their turn; for such kind of
Constitutions as we are now setting down, had the Vogue.

44. If any Controversy concerning the Advowson and Presentation of Churches,
arise betwixt Laymen, or betwixt Laymen and Clergymen, or betwixt Clergymen
among themselves; let it be handled and determined in the Court of the Lord our
King.

45. The Churches which are in the Kings Fee, cannot be given to perpetuity
without his assent and concession. Camden.
Even in the Saxons times it seems it was not lawful, without the Kings favor
first obtained, to give away Estates to Monasteries; for so the old Book of
Abington says. A Servant of King Ethelred's called Vlfric Spot, built the Abbey
of Burton in Staffordshire, and gave to it all his Paternal Estate, A. 1004.
appraised at seven hundred pounds; and that this donation might be good in
Law, he gave King Ethelred three hundred Marks of Gold for his confirmation of
it, and to every Bishop five Marks, and over and above to Alfric Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Village of Dumbleton.

46. Clergymen being arighted and accused of any matter whatsoever, having been
summoned by the Kings Justice, let them come into his Court, there to make
answer to that, of which it shall be thought fit that there answer ought to be
made: So that the Kings Justice send into the Court of Holy Church, to see
after what manner the business there shall be handled.

47. If a Clergyman shall be convicted, or shall confess the Fact; the Church
ought not from thenceforth to give him protection.

48. It is not lawful for Archbishops, Bishops, and Persons of the Kingdom, to
go out of the Realm without leave of our Lord the King: And if they do go out,
if the King please, they shall give him security, that neither in going, nor in
returning, or in making stay, they seek or devise any mischief or damage
against our Lord the King. Whether you refer that Writ, we meet with in the
Register or Record, NE EXEAS REGNVM, for Subjects not to depart the Kingdom to
this time or instance, or with Polydore Virgil to William Rufus, or to later
times, is no very great matter: Nor will it be worth our while, curiously to
handle that question: For who, in things of such uncertainty, is able to fetch
out the truth? Nor will I abuse my leisure, or spend time about things
unapproachable. Metamor. l. 10.
An sit and hic dubito, sed and hic tamen auguror esse. Says the Poet in another
case: And so say I. Whether it be here or no,
Is a Question, I confess:
And yet for all that, I trow,
Here it is too, as I guess.


Out of King John's great Charter, as they call it, you may also compare or
make up this Repeal of that Law in part. Let it be lawful henceforward for any
one to go out of our Realm, and to return safely and securely by Land and by
Water, upon our Royal word; unless in time of War, for some short time, for the
common advantage of the Kingdom; excepting those that are imprisoned and
outlawed according to the Law of the Kingdom, and any People or Nation, that
are in actual War against us: And Merchants, concerning whom let such Order be
taken, as is before directed. I return to King Henry.

49. Excommunicate Persons ought not to give suretiship for the Remainder, nor
to take an Oath; but only to find Surety and Pledge, to stand to the Judgment
of the Church, that they may be absolved.

50. Persons of the Laity ought not to be accused or impleaded but by certain
and legal Accusers and Witnesses, in the presence of the Archbishop or Bishop;
so that the Arch Deacon may not lose his right, nor any thing which he ought to
have therefrom.

51. If they be such Persons who are in fault, as no one will or dare to
accuse; let the Sheriff being thereunto required by him, cause twelve legal men
of the Voisinage or of the Village, to swear before the Bishop, that they will
manifest or make known the truth of the matter according to their Conscience.

52. Let no one who holds of the King in capite, nor any one of the Kings
Officers or Servants of his Domain, be excommunicated; nor the Lands of any of
them be put under an Interdict or prohibition; unless first our Lord the King,
if he be in the Land, be spoke with; or his Justice, if he be out of the Land,
that they may do right by him: And so that what shall appertain to the Kings
Court, may be determined there; and as to what shall belong to the
Ecclesiastical Court, it may be sent thither and there treated of.

CHAP. XI.
Other Laws of Church affairs. Concerning Appeals. A Suit betwixt a Clergyman
and a Layman, where to be Tried: In what case one, who relates to the King, may
be put under an Interdict. The difference betwixt that and Excommunication.
Bishops to be present at Trials of Criminals, until Sentence of Death, etc.
pass. Profits of vacant Bishoprics, etc. belong to the King. The next Bishop
to be Chosen in the Kings Chapel, and to do Homage before Consecration.
Deforcements to the Bishop, to be righted by the King. And on the contrary,
Chattels forfeit to the King, not to be detained by the Church. Pleas of debts
whatsoever in the Kings Court. Yeomens Sons not to go into Orders without the
Lords leave.

V. Rog. Hoveden. fol. 303.
53. COncerning Appeals, if at any time there shall be occasion for them, they
are to proceed from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the
Archbishop; and if the Archbishop shall be wanting in doing of Justice, they
must come in the last place to our Lord the King; that by his precept or order,
the Controversy may be determined in the Archbishops Court, so as that it
ought not to proceed any further without the Kings assent. This Law, long
since, the famous Sir Edward Coke made use of, to assert and maintain the Kings
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Coke praesat. ad Lib. 6.
as a thing not of late taken up by him, but anciently to him belonging.

54. If a Claim or Suit shall arise betwixt a Clergyman and a Layman, or
betwixt a Layman and a Clergyman, concerning any Tenement which the Clergyman
would draw to the Church, and the Layman to a Lay-fee; it shall by the
recognizance of twelve legal men, upon the consideration and advisement of the
Lord Chief Justice, be determined, whether the Tenement do appertain to Alms (
i. e. to the Church) or to Lay-Estate, before the Kings own Justice. And if it
shall be recognized or adjudged to appertain to Alms; it shall be a Plea in the
Ecclesiastical Court: But if to a Lay-fee, unless they both avow or avouch the
Tenement from the same Bishop or Baron, it shall be a Plea in the Kings Court.
But if each of them shall for that fee avouch the same Bishop or Baron, it
shall be a Plea in that Bishops or Barons Court; so that he who was formerly
seized, shall not, by reason of the Recognizance made, lose the Seisin, till it
shall by Plea be deraigned.

55. He who shall be of a City, or a Castle, or a Borough, or a Manner of the
Kings Domain, if he shall be cited by an Archdeacon or a Bishop, upon any
misdemeanour, upon which he ought to make answer to him, and refuse to satisfy
upon their summons or citations; they may well and lawfully put him under an
Interdict or Prohibition; but he ought not to be Excommunicated.

(By the way) seasonably remark out of the Pontificial Law, that that
Excommunication, they call the greater, removes a man and turns him out from
the very Communion and Fellowship of the Faithful; and that an Interdict, as
the lesser Excommunication, separates a man, and lays him aside only,
forbidding him to be present at Divine Offices, and the use of the Sacraments.)
I say he ought not to be Excommunicated, before that the Kings Chief Justice of
that Village or City be spoken with, that he may order him to come to
satisfaction: And if the Kings Justice fail therein, he shall be at the Kings
mercy, and thereupon or after that the Bishop may punish him upon his
impleadment, with the Justice of the Church.

56. Archbishops, Bishops, and all Persons whatsoever of the Kingdom, who hold
of the King in capite, and have their possessions from our Lord the King in
nature of a Barony, and thereupon make answer to the Kings Justices and
Officers, and perform all Rights and Customs due to the King as other Barons
do; they ought to be present at the Trials of the Court of our Lord the King
with his Barons, until the losing of Limbs or death, be adjudged to the party
tried.

57. When an Archbishopric or Bishopric, or Abbacy, or Priory of the Kings
Domain shall be void; it ought to be in his hand, and thereof shall he receive
all the profits and issues as belonging to his Domain: And when the Church is
to be provided for, our Lord the King is to order some choice persons of the
Church, and the Election is to be made in the Kings own Chapel, by the assent
of our Lord the King, and by the advice of those persons of the Kingdom, whom
he shall call for that purpose; and there shall the Person Elect (saving his
order) before he be Consecrated, do Homage and Fealty to our Lord the King, as
to his Liege Lord, for his life and limbs, and for his Earthly Honor.

58. If any one of the Nobles or Peers do deforce to do Justice to an
Archbishop, Bishop, or Archdeacon, for themselves or those that belong to
them; the King in this case is to do justice.

59. If peradventure any one shall deforce to the Lord the King his Right; the
Archbishop, Bishop, and Archdeacon, ought then in that case to do justice (or
to take a course with him) that he may give the King satisfaction.

60. The Chattels of those who are in the Kings forfeit, let not the Church or
Churchyard detain or keep back against the justice of the King; because they
are the Kings own, whether they shall be found in Churches or without.

61. Pleas of debts which are owing, either with security given, or without
giving security, let them be in the Kings Court.

62. The Sons of Yeomen or Country people, ought not to be ordained or go into
holy Orders, without the assent of the Lord, of whose Land they are known to
have been born.

CHAP. XII.
The Statutes of Clarendon mis-reported in Matthew Paris, amended in
Quadrilegus. These Laws occasioned a Quarrel between the King and Thomas a
Becket. Witness Robert of Gloucester, whom he calls Yumen. The same as Rusticks,
i. e. Villains. Why a Bishop of Dublin called Scorch-Uillein. Villanage before
the Normans time.

I Confess there is a great difference between these Laws and the Statutes of
Clarendon, put forth in the larger History of Matthew Paris, I mean those
mangled ones; and in some places, what through great gaps of sense,
disjointings of Sentences, and misplacings of words, much depraved ones, whose
misfortune I ascribe to the carelessness of Transcribers. But the latter end of
a Manuscript Book commonly called Quadrilegus, (wherein the Life of Thomas,
Archbishop of Canterbury, is out of four Writers, to wit, Hubert of Boseham,
John of Salisbury, William of Canterbury, and Alan, Abbot of Tewksbury,
digested into one Volume) has holp us to them amended as you may see here, and
set to rights. It is none of our business to touch upon those quarrels, which
arose upon the account of these Laws betwixt the King and Thomas of Canterbury:
Our Historians do sufficiently declare them. In the mean time, may our Poet of
Gloucester have leave to return upon the Stage, and may his Verses written in
ancient Dialect, comprising the matter which we have in hand, be favorably
entertained.

No man ne might thenche the love that there was
Bitwene the K. H. and the good man S. Thomas;
The devil had enui thereto, and fed bitwen them feu,
Alas, alas thulke stond, vor all to well it greu.
Uor there had ere ibe kings of Luther deed
As W. Bastard, and his son W. the read.
That Luther Laws made inou, and held in all the land
The K. nold not believe the laws that he fond,
Ne that his elderne hulde, ne the godeman S. Thomas
Thought that thing age right never law nas.
Ne sothnes and custom mid strength up ihold,
And he wist that ure dear Lourd in the Gospel told
That he himself was sothnes, and custum naught,
Theruore Luther custumes he nould graent naught.
Ne the K. nould bileue that is elderne ad ihold,
So that conteke sprung bituene them manifold.
The K. drou to right law mani Luther custume,
S. Thomas they withsed, and granted some.
The Laws that icholle now tell he granted vawe.
Zuf a yuman has a sone to clergi idraw
He ne sall without is lourdes icrouned naught be
Uor yuman ne may naught be made again is lourds will free.
Those that are born Slaves, or that other sort of servants termed Villains, he
calls by the name of Yumen. We call freeborn Commoners, alike as Servants, as
it were with a badg of ignobleness or ungentility, 40 Assi^. pl. 21. and 32.
Ed. 3. ti^. Bar. 2^1.
Yeomen; and those who of that number are married men, Gommen; for it was
Gomman in the old Dutch, not Goodman, as we vulgarly pronounce it, which
signified a married man. Words, as I am verily persuaded, made from the Latin,
Homines; which very word, by Ennius and Festus, according to the Oscan Idiom,
is written Hemones, and in our Language, which comes pretty near that spelling
of the Poet, Yeomen. And the Etymon or Origination of the word it self, is very
much confirmed by the opinion of some of our own Country Lawyers, who take (but
with a mistake) Homines, i. e. men that do homage, and Nativos, i. e. born
Slaves, in ancient Pleas to be terms equipollent, and of the same importance.
The Constitution of Clarendon style those Rusticks or Countrymen, whom he calls
Yumen; and Rusticks and Villains (those among the English were slaves or
servants) were anciently synonymous words, meaning the same thing. For whereas
Henry Londres, Arch Bishop of Dublin, had treacherously committed to the
flames, the Charters of his Rustic Tenants, the Free Tenants called him, as we
read in the Annals of Ireland, Scorch-Uillein; as if one would say, Annal.
Hiber. 1212. sub Henr. 3. Malmsb. l. 2. de gest. reg. c. 8. and Ingulph. fol.
519.
the burner or firer of Villains.

Nor should I think it unseasonable in this place, to take notice of a mistake
or oversight of Thomas Spott, a Monk of Canterbury; who writes, that the
English, before the Norman Conquest, knew nothing of private servitude or
bondage; i. e. had no such thing as Villanage among them: For he is convinced
both by the Maid of Andover, King Edgar's Miss, Malmsb. l. 1. de gest. Pont.
as also by the Laws signed and sealed by King Ina, and by that Donation or
Grant Torald of Buk^nhale made to Walgate, Abbot of Crowland; wherein among
other things a great many servants are mentioned, with their whole suits and
services. Take it also out of the Synod of London, Anselme being President of
it (since here belike there is mention made of Servants) That no one
henceforward presume to use that ungodly practice, which hitherto they were
wont in England to do, to sell, or put to sale, men, (that is, Servants) like
brute Beasts.

But we do not do civilly to interrupt the Poet: We must begin again with him;
he once more tunes his Pipes.

Another thing he granted eke as ye mow novise;
Yuf a man of holy Chirch has eni lay fee,
Parson, other what he be, he ssal do therevore
Kings service that there valth, that is right ne be vorlore,
In plaiding and in assise be and in judgment also.
Bote war man ssal be bilemed, other to death ido.
He granted eke yuf eni man the Kings traitor were,
And eni man is chateux to holy chirch bear
That holy chirch ne sold naught the chateux there let
That the K. there other is as is own is ne wette.
Uor all that the felon has the Kings it is
And each man may in holy church is own take iwis.
He granted eke that a church of the Kings fe
In none stead ene and ever ne ssold igiue be
As to house of religion, without the Kings leve,
And that he other the patron the gift first gave.
S. Thomas granted well these and other mo
And these other he withsede that did him well woe.
I. Yuf bituene twei lewd men were eni striving,
Other bituene a lewd and a clerc, for holy chirch thing
As vor vouson of chirch whether should the chirch give,
The K. would that in his court the ple ssold be drive;
Uor as much as a lewd man that the o parti was
Chanliche was under the K. and under no bishop nas.
CHAP. XIII.
The Poet gives account which of those Laws were granted by Thomas a Becket,
which withstood. Lendemen signifies Laymen, and more generally all illiterate
Persons.

THat which this Author of ours calls Leudemen, the Interpreters of Law, both
our Common and the Canon Law call Laics, or Laymen. For as (...), i. e.
people, as it it is derived by Caesar Germanicus, upon Aratus his Phenomenon
after Pindar, (...), i. e. from a Stone, Caes. Germ. ad Arat. in Aquario.

Pindar. Olym. 9.


denotes a hard and promiscuous kind of men; so the word Leudes imports the
illiterate herd, the multitude or rabble, and all those who are not taken into
holy Orders. Justus Lipsius in his Poliorceticks, discourses this at large;
Lips. Poliorcet. lib. 1. dissert. 2.
where he searches out the origination of Leodium or Liege, the chief City of
the Eburones in the Netherlands. As to what concerns our language, John Gower
and Jeoffry Chaucer, who were the Reformers and Improvers of the same in Verse,
do both make it good. Thus Jeoffry. Chauc. in Prolog. of the Sumners tale.
No wonder is a leude man to rust
If a Priest be foul on whom we trust.
However, that it signifies an illiterate or unlearned person, as well as one
not yet in orders; what he says elsewhere, informs us. This every lewd Uicar
and Parson can say. And Peter of Blois, and others, use this expression; Pet.
Blesens. app. ad Ingulph.
as well Laymen as Scholars. But let not Chaucer take it ill, that here he must
give way to our Gloucester Muse.

II. Another was that no cl^re, ne bishop nath mo,
Ne ssolde without Kings love out of the land go.
And that hii ssolde suere up the book ywis.
That hii ne sold purchase no uvel the K. ne none of is.
III. The third was yuf eni man in mausing were I brought,
And suth come to amendment, ne age were naught
That he ne suore ^p the boc, ac borowes find sold
To stand to that holy Chirch there of him toky would.
IV. The verth was that no man that of the K. huld ought
In chief or in eni servise in mausing were ibrought,
Bote the wardeins of holy chirch that brought him thereto,
The K. sede or is bailifes wat he ad misdo,
And looked verst were they to amendment it bring,
And vote hii would by their leave do the mausing.
V. The vist was, that bishoprikes and Abbeis also
That vacans were of prelas in the K. hand were ido,
And that the K. sold all the land as is own take,
Uort at last that him lust eni prelat there make.
And than thulke prelat sold in is chapel ichose be.
Of is clarks which he wuld to such prelace bise.
And than wan he were ichose in is chapel right year,
Homage he sold him do ar he confirmed were.
VI. The sixth was yuf eni play to chapitle were idraw,
And eni man made is appele, yuf me dude him unlaw,
That to the Bishop from Ercedeken is appele sold make,
And from Bishop to Arcebissop and suth none other take,
And but the Ercebisops court to right him would bring,
That he sold from him be cluthe biuore the King.
And from the K. non other mo so that attan end
Plaining of holy chirch to the K. should wend.
And the K. amend sold the Ercebissops deed,
And be as in the Popes stude, and S. Thomas it withsede.
VII. The seuethe was that plaiding that of det were
To yield well thoru truth iplight, and naught ihold nere
Althei thoru truth it were, that ple sold be ibrought
Biuore the K. and is bailies and to holy chirch naught.
VIII. The eighth that in the land citation none nere
Thoru bull of the Pope of Rome, and clean bileued were.
IX. The nithe was that Peter's pence that me gadereth manion
The Pope nere naught on isend, ac the K. echone.
X. The tethe was yuf eni Clarke as felon were itake,
And vor felon iproved and ne might it not forsake,
That me sold him verst disordein and suth thoru there law,
And thoru judgment of the land hong him other to draw.
Uor these and vor other mo the Godeman S. Thomas
Fleu verst out of England and eke imartred was,
Uor he sei there nas bote o way other he must stiff be
Other holy chirch was isent, that of right was so fre.
CHAP. XIV.
The Pope absolves Thoms a Becket from his Oath, and damns the Laws of
Clarendon. The King resents it, writes to his Sheriffs, Orders a Seizure.
Penalties inflicted on Kindred. He provides against an Interdict from Rome. He
summons the Bishops of London and Norwich. An Account of Peter Pence.

TO the Laws of Clarendon, which I spoke of, the States of the Kingdom (the
Baronage) and with them the Archbishop of Canterbury, took their Oaths in
solemn manner, calling upon God. There were Ambassadors sent to Pope Alexander
the third, that there might be that bottom also, that he would further confirm
and ratify them. But he was so far from doing that, that he did not only
pretend that they did too much derogate from the privilege of the Clergy, and
wholly refuse to give his assent to them; but also having absolved Thomas the
Archbishop, at his own request, from the obligation of that Oath he had bound
himself with, he condemned them as impious, and such as made against the
interest and honor of holy Church. King Henry, as soon as he heard of it, took
it, as it was fit he should, very much in dudgeon; grievously and most
deservedly storming at the insolence of the Roman Court, and the Treachery of
the Bishop of Canterbury. Immediately Letters were dispatched to the several
Sheriffs of the respective Counties, That if any Clerk or Layman in their
Bayliwicks, should appeal to the Court of Rome, they should seize him and take
him into firm custody; till the King give order what his pleasure is: And that
they should seize into the Kings hand, and for his use, all the Revenues and
Possessions of the Archbishops Clerks; and of all the Clerks that are with the
Archbishop; they should put by way of safe pledge the Fathers, Mothers, and
Sisters, Nephews and Neeces, and their Chattels, till the King give order what
his pleasure is. I have told the Story out of Matthew Paris.

You see in this instance a penalty, where there is no fault: It affects or
reaches to their Kindred both by Marriage and Blood; a thing not unusual in the
declension of the Roman Empire after Augustus his time. But let misdemeanors
hold or oblige those who are the Authors of them (was the Order of Arcadius and
Honorius, Emperors, C. de poeni^. l. 21. sancimus.
to the Lord Chief Justice Eutychianus) nor let the fear of punishment proceed
further than the offense is found. A very usual right among the English,
whereby bating the taking away the Civil Rights of Blood and Nobility, V.
Canut. leg. 74.
none of the Posterity or Family of those who lose their honors, do for the
most heinous crimes of their Parents, undergo any p^^al^ies.

But this was not all, in those Letters I mentioned, he added threats also.

63. If any one shall be found carrying Letters or a Mandate from the Pope, of
Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, containing an interdiction of Christian
Religion in England, let him be seized and kept in hold, and let Justice be
done upon him without delay, as a Traitor against the King and Kingdom. This
Roger of Hoveden stands by, ready to witness.

64. Let the Bishops of London and Norwich be summoned, that they may be before
the Kings Justices to do right ( i. e. to answer to their charge, and to make
satisfaction) that they have contrary to the Statutes of the Kingdom,
interdicted the Land of Earl Hugh, and have inflicted a sentence of
Excommunication upon him. This was Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk.

65. 'Let St. Peter's pence be collected, or gathered, and kept safe. Those
Pence were a Tribute or Alms granted first by Ina King of the West Saxons;
yearly at Lammas to be gathered from as many as 'had thirty pence (as we read
it in the Confessor's Laws) 'of live money in their house. These were duly, at a
set time, paid in, till the time of Henry the eighth, when he set the
Government free from the Papal Tyranny: About which time Polydore Virgil was
upon that account in England, Treasurer, or Receiver general. Fox. in hist.
Eccels. Ed. 2. Rescript. dat. 10. Ral. Maii ap. Veterem urbem, Pontificat. 2.
I thought fit to set down an ancient brief account of these pence, out of a
Rescript of Pope Gregory to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, in the
time of King Edward the second.

Diocese li. s. d. Canterbury 07 18 00 London 16 10 00 Rochester 05 12 00
Norwich 21 10 00 Ely 05 00 00 Lincoln 42 00 00 Coventry 10 05 00 Chester 08 00
00 Winchester 17 06 08 Exceter 09 05 00 Worcester 10 05 00 Hereford 06 00 00
Bath 12 05 00 York 11 10 00 Salisbury 17 00 00

It amounts to three hundred Marks and a Noble; that is, two hundred Pounds
sterling, and six Shillings and eight Pence.

You are not to expect here the murder of Thomas a Becket, and the story how
King Henry was purged of the crime, having been absolved upon hard terms.

Convenient cymbae vela minora meae. My little Skiff bears not so great a Sail.
CHAP. XV.
A Parliament at Northampton. Six Circuits ordered. A List of the then
Justices. The Jury to be of twelve Knights. Several sorts of Knights. In what
cases Honorary Knights to serve in Juries. Those who come to Parliament by
right of Peerage, sit as Barons. Those who come by Letters of Summons, are
styled Chevaliers.

NOt long after, the King and the Barons meet at Northampton. They treat
concerning the Laws and the administration of Justice: At length the Kingdom
being divided into six Provinces or Circuits, there are chosen from among the
Lawyers, some, who in every of those Provinces might preside in the Seat of
Justice, Commissioned by the Name of Itinerant Justices, or Justices in Air.
See here the List and Names of those Justices out of Hoveden.

Hugh de Cressi. Walter Fitz-Robert. Robert Mantel. for Norfolk. Suffolk.
Cambridge. Huntington. Bedford. Buckingham. Essex. Hertford.
Hugh de Gundeville. William Fitz-Ralph. William Basset. for Lincoln.
Nottingham. Darby. Stafford. Warwick. Northampton. Leicester.
Robert Fitz-Bernard. Richard Gifford. Roger Fitz-Reinfrai. for Kent. Surrey.
Southampton. Sussex. Barkshire. Oxford.
William Fitz-Steeven. Bertam de Uerdun. Turstan Eitz-Simon. for Hereford.
Gloucester. Worcester. Shropshire.
Ralph Fitz-Steeven. William Ruffus. Gilbert Pipard. for Wiltshire.
Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Devonshire. Cornwall.
Robert de Walls. Ralph de Glanville. Robert Pikenot. for York. Richmond.
Lancashire. Copland. Westmoreland. Northumberland. Cumberland.

These he made to take an Oath, that they would themselves, bona fide, in good
faith, and without any deceit or trick, ('it is the same Author whose words I
make use of) keep the underwritten Assizes, and cause them inviolably to be
kept by the men of the Kingdom. He mentions them under this specious Title.

The ASSIZES of King HENRY, made at Clarendon, and renewed at Northampton. 66.
If any one be called to do right (or be served with a Writ) before the Justices
of our Lord the King, concerning Murder, or Theft, or Robbery, or the receiving
and harboring of those who do any such thing; or concerning Forgery, or wicked
setting fire of houses, etc. let him upon the Oath of twelve Knights of the
Hundred; or if there be no Knights there, then upon the Oath of twelve free and
lawful men, and upon the Oath of four men out of each Village of the Hundred,
let him go to the Ordeal of Water, and if he perish, i. e. sink, let him lose
one foot. The Knights who are wanting here, are perhaps those who hold by
Knights service, or if you had rather, that hold by Fee; betwixt whom, and
those who served in War for wages or pay, which in the Books of Fees are called
Solidatae (the same peradventure as by Caesar are termed Soldurii, Caes. comm.
l. 3. Ath. dipn. l. 6. Feud. l. 2. tit. 20. Otho Fris. lib. de Frederic. 1.
Radevic. l. 1. c. 26.
that is, Soldiers; by Nicolaus Damascenus, (...), by our Monks, Bracton, Otho
Frisingensis, and Radevicus, in the Camp Laws of Barbarossa, are styled
Servientes, that is, Sergeants) there is an apparent difference; both of them
being, placed far below the dignity of those honorary Knights, who are called
Equites aurati.

But yet I do very well know, that these honorary Knights also were of old
time, Bract. l. 5. de Essoniis, c. 10. and 26 Ed. 3. fo. 57. a. 30 Ed. 3. fol.
2.6. v. 17 Ed. 2. tit.

Attaint. 60.1^ Ed. 3. tit. Challenge. 115. Plo. com. fol. 117.8 H. 6. fol. 10.


and are now by a most certain right cal^ed forth to some Trials by Jury. To
the Kings Great or Grand Assise (I say) and to a Suit of Law contested, when a
Baron of Parliament is Party on one side, i. e. Plaintiff or Defendant. To the
Assise, in that it is the most solemn and honorable way of Trial, and that
which puts an utter end to the claim of the Party that is cast. To such an
unequal suit, that there may be some equality of Name or Title as to some one,
at least, of the Judges (for the Jury or twelve men are upon such occasion
Judges made) and as to the more honorable of the two parties, whether
Plaintiff or Defendant. For the Peers of Parliament, who are the greater Nobles
(amongst whom by reason of their Baronies, Archbishops and Bishops, heretofore
a great many Abbots) such as are Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons; who though they be distinguished by Order and honorary Titles, yet
nevertheless they sit in Parliament, only as they are Barons of the Realm. And
those who at the Kings pleasure are called in by Letters of summons, as Lawyers
term it, are styled Chevaliers, not Barons. For that of Chevalier was a Title
of Dignity; this of Baron anciently rather of Wealth, and great Estate. Which
Title only such Writs of Summons bestowed till Richard the seconds time, who
was the first that by Patent made John Beauchamp of Holt, Baron of
Kiderminster: Now both ways are in fashion.

CHAP. XVI.
The person convict by Ordeal, to quit the Realm within Forty days. Why Forty
days allowed. An account of the Ordeals by Fire and Water. Lady Emme dear'd by
going over burning Coulters. Two sorts of trial by Water. Learned conjectures
at the rise and reason of these customs. These Ordeals, as also that of single
Combat condemned by the Church.

67. AT Northampton it was added for the rigor of Justice, (remember what was
said in the foregoing Chapter) that he should in like manner lose his right
Hand or Fist with his Foot, and forswear the Realm, and within Forty Days go
out of the Kingdom into banishment. (He had the favor of Forty Days allowed
him, so says Bracton, Bract. tract. de Coron. l. 3.
that in the mean time he might get help of his friends to make provision for
his Passage and Exile.) And if upon the trial by water he be clean, i. e.
innocent, let him find pledges, and remain in the Realm, unless he be arighted
for Murder, or any base Felony, by the Community or Body of the County, and of
the Legal Knights of the Country, concerning which, if he be arighted in
manner aforesaid, although he be clean by the trial of Water; nevertheless let
him quit the Realm within Forty Days, and carry away his Chattels along with
him, saving the right of his Lords, and let him forswear the Realm at the mercy
of our Lord the King.

Here let me say a little concerning the Trial by Fire and Water, or the
Ordeals. It is granted, that these were the Saxons ways of trial, rashly and
unadvisedly grounded upon Divine Miracle. They do more appertain to Sacred
Rites, than to Civil Customs; for which reason we past them by in the former
Book, and this place seemed not unseasonable to put the Reader in mind of them.
He who is accused, is bound to clear himself ('it is Ralph Glanvill writes this)
by the Judgment of God, Glanv. l. 14. c. 1.
to wit, by hot burning Iron, or by Water, according to the different condition
of men: by burning hot Iron, if it be a freeman; by Water, Polydor. hist. l. 8.

Matthew. Park. in vit. Rob. Archiep. Cant.


if he be a Countryman or Villain. The party accused did carry in his hand a
piece of Iron glowing hot, going for the most part two or three steps or paces
along, or else with the soles of his feet did walk upon red hot Plough-shares
or Coulters, and those, according to the Laws of the Franks and Lombards, nine
in number. The Lady Emme the Confessor's Mother being impeached of Adultery
with Aldwin Bishop of Winton, was wonderfully cleared by treading upon so many,
and is famous for it in our Histories, being preserved safe from burning, and
proved innocent from the Crime.

There were two sorts of watery Ordeal or trial by Water; to wit, cold or
scalding hot. The party was thrown into the cold water, as in some places at
this day Witches are used: he who did not by little and little sink to the
bottom, was condemned as guilty of the Crime, as one whom that Element, which
is the outward sign in the Sacrament of Regeneration, did not admit into its
bosom. As to scalding Water, ones arm in that manner thrust in up to the
elbow, made a discovery of the truth; and Aelstan a Monk of Abendon, afterward
Bishop of Shirburn, thrusting in his bare Hand into a boiling Cauldron, showed
himself with some pride to his Abbot.

But that they say, that Rusticks or Vassals only were tried by Water, Malmesb.
l. 2. de gest. Pontif.

Lact. Instit. l. 7. de divi^. praem. c. 9. Hoveden. annal. l. 2.


(for Water is ascribed to the earthly and ignoble nature, Fire to the
heavenly; so that from the use of Fire peculiar to man, Firmianus Lactantius
has fetched an argument for the Immortality of the Soul) that this is not
altogether so true, is made out by that one example of John, a Noble and Rich
old man, who in the time of King Henry the Second, when, being charged with the
death of his Brother the Earl of Ferrers, he could not acquit himself by the
Watery Trial, was hanged on a Gallows.

Whence or by what means both these Customs were brought in among Christians,
it is none of my business to make an over strait inquiry. Coel. Rhod. antiq.
sect. l. 17. c. 21.
I remember that Fire among the Ancients was accounted purgative; and there is
one in a Tragedy of Sophocles entitled Antigone, who of his own accord professed
to King Creon, -- (...)
(...). -- Sophocles in Antigone.

That in his hands be red-hot gads would keep,
And over burning gleads would barefoot creep.
to show himself innocent as to the Burial of Polynices. I pass by in silence
that Pythagorical opinion, Arist. 2* de Coelo.
which places Fire in the Center of the Universe, where Jupiter has his
Prison; which Fire some, however the Peripateticks stiffly oppose it, would
have to be in plain terms the Sun, -- (...). Iliad. 3.
Who all things overlooks, and all things hears. Yet I shall not omit this,
Deuteronomy. 4. Zanch. de not. Dei, l. 1. c. 6. Reuchl. de verb. mirif. l. 2. c. 16.
Psalm 104. Hebr. 1.7.
that in the holy Bible the great and gracious God has of a truth discovered
himself to mortal conception in the very name of Fire, (...), as a thing
agreeable to Divinity, as says John Reuchlin; and that S. Paul has, according
to the Psalmists mind, styled the Ministers of God, a flame of fire. And indeed
to abuse the holy Scriptures, by mis-interpreting them, is a custom too ancient
and too too common.

Homer and Virgil both sing of -- Imperjuratam Stygiamque paludem, Aeneid. 6.

Dii cujus jurare timent and fallere numen.
that is, -- The unperjur'd Stygian lake,
Whose name the Gods do fear in vain to take.
We read of the Infants of the Celts, Anthol. (...). Epigr. (...).
(...). Tried in the streams of sacred Flood,
Whether of right or of base blood;
as it is in the Greek Epigrams: Polyhist. l. 1. c. 10.

Ovid. Fast. 2. Senec. Ep. 41.


of the fountains of Sardinia, in Solinus: of the moist Februa, or
purifications by water, in Ovids Fastorum: and of those Rivers that fell from
Heaven, and their most wonderful and hidden natures, among Natural
Philosophers. But most of these things were not known peradventure in our
Ordeals. Mart. del Rio disq mag. l. 4. sect. 3. and 4.
Yet Martin Del Rio, a man of various Reading and exquisite Learning, has in
his Magical Inquiries offered a conjecture, that the trial by Water crept into
use from a paltry imitation of the Jews Cup of Jealousy.

Truth is, a great many instances both of this way of trying by Water and of
that by Fire, are afforded by the Histories of the Danes, Saxons, Germans,
Franks, Spaniards, in a word, of the whole Christian World. An quia cunctarum
concordia semina rerum,
Ovid. Fast. 4.
Sunt duo discordes Ignis and Vnda dei,
Junxerunt elementa Patres?
was it, says the Poet, 'Cause the two differing Gods,
Always at ods,
That of Water, that of Fire,
Which yet in harmony conspire
The seeds of all things fitly joined;
Therefore our Fathers have these two combined.
Or was it, because that the Etymology of the Word (...) Hashamaim, that is,
Pic. Mirandula in Heptaplo.
Heaven, (for the Heavens themselves were the feigned Gods of the Gentiles)
some are pleased with the deriving it from (...) Esh, i. e. Fire and (...)
Maim, i. e. Water: Let some more knowing Janus tell you. Pindar. Olymp. 3.
-- (...). For my part I shall not this game pursue;
Why should I lose my time and labor too?


The superstitions and fopperies, the rites and usages, the lustrations and
purifyings, the Prayers and Litanies, and the solemn preparations (in
consecrating and conjuring the Water, etc.) you have in Will. Lambard in his
Explications of Law terms, Vita Roberti.
and in Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury in his Antiquities of the
British Church. Both of them together, with that other of single Combat or
Duel (for that also was reckoned among the Ordeals) were judged by the Church
of Rome to be impious customs; Decret. tit. de vulgar. purgat. cause. 2. quaest.
5.
and it is long since that they have been laid aside, and not put in practice
among the common ordinary ways of peoples purging and clearing themselves.

Well, now let me come back to my own Country again, and return to Northampton.

CHAP. XVII.
Other Laws: Of entertaining of strangers. An Uncuth,, a Gust, a Hogenhine;
what of him who confesses the Murder, etc. Of Frank pledge. Of an Heir under
age. Of a Widows Dowry. Of taking the Kings fealty. Of setting a time to do
homage. Of the Justices duty. Of their demolishing of Castles. Of Felons to be
put into the Sheriffs hands. Of those who have departed the Realm.

68. LEt it be lawful for no man, neither in Borough nor in Village or place of
entertainment, to have or keep in his house, beyond one night, any stranger,
whom he will not hold to right, (that is, answer for his good behavior) unless
the person entertained shall have a reasonable Essoin or excuse, which the
Master or Host of the house is to show to his neighbors; and when the Guest
departs, let him depart in presence of the neighbors, and in the day time.
Hither belongs that of Bracton. He may be said to be of ones family, who shall
have lodged with another for the space of three nights; Bract. l. 3. tract. 2.
c. 10. and Canuti leges.
in that the first night he may be called Uncuth, i. e. Unknown, a Stranger;
but the second night Gust, i.e. a Guest or Lodger; the third night Hogenhine (I
read Hawan man) i. e. in Greek (...), in Latin Familiaris, one of the family.

69. If any one shall be seized for Murder, or for Theft, or Robbery, or
Forgery, and be knowing thereof, ( i. e. shall confess it) or for any other
Felony which he shall have done, before the Provost (the Master or Bailiff of
the Hundred or Borough, and before lawful men, he cannot deny it afterward
before the Justices. And if the same person without Seisin ( with Seisin in
this place is the same as (...), as we commonly say in our Language, taken with
the manner) shall recognize or acknowledge any thing of this nature before
them, this also in like manner he shall not be able to deny before the Justices.

70. If any one shall dye holding in Frank Pledge ( i. e. having a free Tenure)
let his heirs remain in such Seisin, as their Father had on the day he was
alive and dyed, of his fee, and let them have his Chattels, out of which they
may make also the devise or partition of the deceased, (that is, the sharing of
his goods according to his will) and afterward may require of their Lord, and
do for their relief and other things, which they ought to do as touching their
Fee ( i. e. in order to their entering upon the estate.)

71. If the heir be under age, let the Lord of the Fee take his homage, and
have him in custody or keeping for as long time as he ought; let the other
Lords, if there be more of them, take his homage, and let him do to them that
which he ought to do.

72. Let the Wife of the deceased have her Dowry, and that part of his
Chattels, which of right comes to her. In former times peradventure it was a
like generally practiced by the English, that the Wife and Children should have
each their lawful Thirds of the estate; (each of them, I say, if they were in
being; but half to the Wife, if there were no issue; and as much to the
Children, if the Wife did not survive her Husband:) as it was practiced by the
Romans of old according to the Falcidian Law* and of later time by the Novells
of Justinian, that they should have their Quarter-part. For I see that those of
Normandy, of Arras, of Ireland, people that lay round about them, had the same
custom. Of this you are to see Glanvill, Bracton, the Register of Briefs or
Writs, and William Lindwood, beside the Records or yearly Reports of our Law.

73. Let the Justices take the Fealties of our Lord the King before the close
of Easter, and at furthest before the close of Pentecost; namely, of all Earls,
Barons, Knights and Freeholders, and even of Rusticks or Vassals, such as have
a mind to stay in the Realm; and he who will not do fealty, let him be taken
into custody as an enemy of our Lord the King.

74. The Justices have also this to give in charge, that all those, who have
not as yet done their homage and allegiance to our Lord the King, do at a term
of time; which they shall name to them, come in and do homage and allegiance to
the King as to their Liege Lord.

75. Let the Justices do all acts of Justice and rights belonging to our Lord
the King by a Writ of our Lord the King, or of them who shall be in his place
or stead, as to a half-Knights fee and under; (a Knights fee in an old Book,
which pretends to more antiquity by far than it ought, concerning the manner of
holding Parliaments, is said to be twenty pounds worth of Land in yearly
revenue, but the number prefixed before the Red Book of the Exchequer goes at
the rate of Six Hundred and Eighty Acres:) unless the complaint be of that
great concern, that it cannot be determined without our Lord the King, or of
that nature that the Justices by reason of their own doubting refer it to him,
or to those who shall be in his place and stead. Nevertheless let them to the
utmost of their ability intend and endeavor the service and advantage of our
Lord the King.

76. Let the Justices provide and take care, that the Castles already
demolisht, be utterly demolished, and that those that are to be demolished, be
well levelled to the ground. And if they shall not do this, our Lord the King
may please to have the judgment of his Court against them, as against those
who show contempt of his Precept.

77. A Thief or Robber, as soon as he is taken, let him be put into the
Sheriffs hands to be kept in safe custody; and if the Sheriff shall be out of
the way, let him be carried or brought to the next Constable of a Castle, and
let him have him in custody, until he deliver him up to the Sheriff.

78. Let the Justices according to the custom of the Land, cause inquiry to be
made of those, who have departed or gone out of the Realm. And if they shall
refuse to return within a term of time that shall be named, and to stand to
right in the Kings Court ( i. e. to make their appearance, and there to answer,
if any thing shall be brought in against them) let them after that be outlawed,
and the names of the Outlaws be brought at Easter and at the Feast of St.
Michael to the Exchequer, and from thence be sent to our Lord the King.

These Laws were agreed upon at Northampton.

CHAP. XVIII.
Some Laws in favor of the Clergy. Of forfeitures on the account of Forest or
hunting. Of Knights fees. Who to bear Arms, and what Arms. Arms not to be
alienated. No Jew to bear Arms. Arms not to be carried out of England. Rich men
under suspicion to clear themselves by Oath. Who allowed to swear against a
Freeman. Timber for building of Ships not to be carried out of England. None
but Freemen to bear Arms. Freemen who. Rusticks or Villains not such.

Matthew. Paris.
79. THat henceforth a Clergyman be not dragged and drawn before a Secular
Judge personally for any crime or transgression, unless it be for Forest or a
Lay-fee, out of which a Lay-service is due to the King, or to some other
Secular Lord. This privilege of the Clergy the King granted to Hugh the Popes
Cardinal Legate, by the Title of S. Michael a Petra, who arrived here on
purpose to advance the Popish interest.

80. Furthermore, that Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics or Abbacies be not held in
the Kings hand above a year, unless there be an evident cause, or an urgent
necessity for it.

81. That the Murderers or Slayers of Clergymen being convicted, or having
confessed before a Justice or Judge of the Realm, be punished in the presence of
the Bishop.

82. That Clergymen be not obliged to make Duel: i. e. not to clear
themselves, V. Britton. cap. d' Appeals, and temp. Ed. 1. tit. Quod permittat.
9.
as others upon some occasion did, by single combat.

83. He ordained at Woodstock (we transcribe these words out of Hoveden) that
whosoever should make a forfeit to him concerning his Forest, or his hunting
once, he should be tied to find safe Pledges or Sureties; and if he should make
a second forfeit, in like manner safe Pledges should be taken of him; but if
the same person should forfeit the third time, then for his third forfeit, no
pledges should be taken, but the proper body of him who made the forfeit.

Moreover, we meet with these Military Laws, or Laws of Knights fees, made for
Tenants and other people of the common sort.

84. He who has one Knights fee ('it is the aforesaid Hoveden speaks) let him
have an Habergeon or Coat of Male, and a Helmet or Headpiece and a Buckler or
Target and a Lance: and let every Knight have so many Habergeons, and Helmets,
and Targets, and Lances, as he shall have Knights fees in his demeans.

85. Whatsoever Freeholder that is a Layman, shall have in Chattel or in Rent
and Revenue to the value of Sixteen Marks, let him have a Coat of Male, and a
Headpiece, and a Buckler, and a Lance.

86. Whatsoever Lay-person being a Freeman, shall have in Chattel to the value
of Ten Marks, let him have a little Habergeon, or Coat of Male, and a Capelet
of Iron, and a Lance.

87. Let all Burghers or Townsmen of a Corporation, and the whole Communities
of Freemen have a Wambais, and a Capelet of Iron, and a Lance.

88. Let no one, after he has once had these Arms, sell them, nor pawn them,
nor lend them, nor by any other way alienate them from himself, or part with
them: nor let his Lord alienate them by any manner of way from his man ( i. e.
his Tenant that holds under him) neither by forfeit, nor by gift, nor by
pledge, nor by any other way.

89. If any one shall dye having these Arms, let them remain to his heir; and
if the heir be not of such estate or age, that he may use the Arms, if there
shall be need, let that person who shall have them (the heir) in custody, have
likewise the keeping of the Arms, and let him find a man, who may use the Arms
in the service of our Lord the King, if there shall be need, until the heir
shall be of such estate, that he may bear Arms, and then let him have them.

90. Whatsoever Burgher shall have more Arms, than it shall behove him to have,
according to this Assize, let him sell them, or give them away, or so dispose
of them from himself to some other man, who may retain them in England in the
service of our Lord the King.

91. Let no one of them keep by him more Arms, than it shall behove him
according to this Assize to have.

92. Let no Jew keep in his possession a Coat of Male or an Habergeon, but let
him sell them, or give them, or in some other manner put them away, in that
wise that they may remain in the service of the King of England.

93. Let no man bear or carry Arms out of England, unless it be by special
order of our Lord the King; nor let any one sell Arms to any one, who may carry
them from England; nor let Merchant or other carry or convey them from England.

94. They who are suspected by reason of their wealth or great estate, do free
or acquit themselves by giving their Oaths. The Justices have Power or
Jurisdiction given them in the case for this purpose. If there shall be any,
who shall not comply with them (the Justices) the King shall take himself to
the members or limbs of such persons, and shall by no means take from them
their Lands or Chattels.

95. Let no one swear upon lawful and freemen, ( i. e. in any matter against
or concerning them) who has not to the value of Sixteen or Ten Marks in
Chattel.

96. Let no one, as he loves himself and all that he has, buy or sell any Ship
to be brought from England; nor let any one carry, or cause to be carried out
of England Timber for the building of Ships.

97. Let no one be received or admitted to the Oath of bearing Arms 'but a
Freeman.

To bring once for all something concerning a Freeman, that may not be beside
the purpose. The ancient Law of England bestowed that name only upon such
persons, as many as, either being honored by the Nobility of their Ancestors,
or else out of the Commonalty being of ingenuous Birth (to wit, of the
Yeomanry) did not hold that rustic fee or Tenure of Villenage) dedicated to
Stercutius (the God of Dunghils) and necessarily charged and burdened with the
Plough tail, the Wain, and the Dray, which are the hard Countrey-folks Arms and
Implements. To this purpose makes the term of Rustic or Countryman above
mentioned in the Statutes of Clarendon, and the place of Glanvill cited in the
Trial of Ordeal.

That the business may be more clearly asserted; a Suit of Law being waged in
the time of Edward the First, Temp. Ed. 1. tit. Attorney, 103.
betwixt John Levin Plaintiff and the Prior of Bernwell Defendant (I have taken
the Story out of an old Manuscript, and the Reports of our Law, and the
Collection or Body of the Royal Rescripts do agree to it) it was then, after
several disputes bandied to and fro, and with earnestness enough, decided by
the judgment of the Court, that those Tenants which hold in fee from the
ancient Domain of the Crown, as they call it, are by no means comprehended
under the title of freemen; as those who driving their labor around
throughout the year pay their daily Vows to Ceres the Goddess of Corn, to Pales
the Goddess of Shepherds, and to Triptolemus the Inventer of Husbandry or
Tillage, and keep a quarter with their Gee Hoes about their Chattel.

And now death has put an end to King Henry's Reign. And I also having made an
end of his Laws, so far as Histories do help me out, do at the last muster and
arm my Bands for the guard of my Frontiers. I wish they may be of force enough
against Back-biters.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Lawmakers. Our Kings not Monarchs at first. Several of them in the same
County. The Druids meeting place where. Under the Saxons, Laws made in a
general Assembly of the States. Several instances. This Assembly under the
Normans called Parliament. The thing taken from a custom of the ancient
Germans. Who had right to sit in Parliament. The harmony of the Three Estates.

BUt however Laws are not without their Makers and their Guardians, or they are
to no purpose. It remains therefore that we say somewhat in general of them.
They are made either by Use and Custom (for things that are approved by long
Use, do obtain the force of Law) or by the Sanction and Authority of
Lawgivers. Of ancient time the Semnothei, the Kings and the Druids were
Lawgivers; amongst the Britans I mean.

Concerning the Semnothei whatsoever does occurr you had before.

The Kings were neither Monarchs of the whole Island, nor so much as of that
part of Brittany that belonged to the Angles. For there were at the same time
over the single County of Kent four Kings; to wit, Cyngetorix, Carvilius,
Taximagulus, and Segonax; and at the same rate in other Counties. Wherefore we
have no reason to make any question, but that part wherein we live, now called
England, was governed by several persons, and was subject to an Aristocracy:
according to what Polydore Virgil, John Twine, Polyd. hist. Angl. 2.

Tuin. Com. de reb. Albion. Dav. Pouel. in Epist. Guli. Fleetwode.


David Powell and others have informed us.

The Druids were wont to meet, to explain the Laws in being, and to make new
ones as occasion required, as is most likely, in some certain place designed
for that purpose; as now at this very time all matters of Law go to be decided
at Spire in Germany, at Westminster Hall in England, and Paris in France.

Their public Convention or Meeting Place was constantly, as Julius Caesar
tells us, Caes. l. 6. de bell. Gall.
in the borders of the Carnutes the middle Region of all France. Some think
that a Town at eight Miles distance from the Metropolis of those people
commonly called Dreux, was designed for that use. Paul. Merula.


Whilst the Saxons governed, the Laws were made in the General Assembly of the
States or Parliament. In the front of King Ina's Laws ('it is above Eight Hundred
and Eighty years that he first reigned) we read thus, It Ine mid gods gift
West-Saxna Cyning mid getbeat and mid lere Cenredes mines fader and hedde and
Erconwald mine biscops and mid eallum minum, ealdor mannum, and tham yldestan
Witan mines theode be beodeth, etc. which in our present English speaks thus, I
Ina by the Grace of God King of the West Saxons, by the advice and order of
Kenred my Father, and of Hedda and Erconwald my Bishops, and of all my
Aldermen, and of the Elders and Wise Men of my people, do command, etc. There
are a great many instances of this kind in other places. Moreover Witlaf and
Bertulph, Ingulph.
who were Kings of the Mercians near upon Eight hundred years ago, do in their
instruments under their hands make mention of Synods and Councils of the
Prelates and Peers convened for the affairs of the Kingdom. Camden.
And an ancient Book has this passage of Abendon, Here was the Royal Seat,
hither when they were to treat of the principal and difficult points of State,
and affairs of the Kingdom, the people were used to meet and flock together. To
this may be added that which Malmesbury says of King Edward in the year of our
Lord 903. The King gathered a Synod or ^ssembly of the Senators of the English
Nation, over which did preside Pleimund Archbishop of Canterbury interpreting
expressly the words of the Apostolical Embassy. These Assemblies were termed by
the Saxons, Widdena gemcdes, i. e. Meetings of the Wise Men, and Micil sinodes,
i. e. the Great Assemblies. At length we borrowed of the French the name of
Parliaments, Polyd. hist. Angl. l. 11.
which before the time of Henry the First, Polydore Virgil says, were very
rarely held. An usage, that not without good reason seems to have come from the
ancient Germans. So Tacitus says of them, Concerning smaller matters the
Princes only, concerning things of greater concern, they do all the whole body
of them consult; yet in that manner, that those things also, which it was in
the peoples power to determine, Mod. ten. Parl.
were treated of by the Princes too. And I have one that has left it in
writing, that when there was neither Bishop, nor Earl, nor Baron, yet then
Kings held their Parliaments: and in King Arthur's Patent to the University of
Cambridge (for ye have my leave, if you can find in your heart, Jo. Caius
Antiq. Cantabrig. l. 1.
to give credit to it, as John Key does) by the counsel and assent of all and
singular the Prelates and Princes of this Realm, I decree.

There were present at Parliaments, about the beginning of the Normans times,
V. 22 Ed. 3. fol. 18.
as many as were invested with Thirteen Fees of Knights service, and a third
part of one Fee, called Baron's, from their large Estates: for which reason
perhaps John Cochleius of Mentz, in his Epistle Dedicatory to our most Renowned
Sir Thomas More, prefixed before the Chronicle of Aurelius Cassiodorus, calls
him Baron of England. But Henry the Third, the number of them growing over big,
ordered by Proclamation, that those only should come there, whom he should
think fit to summon by Writ.

These Assemblies do now sit in great State, which with a wonderful harmony of
the Three Estates, the King, the Lords and the Commons, or Deputies of the
People, are joined together, to a most firm security of the public, and are by
a very Learned Man in allusion to that made word in Livy, Panaetolium from the
Aetolians, most rightly called Pananglium, August. de civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 21.
that is, all England. As in Musical Instruments and Pipes and in Singing it
self, and in Voices (says Scipio in Tully's Books of the Commonwealth) there
is a kind of harmony to be kept out of distinct sounds, which Learned and
Skilful Ears cannot endure to hear changed and jarring; and that consort or
harmony, from the tuning and ordering of Voices most unlike; yet is rendered
agreeing and suitable: so of the highest and middlemost and lowermost States
shuffled together, like different sounds, by fair proportion does a City agree
by the consent of persons most unlike; and that which by Musicians in singing
is called Harmony: that in a City is Concord, the straightest and surest bond
of safety in every Commonwealth, and such as can by no means be without
Justice.

But let this suffice for Lawmakers.

CHAP. XX.
The Guardians of the Laws, who. In the Saxons time seven Chief. One of the
Kings among the Heptarchs styled Monarch of all England. The Office of Lord
High Constable. Of Lord Chancellor, ancient. The Lord Treasurer. Alderman of
England, what. Why one called Healfkoning. Aldermen of Provinces and Graves,
the same as Counts or Earls and Viscounts or Sheriffs. Of the County Court, and
the Court of Inquests, called Tourn le Viscount. When this Court kept, and the
original of it.

I Do scarce meet before the Saxons times with any Guardians of the Laws
different from these Lawmakers. In their time they were variously divided,
whose neither Name nor Office are as yet grown out of use. The number is made
up, to give you only the heads, by these; to wit, the King, the Lord High
Constable, the Chancellor, the Treasurer, the Alderman of England, the Aldermen
of Provinces and the Graves. Those of later date and of meaner notice I pass
by, meaning to speak but briefly of the rest.

The King was always one amongst the Heptarchs or seven Rulers, who was
accounted (I have Beda to vouch it) the Monarch of all England. Ethelwerd. l.
3. c. 2.
Ella King of the South Saxons (so says Ethelwerd) was the first that was
dignified with so high a Title and Empire, who was Owner of as large a
Jurisdiction as Ecbright; the second was Ceulin King of the West-Angles; the
third Aethelbrith King of the Kentish-men; the fourth Redwald King of the
Easterlings; the fifth Edwin King of Northumberland; the sixth Oswald; the
seventh Osweo, Oswala's Brother; after whom the eighth was Ecbright. His
West Saxon Kingdom took in the rest for the greatest part.

The Office of Lord High Constable, which disappeared in Edward Duke of
Buckingham, who in Henry the Eighth's time lost his Head for High Treason, was
not seen till the latter end of the Saxons. Hist. Eliens.
One Alfgar Staller is reported by Richard of Ely Monk, to have been Constable
to Edward the Confessor, and Mr. Camden mentions a dwelling of his upon this
account called Plaiffy in the County of Middlesex. Camd. in Northampt. V. Kel.
relat. 6 Hen. 8. fol. 171. Stat.

13 Rich. 2. c. 2 Matthew. Paris, page 563. Brook tit. Prerogative. 31.


He of Ely sets him out for a Great and Mighty Man in the Kingdom. And indeed
formerly that Magistrate had great power, which was formidable even to Kings
themselves.

They who deny there were any Chancellors before the coming in of the Normans,
are hugely mistaken. Nor are they disproved only out of the Grant of Edward the
Confessor to the Abbot of Westminster, which I am beholden to Mr. Lambard for,
at the bottom of which these words are set down: I Syward Public Notary,
instead of Rembald the Kings Majesty's Chancellor, have written and subscribed
this paper; but also out of Ingulph, who makes mention of Farketulus, some
while after that Abbot of Crowland, Chancellor of King Edred, by whose Decree
and Counsel were to be handled and treated whatsoever businesses they were,
Temporal or Spiritual, that did await the Judgment of the King; and being thus
treated of by him, Fr. Thin. in contin. Chr. Eliz.
might irrefragably stand good. And Francis Thinn, that Learned Antiquary has
reckoned up several, who have discharged this Office; as Turketill to King
Ethelbald, Swithin Bishop of Winchester to King Egbert, Vlfin to King
Athelstan, Adulph to King Edgar, Alsy Abbot and Prelate of Ely to King
Ethelred. Concerning which Office and the Seals, which the Chancellor in old
time had the keeping of, I had rather you would consult with Camden's Tribunals
or Seats of Justice, and those things which John Budden at Wainfleet Doctor of
Laws has brought out of the Archives into his Palingenesia, than seek them at
my hands.

Matthew. Cant. in Odonis severi vita.
As for Treasurers, Dunstan was so to King Edred, and Hugolin to the Confessor.

But that fifth title of Alderman of England, is an unusual one. Yet, if I
don't mistake my self, he was the Chief President in Trials at Law, and an
Officer to keep all quiet at home; the same as now perhaps is commonly called
the Lord Chief Justice of England. This remarkable name I do not meet with,
neither in the Monkish Chronologers, which are to be had at the Shops, nor in
the Records of our Laws. But a private History of the Abbey of Ramsey in
Huntingdon-shire has given us notice of one Ailwins Tomb with this Inscription,
Camden.
HIC. REQUIESCIT. AILWINUS. INCLITI. REGIS. EADGARI. COGNATUS. TOTIUS. ANGLIAE.
ALDERMANNUS. ET. HUJUS. SACRI. COENOBII. MIRACULOSUS. FUNDATOR. that is, Here
rests Ailwin Kinsman of the Renowned King Edgar, Alderman of all England, and
the miraculous Founder of this Sacred Monastery. And by reason of his great
Authority and Favor which he had with the King, by a Nick name they called him
Healfkoning, i. e. Half-King. Now Henry of Huntingdon says, Huntingd. hist. l.
6.
that Tostius Earl (or to use his phrase Consul) of Northumberland, and Harald
Sons of Godwin Earl of Kent were Justices of the Realm.

Aldermen may aptly be termed by the word Senators. Those Judges did exercise a
delegated power throughout the Provinces, called Counties or Shires, and the
Graves an under-delegated power from them. The word is as much as Governors,
and is the same thing, as in High Dutch Grave in Landgrave, Burgrave,
Palsgrave, etc. and what amongst some of our own people Reev. We shall call
them both, as that Age did, in a Latin term, the one Comites, i. e. Counts or
Earls, the other Vicecomites, that is, Viscounts or Sheriffs.

The name of Count is every where met with amongst the most ancient of the
Monks, which yet does very often pass into that of Duke in the subscription of
Witnesses. And in the Charter of the Foundation of Chertsey Abbey in Surrey,
Camden.
Frithwald styles himself subregulus, i.e. an under Kingling or petty Viceroy
to Wulpher King of the Mercians; make no question of it, he meant he was a
Count.

A Viscount and a Vice-Lord are more than very like, they are the very same.
Ingulph says it above. And in the last handwriting of King Edred we have, I
Bingulph Vice-Lord advised it, I Alfer Viscount heard it.

These Counts and Viscounts, or Earls and Sheriffs had in their Counties their
several Courts both for private and for public matters. For private affairs
they had every Month a Meeting called the County Court. Let every Grave, as we
have it in Edward the Elder's Laws, Leg. Edw. 5. and Canut. 17.
every fourth Week convene and meet the people in Assembly: let him do equal
right to every one, and determine and put an end to all Suits and Quarrels,
when the appointed days shall come. For public business King Edgar ordered the
Court of Inquests or Inquiries, Leg. Edgar. cap. 11.
called Tourn le Uiscount. Let a Convention or Meeting be held twice every year
out of every County, at which let the Bishop of that Diocese, and the Senator,
( i. e. the Alderman) be present; the one to teach the people the Laws of God;
the other the Laws of the Land. What I have set down in William the First at
the end of the fourth Chapter of this second Book, you ought to consider of
here again in this place.

The inhabitants did not meet at this Court of Inquests at any season
promiscuously and indifferently, but as it is very well known by the use and
ancient Constitutions of the Realm, within a Month either after Easter, or
after Michaelmas. In which Court, seeing that not only the Count, as now a
days the Viscount or Sheriff does, but also the Bishop did preside; it does
not at all seem difficult to trace the very original of this temporary Law.
Synod. Antioch. c. ^0.
That peradventure was the Synod of Antioch held in Pope Julius the First's
time, and acknowledged in the sixth General Council held at Constantinople.
Did. 18. c. 4.
In this latter there are expressly and plainly two Councils or Meetings of the
Bishops to be kept every year within three Weeks after Easter, and about the
middle of October, (if there be any small difference in the time, it can be no
great matter of mistake). You may help your self to more other things of meaner
note out of what has been said before about Hundreds, Bourghs and the like.

And this may serve in brief for the Saxons, who were entrusted with the care
of their Laws.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Norman Earls. Their Fee. Their power of making Laws. Of the Barons,
i.e. Lords of Manours. Of the Court Baron. Its rise. An instance of it out of
Hoveden. Other Offices much alike with the Saxons.

I Shall be briefer concerning the Normans, I mean their Earls and Barons.

Their Counts or Earls before the Conquest, except those of Leicester, and
perchance some others, were but Officers, and not as yet hereditary. When
William bore the sway, they began to have a certain Fee and a descent of
Patrimony; having together with their Title assigned to them a third part of
the Revenues or Rents, which did arise out of the whole County to the
Exchequer. This custom is clear enough in Gervase of Tilbury in the case of
Richard de Redueriis made Earl of Devonshire by Henry the First, and Jeoffrey
de Magna Villa made Earl of Essex by Mawd the Empress. It seems that the Saxon
Earls had the self-same right of sharing with the King. So in Doomsday Book we
find it; The Queen Edeua had two parts from Ipswich in Suffolk, and the Earl or
Count Guert the third: and so of Norwich, that it paid Twenty Pound to the
King, and to the Earl Ten Pound: so of the Revenues of the Borough of Jews in
Sussex, the King had two shares, and the Earl the third. And Oxford paid for
Toll and Gable, and other customary Duties Twenty Pound a year to the King,
besides Six Quarts of Honey, and to Earl Algar Ten Pound.

To conclude, it appears also that these Norman Earls or Counts had some power
of making Laws to the people of their Counties. For instance, Malmesb. de gest.
reg. l. 3.
the Monk of Malmesbury tells us, that the Laws of William Fitz-Osborn Earl of
Hereford remained still in force in the said County, that no Soldier for
whatsoever offense should pay above Seven Shillings. The Writings and Patents
of the men of Cornwall concerning their Stannaries or Tinn-Mines do prove as
much; nor need I tell the story, how Godiva Lady to the Earl Leofrick rid on
Horseback through the Streets of Coventry with her hair disshevelled, all
hanging about her at full length, that by this means she might discharge them
of those Taxes and Payments, which the Earl had imposed upon them.

Out of the Countries (wherein all Estates were subject to Military Service)
the Barons had their Territories, as we call them Manors; and in them their
Courts to call their Tenants together, at the end of every three Weeks, and to
hear and determine their Causes. A Civilian, Ad leg. 2. de origin. jur.
one Vdalricus Zazius, would have the original of these Courts among other
Nations, to have come by way of imitation from Romulus his making of Lords or
Patrons, and their Clanns or Tenants. The use of them at this day is common and
ordinarily known. But to show how it was of old, we will borrow out of Hoveden
this spark of light. Roger de Hoveden in H. 2.
John Marshall complained to Henry the Second, that whereas he had claimed or
challenged in the Archbishops Court a piece of Land to be held from him by
right of inheritance, and had a long time pleaded upon it, he could obtain no
Justice in the case, and that he had by Oath falsified the Archbishops Court,
(that is, proved it to be false by Oath, according to the custom of the Realm:
to whom the Archbishop made answer, There has been no Justice wanting to John
in my Court; but he, I know not by whose advice, or whether of his own head,
brought in my Court a certain Toper, and swore upon it, that he went away from
my Court for default of Justice; and it seemed to the Justices of my Court,
that he did me the injury, by withdrawing in that manner from my Court; seeing
it is ordained in your Realm, that he who would falsify another Court must
swear upon the holy Gospels. The King not regarding these words, swore, that he
would have Justice and Judgment of him; and the Barons of the Kings Court did
judge him to be in the Kings Mercy; and moreover they fined him Five Hundred
Pound.

As to doing Justice in all other Cases, and managing of Public Affairs, the
Normans had almost the same Names and Titles of Officers and Offices as the
Saxons had.

FINIS.
A Brief CHRONOLOGY TO Attend and Assist THE HISTORY.
In the Year of the WORLD. 1910. Samothes, if there ever were such a man, bears
rule. 2805. Brutus makes a descent, (that is, lands with his Trojans) in
Cornwall or Devonshire. 3516. Dunvallo Molmutius swayes the Scepter. 3627.
Martia, Dowager of King Quintilen, is Queen Regent during the Minority of her
Son Sisillius the First. 3942. Caius Julius Caesar arrives at Deal on the
Seacoast of Kent, and Lucan.
Territa quaesitis ostendis terga Britannis, that is, Having inquiry made,
After the Britans bold,
He turned his back, it is said,
His courage would not hold:
and was the first that discovered Britanny to the Romans.

In the Year of CHRIST. 44. Claudius Caesar Emperor sends over Aulus Plautius
with an Army as his Lieutenant General, and by degrees reduces the Country
into the form of a Roman Province. 52. A Colony of Veterans or old Roman
Soldiers is sent down to Maldon in Essex. 86. Britanny is subdued or brought
under the yoke by the Conduct of Junius Agricola, in the time of Domitian the
Emperor. 183. Lucius or King Lucy was the first Christian King. Forasmuch as
he was of the same standing with Pope Eleutherius and the Emperor Commodus.
Whence it appears, that Beda makes others mistake, and is himself mistaken in
his wrong account of time in this affair. 428. The Saxons, Angles, Jutes,
Danes, Frisons, or Friselanders arrive here from Germany, Taurus and Felix then
Consuls, in the one and twentieth year of Theodosius the younger. The common or
ordinary account of Writers sets it down the four hundred forty ninth year: but
that great man both for Authority and Judgment William Camden Clarenceaux King
at Arms has, upon the credit of ancient Records, closed this Epoch or Date of
time within that term of years, which I have set in the Margin. 561. King
Ethelbert the First King of the English Saxons, who professed Christianity. 800.
King Egbert. 872. King Alured or Alfred. 959. King Edgar. 1017. Canute or King
Knute the Dane. 1036. Harold, eldest Son to King Knute, called for his
swiftness Harefoot. 1042. Edward the Confessor, after whom Harold Son to Godwin
Earl of Kent usurped the Throne, where he continued only nine Months. 1066.
William Duke of Normandy, after a Battle fought upon the Plain near Hastings,
got the Dominion or Sovereignty of the British Island. 1088. William Rufus,
second Son of the Conqueror. 1100. Henry the First, younger Brother to Rufus.
1135. King Stephen, Count of Blois in France, Nephew to Henry by his Sister
Adela. 1153. Henry the Second, Grandchild to Henry the First by his Daughter
Mawd the Empress, and Jeoffrey Count of Angers in France.

FINIS.
BRIEF NOTES UPON Some of the more Difficult Passages IN THE TITLE PAGE.
COmmon and Statute Law] So I render Jus Prophanum, as Profane is opposed to
Sacred and Ecclesiastical, as himself explains the term in his Preface out of
Festus. Otherwise it might have been rendered Civil Law, as relating to Civil
affairs and the Government of State, not meddling with the Canons and Rules of
the Church; but that the Civil Law with us is taken generally in another sense
for the Imperial Law, which however practiced in several other Nations, has
little to do in England, unless in some particular cases.

Of English Britanny] that is, that part of Britain, which was inhabited by the
Angles, in Latin called Anglo-Britannia, by us strictly England; as for
distinction, the other part of the Island, Wales, whither the Welsh, the true
and ancient Britans, were driven by the Saxons, is called Cambro-Britannia,
that is, Welsh Britanny; and Scotland possessed by the Scots, is in like manner
called Scoto-Britannia, that is Scotch-Britanny, which now together with
England, since the Union of the two Kingdoms, goes under the name of Great
Britain.

In the Author's PREFACE.
The Guardian of my Threshold] So Limentinus among the Romans was the God of
the Threshold, qui limentis, i. e. liminibus praeest; but it may be taken for
the Officer of the Gate, the Porter, who gives admission to strangers.

In a different Character] Accordingly in the Latin the Author's Citations are
printed in Italick; which, because they are so frequent, I thought fit rather
to notify by a distinction, as usual, in the Margin; thus, " "

Intercidona, Pilumnus and Deverra] These were Heathen Deities, to whom they
attributed the Care of their Children, whom else they thought Silvanus might,
like Oberon King of the Fairies, surprise or do some other mischief to.

In the FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
Page 2. lin. 23. Among the Celts and Gauls] Who are reckoned for one and the
same people; as for instance, those Gauls, who removed into the Lesser Asia,
mixing with the Greeks, were called Gallo-Graeci, but by the Greeks were styled
(...), whence by contraction, I suppose (...).

L. 41. Bellagines, that is, Bylaws.] From By, that is, a Village, Town or
City, and Lagen, which in Gothish is a Law; so that it signifies such Laws, as
Corporations are governed by. The Scots call them Burlaws, that is,
Borough-Laws. So that Bellagines is put for Bilagines or Burlagines. This kind
of Laws obtains in Courts Leet and Courts Baron, and in other occasions, where
the people of the place make their own Laws.

CHAP. II.
Page 4. l. 7. Adrastia, Rhamnusia and Nemesis.] Which is all but Nemesis the
Goddess of Revenge, called Adrastria from King Adrastus, who first built her a
Temple; and Rhamnusia from Rhamnus a Village in the Athenian Territory, where
she was worshipped.

L. 42. Elohim, that is, Gods.] And so Judges are properly called according to
the original notation of the word, whose Root (...) alah, though in Hebrew it
signify to curse, yet in the Arabic Language, a descendent of the Hebrew, it
betokens to judge. Thus it is said in the Psalms, God stands in the
Congregation of the Gods, and I have said, Ye are Gods, etc.

L. 45. It subjoins to it the name of God.] To wit, that Name of his (...) El,
which signifies a mighty God. In this sense the Cedars of God are lofty stately
Cedars; and by Moses his being fair to God, is meant, that he was exceeding
fair.

Page 5. lin. 18. Not only Berecynthia, but also Juno, Cybele.] Why! Cybele is
the very same Goddess, who was called Berecynthia from Berecynthus a Hill of
Phrygia (as also Cybelus was another) where she was worshipped. And she had
several such Names given her from the places of her worship, as Dindymene,
Pessinuntia, Idaea, Phrygia. This then was a slip of our worthy Author's memory
or his haste.

CHAP. III.
Page 5. lin. 34. Not by the number of days, but of nights.] Thus in our
common reckoning we say a Sennight, that is, seven nights; septinoctium, for
what in Latin they say septimana, seven mornings; and a fortnight, that is,
fourteen nights. Again for Sundays and Holy Days, the Evening, which
concludes the foregoing day, is said to be their Eve, that is, Evening. And
the Grecians agree with us in setting the night before the day, in that they
call the natural day, which is the space of twenty four hours, comprehending
day and night, (...), Night-day, not Day-night.

CHAP. IV.
Page 6. lin. 22. King Phranicus.] It is so ordinary a matter for Historians,
when they treat of things at great distance of time, to devise Fables of their
own, or take them up from others, that I doubt not but this Phranicus was
designed to give name to France; whereas it was so called from the Franks, who
came to plant there out of Franconia a Country of Germany, called East-France.

L. 29. With Corinus one of the chief of his company.] From whom Cornwall had
its name, formerly called in Latin Corinia or Cornavia (say some) now Cornubia.
And possibly if that were so, Corinium also or Cirencester, a Town in
Glocestershire, and Corinus too, the River Churne, that runs by it, owe their
appellations to the same Noble person.

L. 31. New Troy, that is, London.] Called also Troynovant, and the people
about it called Trinobantes or Trinovantes, from whom also the City it self was
styled Augusta Trinobantum, that is, the Royal Seat of the New Trojans.

L. 40. King Belin.] Who gave name to Billinsgate, that is, Belin's Gate, as
King Lud to Ludgate.

Page 8. lin. 39. Eumerus Messenius.] Some such fabulous Writer as our Sir John
Mandevil, who tells us of People and Countries, that are no where to be found
in the World.

CHAP. VI.
Page 9. lin. 19. In the time of Brennus and Belinus.] The first of these was
General of the Gauls, who were called Senones, and going into Italy with them,
sacked Rome. There he built the City Verona, called by his Name Brennona; as he
had done Brennoburgum now Brandenburg in Germany. From his prowess and famed
Exploits, it is supposed that the Britans or Welsh do to this day call a King
Brennin. Of the other, viz. Belinus, some mention has been made already.

CHAP. VII.
Page 10. lin. 24. Locrinus, Camber and Albanactus.] From the first of these
three Brethren, to wit, Locrinus, it is said, that the Welsh call England
Lhoegr, that falling to the eldest Sons share; from the second Camber, that a
Welsh-man is named Cumra, and the Country Cambria; and from the third
Albanactus, that Scotland, or at least good part of it retains the term of
Albania, a title still belonging to the King of Britain's second Brother, the
Duke of York. Though for my part for this last name of Albanactus I am somewhat
of opinion, that it might be devised by some smattering Monk purposely in
favor of the Trojan Story, as much as to say in a mungrel word Alba (...) King
of Alba, a City of Italy built by one of Aeneas his Sons.

L. 29. Gavelkind.] From the Saxon gafel or gafol, a Debt or Tribute, and cyn
or kind, the Kindred or Children; or, as Mr. Lambard, gif eal cyn, i. e. given
to all who are next of Kin; or, as Vorstegan, give all kind, i. e. give to each
Child his part. An ancient custom of the Saxons, whereby the Fathers Estate was
equally divided amongst his Sons; as it is still amongst the Daughters, if
there be no Sons. It obtains still in several places, especially in Kent by the
concessions of the Conqueror.

Page 11. lin. 22. The Laws of second Venus.] Not having Plato by me, nor any
other means to inform my self better, I imagine that by the first Venus they
mean the force of Lust and Beauty, which does so naturally incline people to a
desire of union and copulation; and by the second Venus consequently is
intended that prudential reason, by which men according to wholesome and equal
Laws easily suffer themselves to be gathered into Societies, and to comply with
one another in mutual indearments.

P. 12. lin. 12. Jupiter's Register.] (...) in the Greek Proverb, is the skin
of that Goat, which nursed him in his Childhood, of which after her Death in
honor of her memory, and reward of her services, he made his Register, to
enroll therein and set down upon record all the concerns of mankind.

Lin. 15. Of some Aethalides.] He was the Son of Mercury, and had the
privilege allowed him to be one while among the living, another while among
the dead, and by that means knew all that was done among either of them. The
Moral is plain, that he was a great Scholar, who what with his refined
meditation and study of Books, which is being among the dead, and what by his
conversation with men, had attained great knowledge and prudence: So that
Pythagoras himself, as modest as he was to refuse the Title of Wise man, and to
content himself with that of a Philosopher, that is, a Lover of Wisdom, yet was
fond of the counterfeit reputation of being thought to be He, giving out
according to his own Doctrine of Transmigration, that he was the man.

CHAP. IX.
P. 14. lin. 6. What? that those very Letters, etc.] The Authors expression
here may seem somewhat obscure; Wherefore I think fit to set down this by way
of explication. He says, that the Letters which the Greeks used in Caesar's
time, and which we now use, are rather such as the Greeks borrowed from the
Gauls than what they had originally of their own. This he proves in the end of
this Paragraph by the judgment of several Learned Men. So then, if this were
so, Caesar, who without all question was well enough acquainted with the Greek
Letters then in use, yet in all likelihood did not so well know what the true
old Gallick Letters were, the people being strangers to the Romans, and he
having but lately had any converse with them, and so might very probably
mistake, in thinking that, because the Letters were the same, the Gauls might
borrow the Greek Letters to make use of; whereas the contrary (to wit, that the
Greeks, after the disuse of the Phoenician Letters, which Cadmus had brought
over into Greece, took the Gallick in their stead) is averred by Lazius,
Becanus, etc.

CHAP. X.
Page 15. lin. 12. From the sixth Moon.] Whether that were from the sixth Month
they began their reckoning, which among the Romans, was August, therefore
called formerly Sextilis, as the rest that follow according to order, are
styled September, October, etc. or whether it were from the sixth day of the
Moon's age, (as they apply by way of Proverb Quarta Luna nati to the
unfortunate, Hercules having been born on such a day of the Moon) is none of my
business to determine, but to leave it to the Readers own inquiry and judgment.

Lin. 17. Nestor's triple age.] Which if it be reckoned according to this
account of Thirty Years to an Age, makes but Ninety years in all. And though
that also be a great Age for a man to handle Arms, and to attend the duty and
service of War, yet that is not so extraordinary a case, but that others may be
found in Story to stand in competition with him. Besides it falls short of that
description, which Homer has given of him, (...). Which implies, that he had
outlived two Generations (to wit, the Fathers which had been bred up with him,
and the Sons which had grown up into his acquaintance) and that now he reigned
among the Grandchildren, the Third generation, the two former having been
swept off the Stage. And in this sense the Latins took it, as appears by
Horace, who says of him ter Aevo functus, that he had gone through the course
of nature, lived out the life of man, three times over; and in that he is
styled by another old Poet triseclisenex, that is, the Three hundred years old
Gentleman; for as aevum in the one signifies the whole space of humane life, so
seculum in the other is constantly taken for a Hundred years.

Page 16. lin. 2. Greece, all over Italy.] For all the lower part of Italy was
at that time inhabited by the Greeks, and from them called Magna Graecia, or
Graecia Major, in opposition, I suppose, only to Sicily the neighboring Isle,
as being alike inhabited by Greeks, but of less extent.

Lin. 18. Voitland.] A Province of Germany, in the Upper Saxony.

Lin. 21. Having their heads uncovered.] That as they were barefooted, so they
were bare-headed also, perfect Gymnosophists. The Latin is nudis pedibus,
capita intectae, Graecanico pallio and cucullato, penulaque, and may be rendered
indeed, having their heads covered or muffled. But how? With a Pall hooded and
a Satchell. I, but what had the Satchell to do with their heads, that hung at
their side, and so they are pictured. But to pass this, Reader, thou art at thy
own choice, to take which interpretation of the two thou will; for the Latin
word intectae, as I said, admits of either.

CHAP. XII.
Page 18. lin. 10. The Women carried it for Minerva against Neptune.] There is
another account given of this Story, that these two Gods being in a contest,
which of them should be entitled to the Presidence of this City Athens, they
did each of them, to oblige the Community in their favor, by a Miracle cause
to rise out of the ground, the one ( Neptune) an Horse, to denote Prowess and
warlike Courage, the other ( Minerva) an Olive Tree laden with fruit, an
Emblem of Peace and Fruitfulness; and that the Citizens preferred the latter,
as the greater merit and more welcome blessing.

Lin. 26. Juno, Salacia, Proserpina.] Juno was Jove the Thunderer's Consort, as
Proserpine was the forced Mate of grim Pluto, the infernal Queen. The third,
Salacia, Lady of the Sea, was Wife to Neptune, as* S. Austin has it out of
some of the old Roman Writers: though among the Poets she generally pass by the
name of Amphitrite.

Page 19. lin. 25. Amalasincta, Artemisia, Nicaula, etc.] These brave Ladies or
She-Heroes are famous upon record, and need not any thing further for their
commendation, but their Name. This Artemisia mentioned here, was not the Wife
of Mausolus, a virtuous and magnificent Woman too, but another who lived in
Xerxes's time, a great Commandress, in alliance with him. Nicaula, it seems,
though whence he learned her Name, I cannot tell, for Scripture gives it us
not; was she, who is there called the Queen of the South, a great admirer of
Solomon's Wisdom.

CHAP. XV.
Page 25, 26. The Inscriptions, which are left un-englished, are only brought
in, to evidence, that there were several Roman Colonies, beside that at Maldon,
called Colonia Victricensis, planted up and down in Britain; to wit, at York,
at Chester, at Gloucester, and I doubt not but at Colchester too, no less than
there was one at Cullen in Germany, as the very name of them both imports,
Colonia. And that ours has an addition of Chester to it, is usual to some
other Cities: Colchester for Colnchester, which in Latin would be Colonia
Gastri, or rather Coloniae Castrum, the Castle or Garrison of the Colony.

CHAP. XVI.
Page 28. lin. 11. Now you for your part are Gods Vicegerent in the Kingdom.]
They are the words of Pope Eleutherius in his Letter to Lucy, the first
Christian King, which was in the year of our Lord 183. From whence we may
fairly conclude, that in those early days, the Pope of Rome according to his
own acknowledgement had no such pretensions as now for several Ages since they
have made, upon the Rights of Princes, to the great disturbance of the World,
and reproach of Christian Religion. And indeed this is the more considerable,
in that such was the simplicity of devotion in those early Converts, and such
the deference, which Princes who embraced the Christian Faith, especially from
the Missionaries of Rome, had for that Holy See, as appears by this one single
instance; that it had been no hard matter, nor could be judged an unreasonable
thing, for them to lay claim to a right, and assert a power, which was so
voluntarily offered. Further I add, that seeing the Donation of Constantine,
besides that it was always looked upon as a piece of forgery, was at best,
supposing it true, but an Imperial Grant and Concession, which would not be of
authority enough to bear up the Popes Supremacy in all other Kingdoms of the
earth; and seeing Pope Boniface, who was the first that with bare face owned
it, his compliance with Phocas was so grossly wicked, that none of their own
Writers but are ashamed to make that transaction betwixt those two, an argument
for the Papal pretense: Seeing, I say, it is so, if the Pope be entitled, as
their Canonists pretend, to an Universal Dominion by virtue of his Office, and
by Commission from Christ and his chief Apostle S. Peter, how came it to pass,
that the Bishops of Rome all along till Boniface, were so modest, as not to
challenge any such rights or powers; nay, upon occasion to declare against such
pretenses, as Antichristian; which, if that be true, that the Pope is by his
Office, and by a Divine Commission instated into a Supremacy, was in effect no
less, than to betray the cause of Christ and his Church: how came it to pass,
that Eleutherius should neglect such a seasonable and exemplary opportunity of
maintaining and exercising his right, and should rather choose to return it in a
complement back to the King his Convert? VICARIVS vero DEI estis in Regno,
says he, You are GOD's VICAR in your Kingdom: which Title now the Pope does
with as much arrogance challenge to himself, as here one of his Predecessors
does with modesty ascribe to the King.

Lin. 32. With the title of Spectabilis.] Toward the declension of the Roman
Empire, it was usual so to distinguish great Offices with peculiar Titles, as
Spectabilis, Clarissimus, etc. so among the Italians, Magnifico to a Senator of
Venice, Illustrissimo to any Gentleman, Eminentissimo to a Cardinal: So with us
the term of Highness is given to a Prince of the Blood, Excellence to a
Viceroy or a Lord Lieutenant and to a General of an Army, Grace to an
Archbishop and to a Duke, Honor to a Lord, Worship to an Esquire, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
P. 29. lin. 43. Fabius Quaestor Aethelwerd.] Why he calls him Fabius Quaestor,
is at present past my understanding. Did he take upon him a Roman name? Was he
in any such Office as Quaestor, i. e. Treasurer or Receiver General, wherein he
behaved himself like a Fabius? or did he entitle his Book by that name? I am to
seek.

CHAP. XVIII.
Page 31. lin. 19. Whatsoever there was in Pandora of Good and Fair.] She was a
Woman made by Jupiter's own order, and designed to be the pattern of female
perfection: to which end all the Gods contributed to the making of her several
gifts, one Wisdom, another Beauty, a third Eloquence, a fourth Music, etc.

CHAP. XIX.
P. 32. lin. 27. Wapentakes.] Which in some of our Northern Countries is the
same as we call other-where a Hundred, from the Saxon word waepen, i. e. arms,
and tac, i. e. touch; as one should say, a touching or shaking of their Arms.
For, as we read it in King Edward's Laws, when any one came to take upon him
the Government of a Wapentake, upon a day appointed all that owed suit and
service to that Hundred, came to meet their new Governor at the usual place of
their Rendezvous. He upon his arrival, lighting off his Horse, set up his Lance
an end (a Custom used also among the Romans by the Praetor at the meetings of
the Centumviri) and according to custom took fealty of them. The Ceremony of
which was, that all who were present, touched the Governors Lance with their
Lances, in token of a confirmation: whereupon that whole meeting was called a
Wapentake, inasmuch as by the mutual touch of one another Arms, they had
entered into a confederacy and agreement to stand by one another. This fashion,
they say, the Saxons took up from the Macedonians their Progenitors. Others
will have it from tac to take, and give this account of it, that the Lord of
the Hundred at his first entrance upon the place was used to take the Tenants
Arms, surrendered and delivered up to him by themselves, in token of subjection
by way of Homage. Sir Thomas Smith differs from both these; for he says, that
at the Hundred meeting, there was a Muster taken of their Weapons or Arms; and
that those who could not find sufficient Pledges for their good abearing, had
their Weapons taken away; so that in his sense a Wapentake is properly
Armilustrium, and so called from taking away their Weapons or Arms, who were
found unfit to be trusted with them.

L. 40. For the Ceremony of the Gown.] He alludes to the Roman Custom, with
whom the youth, when they arrived at man's estate, were then allowed to wear
togam virilem, to put on a Gown, the habit of men; whereas before that, they
were obliged to wear a Coat peculiar to the age of Childhood, called Praetexta:
whence Papyrius, though yet a Child, being admitted into the Senate House for
his extraordinary secrecy and manly constancy, was called Papyrius Praetextatus.

Page 33. lin. 9. Morgangheb.] Or Morgingab, from Morgin, which in High Dutch
signifies the Morning, and gab, a gift; to wit, that Present, which a man makes
to his Wife, that morning he marries her.

CHAP. XX.
Page 34. lin. 3. Tityus his Liver.] A Giant, who for ravishing of Latona was
adjudged to have his Liver after death preyed upon continually by a Vulture,
which grew up again as fast as it was wasted. The equity of which punishment
lay in this, that the Liver is reputed the source and seat of all lusts and
unlawful desires, and does naturally, as some Physicians hold, receive the
first taint of Venereal distempers (the rewards of impure mixtures) according
to that of Solomon, speaking of an Adulterer, Till a dart strike thorough his
Liver; from whence they gather, that that, which we now call the French Pox,
was not unknow even in that age of the World.

L. 26. Prema and Mutinus.] This latter a Title given to Priapus, much-what
such a God, as Baal Peor was; the other a Goddess forsooth much to the same
purpose. For the old Romans had Gods and Goddesses, as the present Romans have
Saints, for every thing, for every action of life. But their Offices were such,
as the modest Reader will easily excuse the want of explaining them.

Lin. 38. Says Progne to her Sister Philomel.] Tereus King of Thrace having
married Progne Daughter of Pandion King of Athens, when he went to fetch her
Sister Philomel, ravished her by the way on Shipboard; which occasioned a
bloody revenge in the murder of his Son Itys. At last they were turned all four
into so many several sorts of Birds; Progne into a Swallow, Philomel into a
Nightingale, Tereus into a Lapwing, and Itys into a Pheasant.

CHAP. XXI.
Page 36. lin. 20. With head-money called Wergild.] A word compounded of the
Saxon were, the price or value or worth of a man, and geld or gild, a payment.
That is, he that had killed another, was to buy off his life, by paying the
full value of the person slain. The prizes or rates are set down in Ethelstan's
Laws, by Thrimsa's, a kind of Coin, or piece of money, of the value of three
shillings, says Mr. Lambard; which being reduced to our Sterling stand thus. A
Peasant, 40 l. 1 s. A Thane, or one in Orders, 300 l. A General, or Chieftain,
600 l. A Bishop, or Alderman, 1200 l. An Archbishop, or Peer, 2250 l. And a
King, 4500 l. Half of which last sum was to go to the Kindred, and the other
half to the public. And these Rates are set, he says, by the Common Law of
the English. The reason of this pecuniary compensation, was their tenderness of
life, that two men might not dye upon the account of the same mischance,
according to that saying in an ancient Law, Nulla sit culpa tam gravis, ut vita
non concedatur, propter timorem Dei. But yet withal in some cases of
premeditated or clandestine murder, they were not excused from making
satisfaction with their life; or in case one were not able to pay the were, or
Fine, he was punished with death. I called this Head-money, because in Latin
it is termed capitis aestimatio, the value or price of a man's head: not in that
sense as either Chevage or Poll-money is so called.

CHAP. XXII.
Page 37. lin. 42. In the Margin Caxton is quoted, a Book, it seems, rare; of
which he says, That Book, that goes up and down by this name, Mr. War in
Townsend of Lincoln's Inn, a Gentleman Noble by his Descent and Learning both,
very friendly lent me for my use in a very fair Manuscript; which courtesy of
his, I cannot but think it a foul shame for me, not to own and acknowledge with
all thankfulness.

Page 38. lin. 17, 18. Even now in the time of those that are called the Good.
It Is William of Malmesbury, whom he quotes; etiam nunc tempore Bonorum. Whether
he mean Good Princes, who would have those Laws observed, or Honest Subjects,
who would observe them, or whether there were any sort of men in his time that
went by that Character of Boni, good men, is more than I have to say. There was
at one time a sort of Religious persons, that went by the name of Bon Hommes;
but that can have nothing to do in this business.

CHAP. XXIII.
Page 39. lin. 14. Every Native home-born lawful man.] In the Latin it is
Indigena legalis, in the Saxon Law-term it is Inlaughe or Inlaugh, that is, one
that is under the Law, Inlagatus, who is in Frank pledge, or belongs to some
Court Leet: as all Males from twelve years old and upwards were obliged to be.
So Bracton tells us.

Lin. 27. Decenna.] The same as Decuria, which is generally rendered a Tithing,
i.e. a Company of ten men with their families, all of them bound to the King to
answer for one another good and peaceable behavior. From the Latin word it is
called a Dozein, and the people that belong to it are called Deciners or
Dozeniers, that is, Decennarii. The chief of them is termed Decurio or Decanus
Friburgi, the Tithing-man or Headborough. And all Males of twelve years age and
upwards (except Nobles and Religious persons) were obliged to be of some Dozein
or other. But now there are no other Dozeins but Leets, and no other security
there given for the Kings Peace, but the persons own Oath.

Lin. 29. Friborgh.] From the Saxon freo, free, and borgh* a surety or
security: or, as some write it, Fridburgh, from frid, peace, and burgh, a
surety. If it be taken for the person, it is the same that a Deciner (we now
spoke of;) if for the action, it is their being sureties for one another: if
for the company of these mutual ingagers, it is the same as Decuria, a Tything,
in Saxon tienmannatale, i. e. the number of ten men. The Normans retained the
same custom, but altered the name, calling it Frankpledg, from the French,
Frank, i. e. free, and pledge, i. e. surety. And the compass or circuit of this
Frankpledg the same as that of Friburg, to wit, the Decenna or Dozein, i. e.
ten households.

Lin. 40. Manupastus.] Of this Bracton sets down a Rule for Law, that every
person, whether freeman or servant, either is or ought to be in frank-pledge
or of some bodies mainpast. Now he is of ones Mainpast, says he, who is
allowed Victuals and Clothes, or Victuals only and Wages. And this was the
reason, why great men were not obliged to be of any ordinary Dozein, because
Bishops, Earls and Barons, as the same Bracton informs us, ought to have their
menial servants in their own Friborgh, and to answer to the King for their
behavior, and to pay what forfeits they should make, if they had not the
persons themselves forthcoming. And this, says he, is the case of all those
who are of any ones Mainpast.

CHAP. XXIV.
P. 41. lin. 16. John Scot Erigena.] A School-man famous for his subtilty,
called in Latin, Johannes Duns Scotus. Whether Duns were the Name of his
Family, as it might be, Johannes de Dunis, which in English would be John
Downs; or whether it were a Nickname given him for his slovenliness and seeming
blockishness, from the word Dunce, which in Barbarous Latin is Dunsa, (For so
in Camden's Remains we find the Emperor Charles, as I take it, putting that
question to him, as he sat at Table over against him, Quid interest inter
Scotum and Sotum, What difference between a Scot and a Sot? to which he as
freely replied, Mensa, the Table, Sir) I shall not determine. But Scotus or
Scot, is the name of his Country, he being a Scotch-man, and for that reason
called also Erigena, that is, Irish born, to wit, a Highlander; for those
people were originally Irish, and came out of that Island over into the North
parts of Scotland. Now Ireland is by several Authors Greek and Latin called
Ierna, and by the Inhabitants themselves Erin.

L. 43. The Goddess Anna Perenna.] The Lady President of the year, Anna ab
Anno; to whom they addressed their devotions, that she would perennare, that is,
preserve and continue health and plenty and prosperity from year to year; for
which reason she was called Anna Perenna. Now our Author here brings in
long-lived Nestor and this Goddess, to show that those good fellows in quaffing
of healths, do wish muchos annos, as the Spaniard says, many and many a years
life to their absent friends, while in the mean time by tossing off so many
bowsing Canns, they shorten their own lives.

Page 42. lin. 24. Englescyre.] Or Englecerie, that is, the being an
Englishman. For there was a Law made by King Knute in favor of his Danes (and
so afterward it was interpreted in behalf of the Francigenae, Frenchmen, or
whatever foreigners) that if any such were privily murdered or slain, the
Village, where the fact was done, should be amerced in a lusty fine to the
King, unless they could prove Englecerie, that is, that the murdered person was
an Englishman, one born of English Parents, in which case there was no fine
levied. So that the Danes and French, when they governed here, provided they
might secure themselves from the English, were well enough content to let them
destroy one another.

CHAP. XXV.
Page 44. lin. 11. An Olympiad.] An account of time used by the Greeks,
consisting of four years, so called from the Olympic Games, which were
celebrated in honor of Jupiter Olympius every fifth year. This reckoning began
first in the year of the World three thousand one hundred seventy four.

In the SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Page 48. l. 5. By right of Freehold.] Allodii jure, that is, by a man's own
right, without acknowledgment of service or fealty, or payment of Rent to any
other as a Superior Lord. In which respect it is opposed to an Estate in Fee,
wherein though a man has a perpetual right to him and to his heirs for ever,
yet seeing he owes a duty and service for it, it cannot be said properly and
simply to be his own. And such are all men's Estates here in England, but the
Kings in the right of his Crown, who cannot be supposed to hold of another, or
to owe fealty to any Superior, but to God only.

Lin. 12. Under Military service.] Or Knights service, that is, to find the
King such a number of Men and Arms in time of War, as it is here expressed. See
Cowell in the word Chivalry. Indeed the Clergy before the Conqueror in the
time of the Saxons (as we find it in the five and twentieth Chapter of the
first Book) were allowed to be free from Secular Services, but with an
Exception and Reserve however of these things, to wit, Expedition, Repairing of
Castles and Building of Bridges, from which last duty the Highpriests among
the Romans were called Pontifices, i. e. Bridge-makers. Now this bringing of
the Bishops Baronies under Knights Service, was sure enough designed to engage
them into a close dependence upon the Crown, and to take them off from
hankering after any foreign Power, to which they might pretend to owe any
subordination; as all along the times of Popery, out of reverence to the Holy
See, they were forward enough upon occasion to think themselves obliged to do,
even to the high discontent and great disservice of their Kings.

CHAP. II.
Page 51. lin. 12. Ready money.] So I render Viva pecunia: which though Spelman
says it is so called, that it may the more expressly signify pecudes, i. e.
Cattle; yet he does not to me, I confess, make out by any fair instance that it
does ever so signify; and that it cannot be taken in that sense here, is plain
from what immediately goes before, quot animalia, imo quantum vivae pecuniae
quisque possidebat: where animalia living creatures include pecudes the Cattle.

CHAP. III.
Page 54. lin. 32. Boseham.] What Earl Godwin's trick was, or wherein the
conceit lay, I cannot at present well imagine, unless it were in the
equivocation or misunderstanding of the word Boseham, as it falls in with the
word Bosom in the pronunciation and sound of it; thus. Supposing the Earl at
meeting of the Archbishop, coming up to him upon pretense of saluting him
said, Give me your Boseham, my Lord; to which the Archbishop thinking belike,
he might, by way of desiring his Pastoral embrace, mean only his bosom, readily
made answer, I give you my bosom; which the Earl with a cunning fetch
interpreted a Grant of his Estate of Boseham.

Pardon, Reader, my mistake, if it be one; since I have no better account, from
my own guess, to give, meeting with no help from our Law-Dictionaries.

CHAP. IV.
P. 56. lin. 8. The first Sheriffs of Counties.] A Sheriff or Shyrereed
signifies the Governor of a County, called in Latin Vice-comes, as Deputy to
the Count or Lord or Chief Man of the County; though even in the Confessor's
time he was reckoned the Kings Officer, and not the Counts. This Office, as Mr.
Camden tells us, was first set up by King Alfred, who also divided England into
Counties, and those Counties again into Hundreds and Tythings.

Lin. 29. Other Judges without appeal.] This should seem to be the Court of
Chancery: for which reason the Lord Chancellor is said to keep the Kings
conscience, as here these Judges are compared to the Kings bosom.

Lin. 37. Acting a Busiris his part.] i. e. Treating strangers ill; he being a
cruel Tyrant of Egypt, who slew strangers, and sacrificed them to his Gods:
whence the Proverb, Busiridis arae.

Page 57. lin. 39. that he should pay it at the Scale.] That is, should pay it
by weight, or according to full weight.

CHAP. VI.
Page 60. lin. 17. Being Lord Chief Justice of the whole Kingdom.] In the Latin
it is thus expressed; totius regni placitator and exactor: where I confess the
former title of the two gave me the occasion of my mistake, as if he had been
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas: whereas I should rather have rendered it
thus; who had been (to wit, in King Rufus his time) Pleader or Demander and
Receiver of the Kings duties throughout the whole Kingdom. For such an Officer
this Exactor regius was, otherwise called Grasio. See Spelman upon both those
words.

Lin. 39. In the times of the Saxons a Hereot.] This at first was a tribute
given to the Lord for his better preparation toward War; but afterward though
the name were kept, the thing was altered, being taken for the best Chattle,
that the Tenant has at the hour of his death, due to the Lord by custom, be it
Horse, Ox, etc. That Hereot and Relief do not signify the same thing, appears
by this, that they are both often sound to be paid out of one and the same
Tenure, and again that the heir always succeeds into the Estate upon the payment
of the Relief, but not always upon the payment of the Hereot.

Lin. 42. In French is called a Relief.] From the Verb Relever, to raise again
and take up the Estate which had fallen into the Lords hand by the death of the
Ancestor. It is a sum of money, which the new Homager, when he is come to age,
pays to the Lord for his admission or at his entrance into the estate. Whence
by the old Civilians it is called Introitus, and in Greek (...). This sum was
moderately set; wherein it differed from Ransom, which was much more severe.
The Kings rates upon his Homagers were thus: An Earls heir was to give an
hundred Pounds, a Barons an hundred Marks, a Knights an hundred Shillings at
most; and those of lesser estate less, according to the ancient custom of their
Tenures: as Spelman quotes it out of the Charter of Henry the Third.

Page 61. lin. 11. Of the greater Uavasors.] They were a sort of Gentlemen next
in degree to the Barons. They did not hold immediately of the King, but of some
Duke, Marquess or Earl. And those that held from them again, were called
Valvasini, or the lesser Vavasors. There is little certainty what their Offices
or Privileges were, or indeed whence they were so called; whether qu. ad
valvas stantes, or valvae assidentes, for their sitting or standing at their
Lords door, (if those of that quality did so) as some would have it; or that
they kept the doors or entrances of the Kingdom against the enemies, as Spelman
says; or whether from Vassal^i, as the Feudists derive the name, from that
inferior Tenure they had mediately from the King by his great Lords; which
seems the more likely, because these greater Vavasors, who did so hold, are
sometimes termed Valvasores regii and Vassi dominici, that is, the Kings
Vassals.

Lin. 27. Her Dowry and right of Marriage.] In the Latin it is dotem suam and
maritagium. Now Dos is otherwise taken in the English, than in the Roman Laws;
not for that which the man receives with his Wife at marriage, a Portion: but
for that which the Woman has left her by her Husband at his death, a Dowry.
And Maritagium is that which is given to a Man with his Wife, so that it is the
same as Dos among the Romans, says Spelman. But this is too general, I think,
that the man should be obliged to return at his death all to his Wife that he
had with her, beside leaving her a Dowry. I am therefore rather inclined to
Cowell, who tells us, Maritagium signifies Land bestowed in marriage; which, it
seems, by this Law was to return to the Wife, if her Husband dyed before her.
The word has another sense also, which does not belong to this place, being
sometime taken for that which Wards were to pay to the Lord for his leave and
consent that they might marry themselves, which if they did against his
consent, it was called Forfeiture of marriage.

Lin. 35. The common Duty of Money or Coinage.] So I render the word
Monetagium. For it appears, that in ancient times the Kings of England had
Mints in most of the Countries and Cities of this Realm. See Cowell in the word
Moniers. For which privilege, it is likely, they paid some duty to the chief
place of the Mint. Thus in Doom^sday we read, as Spelman quotes it, that in the
City Winecestre every Monyer paid twenty shillings to London; and the reason
given, pro cuneis monetae accipiendis, for having Stamps or Coins of Money. For
from this Latin word Cuneus (which our Lawyers have turned into Cuna, from
whence the Verb Cunare) comes our English word Coin. Now it is more than
probable, that the Officers of the Chief Mint might by their exactions upon the
inferior Mints give occasion for the making of this Law.

Lin. 42. Or Children or Parents.] By Parent here we are to understand not a
Father or Mother, but a Cousin, one akin; as the word signifies in French, and
as it is used in our Laws. And indeed the Latin word it self began to have that
sense put upon it in vulgar speech, toward the declension of the Empire, as
Lampridius informs us.

Page 62. lin. 21. A pawn in the scarcity of his money.] That is, if he were
not able to pay his forfeit in specie, i. e. to lay down the money, he was to
give security by a pawn of some of his Goods or Chattels. See Cowell in the
word Gage. This in Latin is called Vadium, a pawn or pledge, from Vas, vadis, a
surety. Hence Invadiare, to pawn or engage a thing by way of security, till a
debt be paid.

Lin. 23. Nor shall he make amends.] From the French amend, in our Law-Latin
emenda: which differs from a Fine (or mulct) in this, that the Fine was given
to the Judge, but Amends was to be made to the Party aggrieved. Now there were
three sorts of this Amend, the Greater which was like a full Forfeiture, the
Mid-one at reasonable terms, and the Least or Lowest which was like a gentle
Amercement. This distinction will help to explain the meaning of this Law.

L. 30. Per fee de Hauberke.] This in Latin is called Feudum Hauberticum, i. e.
Loricatum, says Hotoman, from the French word Haubert, that is, a Coat of
Mail, when a Vassal holds Land of the Lord on this condition, that when he is
called, he be ready to attend his Lord with a Coat of Mail or complete Armor
on. Now Haubert, as Spelman tells us, properly signifies a High Lord or Baron,
from Haut or hault, high, and Ber (the same as Baro) a Man or Baron. And
because these great Lords were obliged by their place and service to wait upon
the King in his Wars on Horseback with complete Armor, and particularly with
a Coat of Mail on: hence it came, says he, that the Coat of Mail it self was
also called Haubert; though he does afterward acknowledge that the word is
extended to all other Vassals, who are under that kind of Tenure. But then at
last he inclines to think, that the true ancient writing of the word is Hauberk
(not Haubert) as it were Hautberg, i. e. the chief or principal piece of
Armor; and Berg he will have to signify Armor, as he makes out in some of
its compounds, Bainberg Armor for the Legs, and Halsberg Armor for the Neck
and Breast: and derives it from the Saxon Beorgan, i. e. to arm, to defend. Add
to this, says he, that the French themselves (and we from them) call it an
Haubergeon, as it were Haubergium.

Lin. 33. From all Gelds.] The Saxon word geld or gild signifies a Tribute or
Tax, an Amercement, a payment of money, and money it self: whence I doubt not,
but the best sort of money was called Gold. It is from the Verb geldan or
gyldan, to pay. In Latin it is Geldum, and not Gilda, as Cowell writes it. For
this signifies quite another thing, a Fraternity or Company of Merchants or the
like. Whence a Gildhall, that is the Hall of the Gild or Society: such as was
once the Stilyard, called Gildhalla Teutonicorum, the Gild-hall for the Dutch
Merchants from the Hanse-Towns.

CHAP. VII.
Page 63. lin. 25. Iphis and Ianthis and Ceneus.] Persons mentioned by Ovid,
who changed their Sex, from Female to Male. Iphis was a Maid of Creet, who
after her Metamorphosis when she turned to Man, took Ianthe to Wife: and Caenis
(for that was her Maiden Name) was a Thessalian Girl, whom Neptune made a Whore
of first, and then at her request a Man, who thenceforward went by the Name of
Caeneus.

Lin. 34. Cheats, whom they commonly call Coyners.] In Malmesbury's Latin,
Trapezitas, quos vulgo Monetarios vocant. Which bare citation is all the
account, that Spelman gives of the word Monetarius. It does properly signify
an Officer of the Mint, that makes and coyns the Kings money; a Monier. But
here by the Historian's implying that such fellows, as this Law was made
against, were falsarii, Cheats, and by our Author's terming of them
adulteratores monetae, Counterfeiters of Coin: we must understand them to be
False Coyners, Clippers, Washers, Imbasers of the Kings Coin, and the like. And
therefore I rendered trapezitas (which otherwise is a word of innocent meaning
for Money Changers, Bankers, etc.) in the Historian's sense Cheats.

CHAP. VIII.
Page 65. lin. 24. Every Hide of Land.] It is so called from the Saxon word
hyden, to cover; so that thus it would be the same as Tectum in Latin, a
Dwelling House. And thus I question not, but there are several houses called
The Hide: for I know one or two my self so called, that is, the Capital
Message of the Estate. Nor is it so confined to this sense, but that it takes
in all the Lands belonging to the Message or Manour-house, which the old
Saxons called hidelandes, and upon some such account no doubt Hidepark had its
name, as a Park belonging to some great House. Now as to the quantity, how much
a Hide of land is, it is not well agreed. Some reckon it an hundred Acres,
others thereabouts, by making it contain four Yardlands, every Yardland
consisting of twenty four Acres. The general opinion is, that it was as much as
could be ploughed with one Plow in a year, terra unius aratri culturae
sufficiens. And thus it should be much what the same as Carrucata terrae, i. e.
a Plough-land. From Bid, who translates it familia, they gather it was so much
as could maintain a family. There is mention made of these Hides in the Laws of
King Ina, an hundred years before King Alfred, who divided the Country into
Counties or Shires. And Taxes and Assessments were wont to be made according to
these Hides; up as high as King Ethelred's time in the year of our Lord 1008.
Since the Conquest, William the First had six shillings for every Hide in
England, Rufus four, Henry the First here three for the marriage of his
daughter.

Page 66. lin. 8. This right is called Wreck.] i. e. by which the King claims
shipwrack't goods cast on shore. For though by the Law of Nature such things,
as being nullius in bonis, having no Owner, every one that finds them may seem
to have a right to them; yet by the Law of Nations they are adjudged to the
Prince as a special privilege by reason of his dignity. Now Wreck (or as the
French call it Varec) properly signifies any thing that is cast on shore, as
Amber, precious Stones, Fishes, etc. as well as shipwrack't goods: from the
Saxon wraec, i. e. any thing that is flung away and left forlorn; though use
has limited the word to the later sense.

CHAP. IX.
Page 68. lin. 6. The Roman Laws were banished the Realm.] I suppose there may
be some word missing or mistaken in the Latin, a regno jussae sunt leges
Romanae: But that which follows, the forbidding of the Books, obliged me to
that interpretation: for why should the Books of those Laws be prohibited, if
the Laws themselves were (as the Latin reading seems to import) ordered and
ratified by the Realm. Wherefore I suppose some mistake, or omission, and for a
regno jussae, read a regno pulsae or exulare jussae, etc. unless you would like
to have it thus rendered, commanded out of the Kingdom: which I confess would be
a very odd unusual construction.

CHAP. X.
Page 69. lin. 39. Three hundred Marks of Gold.] A Mark weighed eight ounces,
and as Cowell states it out of Stow, it came to the value of 16 l. 13 s. 4 d.
At this rate three hundred Marks of Gold come to five thousand Pound; and to
every Bishop five Marks, supposing only ten Bishops, come to 833 l. 6 s. 8 d.
which is a very unlikely sum in this business. It Is true, the value of it, as
of other Coyns and sums, might vary. And so we find in Spelman, that an
uncertain Author reckons a Mark of Gold to be worth fifty Marks of Silver. But
then it is as uncertain, what Marks of Silver he means. For if they be such as
ours are (and as they were in King John's time) at 13 s. 4 d. then a Mark of
Gold will be of the value of 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. which is just double to the former
value of 16 l. 13 s. 4 d. (which being resolved into Marks of Silver, makes but
25.) But in ancient times a Mark of Silver was only 2 s. 6 d. so that fifty of
them will make but 6 l. 5 s. Another instance we meet with, where one Mark of
Gold is accounted equivalent to ten Marks of Silver; which taking a Mark for 13
s. 4 d. comes to 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Another, where nine Marks of Silver pass for
one Mark of Gold, in a payment to the King: which is just six pound. And these
three last accounts agree pretty well together. Taking the middlemost of the
three, viz. a Mark of Gold at ten Marks of Silver; thus the above named sum of
three hundred Marks of Gold, that is, three thousand Marks of Silver amounts to
two thousand Pound; and the five Marks to every Bishop (supposing but ten
Bishops) come to 333 l. 6 s. 8 d. But if we take these Marks of Silver at 2 s.
6 d. the account will grow much less. For ten such Marks are but 1 l. 5 s. so
that the three hundred Marks of Gold at this rate will come but to 375 l.
Sterling. But that these Marks of the ancient and lower estimate are not here
intended, may probably enough be gathered from one passage more we find there,
Centum solidi dentur vel marca auri, where, if solidi stand for shillings (for
they may be taken for soulx as the French call them) a Mark of Gold is made of
equal value with 5 l. Sterling. And thus three hundred Marks of Gold come to
Fifteen hundred pound.

I confess after all, most of these accounts of the Mark, Gold or Silver, may
be admitted of, as having possibly at some time or other been true; since money,
both in its Coyns and Sums, has in several Ages of the World, risen, and
fallen according to its plenty or scarcity.

Lin. 42. Being arighted and accused of any matter.] Or rather in the
Law-spelling arrested; in Latin rectatus, that is, ad rectum vocatus, convened
before a Magistrate and charged with a crime. Thus ad rectum habere, is in
Bracton, to have a man forth coming, so as he may be charged and put upon his
trial. It may be also rendered, taken upon suspicion. It is written sometime
retatus and irretitus.

Page 70. lin. 33. To give suretiship for the Remainder.] I confess I do not
well know how to apply to this place that sense, which our Common Law takes the
word Remainder in, for a power or hope to enjoy Lands, Tenements or Rents after
another estate or term expired; when an estate does not revert to the Lord or
Granter of it, but remains to be enjoyed by some third person. What if we say,
that as Bishops could not (because their estates are of Alms) grant any part of
their Demeans ad remanentiam, for ever or to perpetuity, so here Excommunicate
persons were not obliged dare vadium ad remanentiam, to find sureties for
continuance or for perpetuity, that is, for their future good behavior, but
only to stand to the judgment of the Church in that particular case for which
they were at present sentenced.

CHAP. XI.
Page 72. lin. 24. If a Claim or Suit shall arise.] In the Latin, si calumnia
emerserit, a known and frequent word in our Law, which signifies a Claim or
Challenge, otherwise termed clameum.

Lin. 37. Till it shall by Plea be deraigned.] or dereyned: which is in French
dereyne, in the Latin, disrationatum, which as it has several significations
in Law, so here it imports, after a full debate and fair hearing, the
determination of the matter by the judgment of the Court.

CHAP. XII.
Page 75. lin. 2. By the name of Yumen.] The same say some, as the Danes call
young men. Others derive the word from the Saxon geman, or the old Dutch Gemen,
that is, common, and so it signifies a Commoner. Sir Tho. Smith calls him
Yoman, whom our Laws term legalem hominem, a Freeman born (so Camden renders
it by Ingenuus) who is able to spend of his own free Land in yearly Revenue to
the sum of Forty Shillings, such as we now, I suppose, call Freeholders, who
have a Voice at the Election of Parliament Men. But here the word is taken in a
larger sense, so as to include servile Tenure also or Villenage.

CHAP. XIII.
Page 77. lin. 5. Leude-men.] From the Saxon Leod, the common people. It
signified in Law a Subject, a Liege man, a Vassal, a Tenant: hence in
High Dutch a Servant was called Leute, in Old English a Lout. But in common
acception Lewd was formerly taken for a Layman, (...), one of the people, or
for any illiterate person. Now it is used to denote one who is wicked or loose
and debauched.

CHAP. XIV.
Page 79. lin. 8. The States of the Kingdom, the Baronage.] He means the whole
Parliament, and not only the House of Lords by the word Baronage. For though by
Barons, now we properly understand the Peers of the Realm; yet anciently all
Lords of Manours, those who kept Court Baron, were styled Barons: Nay Spelman
tells us, that all Freeholders went by that name before the Free-holds were
quit let out into such small pittances, as now they are, while Noblemen
kept their Lands in their own hands, and managed them by their Vassals. Cowell
gives this further account of those Lords of Manours, that he had heard by men
very learned in our Antiquities, that near after the Conquest all such came to
Parliament, and sat as Nobles in the Upper House. But, as he goes on, when by
experience it appeared, that the Parliament was too much pestered with such
multitudes, it grew to a custom, that none should come but such as the King,
for their extraordinary wisdom or quality, thought good to call by Writ, which
Writ ran hac vice tantum, that is, only for this turn. So that then it depended
wholly upon the Kings pleasure. And then he proceeds to show, how after that
they came to be made Barons by Letters Patents, and the Honor to descend to
their posterity.

Lin. 27. By way of safe pledge.] That is, to oblige them to give security for
the parties appearance against the day assigned; who in case of default were to
undergo the damage and peril of it.

Page 80. lin. 7. St. Peter's pence.] These Peter Pence were also called in
Saxon, Romescot and Romefeoh (that is, a Tribute or Fee due to Rome) and
Rome-penny and Hearth-penny. It was paid yearly by every Family (a Penny a
house) at the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula on the first day of August. It was
granted first, says our Author out of Malmesbury, by Ina or Inas King of the
West Saxons, when he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, in the year of our Lord 720.
But there is a more clear account given by Spelman (in the word Romascot) that
it was done by Offa King of the Mercians, out of an Author that wrote his Life.
And it is this, That Offa after thirty six years Reign having vowed to build a
Stately Monastery to the memory of St. Alban the British Protomartyr, he went
on Pilgrimage to Rome, Adrian the First then Pope, to beg Indulgences and more
than ordinary Privileges for the intended work. He was kindly received, and
got what he came for; and the next day going to see an English School, that had
been set up at Rome, he for the maintenance of the poor English in that School,
gave a Penny for every house, to be paid every year throughout his Dominion,
(which was no less than three and twenty Shires at that time) only the Lands of
S. Alban excepted. And this to be paid at the Feast of S. Peter, because he
found the body of the Martyr on that day, for which reason it was also called
S. Peter's Penny. And although at last these Peter Pence were claimed by the
Pope as his own due and an Apostolical right, yet we find, that beside the
maintenance of a School here mentioned, for which they were first given, they
have by other Kings been appropriated to other uses. Thus we read that
Athelwolf Father to King Alured, who was the first Monarch of this Isle,
granted three hundred Marks (the sum total of the Peter Pence here, bating
only an odd Noble) to be paid yearly at Rome. One hundred for the honor of S.
Peter, to find Lights for his Church: another hundred for the honor of S. Paul
on the like occasion: and the third hundred for the Pope's use to enlarge his
Alms. This was done in the year 858. when Leo the Fourth was Pope.

Lin. 9. Thirty pence of live money.] Possibly the worth or value of thirty
pence in Goods and Chattels. King Offa, in his Grant thus words it, quibus sors
tantum contulit extra domos in pascuis, ut triginta argenteorum pretium
excederet; who had an Estate besides Houses in Lands, which might exceed the
value of thirty silver pence.

Lin. 15. Out of a Rescript of Pope Gregory.] We have the whole Letter set down
in Spelman, which speaks in English thus, GREGORY the Bishop, Servant of the
Servants of God, to his Worshipful Brethren the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, and to their Suffraegans, and to his beloved Sons the Abbots, Priors,
Archdeacons and their Officials, appointed throughout the Kingdom of England,
unto whom these Letters shall come, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction. In
what manner the Pence of S. Peter, which are due or owing to our Chamber, are
to be gathered in England, and in what Bishoprics and Dioceses they are owing,
that there may arise no doubt on this occasion, we have caused it to be set
down in this present Writing, according as it is contained in the Register of
the Apostolic See. Out of the Diocese of Canterbury seven pounds and eighteen
shillings sterling: Out of the Diocese of London sixteen pounds, ten shillings.
And so of the rest. Yeoven at the old City, April 22. in the second year of our
Popedom. There is some difference though in the account of the Dioceses. For
after Lincoln he leaves out Coventry and puts Chichester for Chester, 8 l. and
then after Bath he puts in Salisbury and Coventry (with a mistake 10 l. 10 s.
for 5 s.) and leaves York last. Besides every body knows there are more
Dioceses now than were then. This was Gregory the Fifth that wrote this, and it
was (our Author tells us) in the time of King Edward the Second. But Edward the
Third in the year of the Lord 1365. and of his Reign 39. forbad these
Peter Pence to be paid any more at Rome, or to be gathered any longer in
England.

CHAP. XV.
Page 81. lin. 10. Into six Provinces or Circuits.] As they are for number
still, with two Judges a piece, though at first three. How these differ from
what they now are, as to the Counties, the Reader may easily satisfy himself.
Here are thirty seven of them, as we now reckon: only with this difference,
that Monmouth and Rutland are left out, and Richmond and Copland are put in.

Page 82. lin. 27. And if he perish, i. e. sink, let him lose one foot.] For
that in this trial by water, was the sign and proof of guilt, if the party
thrown in did not swim, which is quite contrary in the trial of Witches: as you
will find in the next Chapter, which treats of Ordeals.

Lin. 39. The Kings great Assise.] Assise is a word, that has many
significations in our Law. It is here in the Title taken for a Statute; The
Assizes (i. e. the Statutes and Ordinances) of King Henry made at Clarendon.
But in this place it is used for a Jury; and it is either the Great or Grand
Assise, which served for the right of Property, and was to consist of twelve
Knights; or the Petty Assise, which served for the right of Possession only,
and was made up of twelve lawful men.

CHAP. XVI.
Page 86. lin. 34. The superstitions and fopperies.] These you have also in Sir
H. Spelman, with an Incipit Missa Judicii, which shows that the Church of Rome
did once approve of these Customs, which since she has condemned,
notwithstanding her pretense of being Infallible. I would to God, she would
deal as ingenuously in throwing off those other errors and corruptions, we do
so justly charge her with.

CHAP. XVII.
Page 87. lin. 21. Hogenhine.] Or Agen-hyne, that is, ones own servant. It is
written also Home-hyne, that is, a servant of the house.

Lin. 33. Holding in Frank Pledge.] The Latin is francus tenens. Wherefore
amend the mistake, and read holding in Frank Fee. For Frank Pledge is a thing of
another nature, as belonging to a man's Behavior and not to his Tenure. Now
Frank Fee is that which is free from all service, when a man holds an Estate at
the Common Law to himself and his heirs, and not by such service as is required
in ancient demesne.

Page 88. lin. 12. The Falcidian Law.] So named from one Falcidius, who being
Tribune of the people in Augustus his time, was the Maker of this Law.

Lin. 33. Twenty pounds worth of Land in yearly revenue.] So I render 20.
libratae terrae. For although Cowell in proportion to Quadrantata, or
Fardingdeal of Land, which he says is the fourth part of an Acre, seem^ at
first to gather that Obolata then must be half an Acre, Denariata a whole Acre,
and by consequence Solidata twelve Acres, and Librata twenty times twelve, that
is, two hundred and forty Acres: Yet this was but a conceit of his own. For by
having found the word used with reference to Rent as well as Land, thus 20.
libratas terrae vel reditus, he is forced to acknowledge, that it must signify
so much Land as may yield twenty shillings per annum. To which opinion Spelman
also giv^ his assent. But what quantity of Land this Librata terrae is, cannot
so easily be determined. Cowell out of Skene tells us, it contains four
Oxgangs, and every Oxgang thirteen Acres: if so, then it is fifty two Acres,
and twenty of them, which make a Knights fee, come to one thousand and forty
Acres, which somewhat exceeds the account here set down of six hundred and
eighty out of the Red Book of the Exchequer. But there is a great deal of more
difference still, as the account of the Knights fee is given by others. In one
Manuscript we read, that A Yardland contains twenty four Acres, four Yardlands
make one Hide, (that is, ninety six Acres), and five Hides make a Knights fee,
(that is, four hundred and eighty Acres) the Relief whereof is a hundred
Shillings. Another Manuscript has it thus, Ten Acres according to ancient
custom make one Fardel, and four Fardels (that is, forty Acres) make a
Yardland, and four Yardlands (that is, one hundred and sixty Acres) make one
Hide, and four Hides (that is, six hundred and forty Acres) make one Knights
fee. A third reckons it otherwise, that sixteen Yard-lands make a whole Knights
fee; which if we make a Yard-land to be twenty four Acres (according to the
first account) com^s to three hundred eighty four Acres; but if (according to
the second) we take it for forty Acres, it amounts to six hundred and forty
Acres. And, says he, when they are taxed at six Shillings four Pence (that is,
every of the sixteen Yard-lands, which make up the Fee, at so much) they make
the sum of one hundred Shillings (or five Pound, which was the ancient Relief
of a Knights fee.) But this is a mistake either of the Author or the Citation;
it is six Shillings three Pence, which makes that just sum; from whence we
learn also what proportion was observed by the Lord in setting and demanding of
the Relief upon the next Heir after his Ancestor's decease. Further in the
Kings Writ, as Glanvil cites it, it is said, that twelve Plough-lands make one
Knights fee: which, allowing to a Plough-land one hundred and twenty Acres,
amounts to one thousand four hundred and forty Acres. In the main, as to the
value of a Knights fee, it is enough what Cowell tells us, that it was so much
inheritance, as was sufficient yearly to maintain a Knight wi^h convenient
Revenue, which in Henry the Thirds days, Camden says, was fifteen Pounds, and
Sir Thomas Smith rates at forty. But to confirm the account, which our Author
here gives us, we find in the Statute for Knights in the first of Edward the
Second, that such as had twenty Pounds in Fee, or for term of life per annum,
might be compelled to be Knights. And as to the various measure of Land (of
which we have had a remarkable instance in this business before us) Spelman
has given us good reasons for it; since where the Land was good, they might
probably reckon the fewer Acres to a Yard-land, a Hide, a Knights fee, etc. and
where it was barren, they might allow the more. Beside, that some Lords, who
let these Fees, might be more bountiful and profuse, others more parsimonious
and severe to their dependents; and that the services which were imposed upon
these Fees, might in some Manors according to custom be lighter, in others
upon agreement and covenant more heavy. All which might strangely diversifie
the account, as to the quantity or measure of those Lands, which were to make
up a Knights fee.

CHAP. XVIII.
Page 91. lin. 4. A little Habergeon or Coat of (...)* In Latin Halbergellum, a
diminutive from the Saxon Halsberg, armor for the Neck and Breast. It is
written also Haubergellum and Hambergellum. They mistake themselves, who
translate it a Halbert, in French Halebarde, anoffensive Weapon, for a Coat of
Mail, which is armor of defense, in French Haubert or Hauberk; whence Fee de
Hauberk, which we have already explained somewhere before.

Lin. 5. A Capelet of Iron.] A little Iron or Steel Cap instead of a Headpiece
or Helmet, which the better sort wore. For by comparing this with the two
foregoing Sections, we find they were to have a difference of Arms according
to their different Quality and Estate.

Lin. 7. A Wambais.] Wambasium or Wambasia, so called, I suppose, because it
reached over the belly or womb, was a Jacket or Coat of defense, used in stead
of the Coat of Mail, perhaps like unto our Buff-coats, though probably not of
Leather only, but of any other material, as the Wearer should think fit.

Page 92. lin. 6. Timber for the building of Ships.] In Latin here, Mairemia;
written also Meremia and Meremium and Maremium and Muremium, from the French
Meresme, Timber to build with.

Lin. 14. Stercutius.] Saturn so called, as being the first Inventer of dunging
Land.

Lin. 28. Under the title of Freemen.] Here the Author himself has in the
Latin added a Marginal Note, which I thought fit to remove to this place. He
says, that among the ancient Germans the Always free, the Middlemost free, and
the Lowermost free were, as it were, the Classes and several Ranks of the
lesser Nobles, i. e. of their Gentry. For the title of Nobless (as also in our
Vulgar Language) was given only to Princes and Great Men. And for this he
quotes Munster. Cosmog. lib. 3.

CHAP. XIX.
Page 93. l. 32. In the borders of the Carnutes.] A people of France, whose
Country is called Chartrain, and their chief City Chartres, about eighteen
Leagues from Paris Eastward. That Town eight Miles off, called Dreux (in Latin
Drocum) was so named from the Druids, who dwelt there at first, and likely
enough afterward often resorted thither.

P. 94. l. 37. Of the three Estates, the King, the Lords, and the Commons.]
There are indeed three Orders or Estates acknowledged by true Divines and sound
Lawyers in the English Government; to wit, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords
Temporal, and the Commons of England. But the fundamental mistake of our
Learned Author is, that he has joined those two sorts of Lords (whose very
character shows them to be of a distinct species, though as to the public
Welfare and the Kings Service they ought to be of one and the same interest)
into one Estate, and to make up the third Estate, thought himself obliged to
bring in the King himself for one, who is Lord paramount over all the three;
and by this means ipsam Majestatem in ordinem redigere. I call this a
fundamental mistake, as a most probable ground of Rebellion (as it was in the
Barons Wars, and in our late Civil Broils) inasmuch as if the King make one of
the three Estates, as they fancy he does, and has (as they do from thence
conclude he has no more) but a coordinate power with both or either of the
other two Estates; that then it is lawful for both or either of those Estates,
in case of public grievances to quarrel the King (their coordinate) if he
will not give way to their redress; that is, if he will not consent to do what
they would have him to do; and upon his refusal of so doing, to raise War
against him, to sequester and murder his Loyal adherents, to destroy his Royal
Person; and finally, if he escape the hazards of Battle, when they get him into
their hands, to bring him to account for a pretended male administration, and
the violation of a trust, which God and not the People put into his hands; and
having gone so far, that they may, if possible, secure themselves, to put the
Monarch to death, and to extirpate Monarchy it self. This was the ground and
method of our late Republican policy and practice. Wherein yet they did not
foresee what examples they set against themselves, supposing this Doctrine of
the three Estates in their sense to be true, and that King, Lords and Commons
had an equality of trust and parity of power, that the same outrage, which the
Rump-Commoners acted against the King, to the destroying of him, and against
the Lords, to the outing of them, and voting them useless and dangerous (as to
their share of Government) might one time or other be more plausibly promoted,
and more effectually put in execution by one or both of the other two Estates,
with the help and assistance of great numbers of the Commoners (as there ever
will be in such National divisions) against themselves and all men whatever of
such pernicious and destructive principles. No. This false Doctrine, I hope,
will never obtain among us; and our English Government is so well constituted,
that our Lords Spiritual and Temporal and our worthy Commoners, will find it
the interest of themselves and their posterities, that they will ever have that
duty and deference to our Sovereign, as may secure Him and Us, and discourage
the designs, and defeat the attempts of all such as wish ill to his honor and
safety, or to the public peace. Besides, is it rational to imagine, that the
King, whose absolute right by Law it is, to convene the Estates, when and where
he thinks fit, to call and dissolve Parliaments, as he pleases: in a word, that
He, in whose Name all Justice is administered, in whose Hands the Militia is,
and by whose Authority alone the Subjects can take up Arms, should stand only
in a Co-ordination of power with any other persons whatsoever or however
assembled or associated within his Dominions? This flaw I could not but take
notice of in our Great Author, and that only with an intention to undeceive the
unwary Reader, and not to reflect upon his Memory, who though he kept along a
great while with the Long Parliament, yet never appeared in action for them,
that ever I heard, much less used or owned that virulence and violence, which
many others of that ill Body of men judged necessary for their proceedings.

CHAP. XX.
Page 96. lin. 15. Alderman of England.] The word Alderman, in Saxon,
Ealdorman, has various acceptions, so as to signify all sorts almost of
Governors and Magistrates. So Matthew. 20.25. the Princes of the Gentiles, in
the Saxon translation are called Ealdormen; and Holofernes, I remember, the
General of the Assyrian Army, is in an Old English Translation called the
Alderman of the Army. So Aethelstan (whose younger Son this Ailwin was) being
Duke or Captain General of the East Saxons is in this Book of Ramsey styled
Alderman. The most proper importance of the word bears up with the Latin
Senator, i. e. Parliament Man; as the Laws of S. Edward make out. In like
manner, say they, heretofore among the Britons, in the times of the Romans, in
this Kingdom of Britanny they were called Senators, who afterward in the times
of the Saxons were called Aldermen; not so much in respect of their Age, as by
reason of their Wisdom and Dignity, in that some of them were but young men,
yet were skilled in the Law, and beside that, were experienced persons. Now
that Alderman of England, as Ailwin here was, had to do in affairs of Justice,
appears by the foresaid Book of Ramsey, where it is said, that Ailwin the
Alderman and Aedric the Kings Provost sat Judges in a certain Court. The
Alderman of the County our Author makes to be the same as the Earl or Lord of
the County, and Spelman says, it is hard to distinguish, but at length places
him in the middle betwixt the Count and Viscount. He and the Bishop kept Court
together, the one for Temporals, the other for Spirituals. The Title goes lower
still, to denote a Mayor or Bailiff of a Corporation, a Bailiff of a Hundred,
etc.

Lin. 30. Healf-koning.] It was an oversight or slip of memory in our Author,
to say, that Ailwin was so called; when the Book of Ramsey tells us, it was his
Father Aethelstan, who was of that great power and diligence, that all the
business of the Kingdom went through his hands, and was managed as he pleased,
that had that Nick name given him therefore.

Lin. 36. The Graves.] Our Author makes them subordinate to the Aldermen of
Counties: but in the Laws of the Confessor they appear to be much what the
same. There we read, And as they are now called Greves, who are put in places
of Rule over others, so they were anciently among the English called Ealdermen.
Indeed, the word Greve or Reev (for it is all one) is of as various use, as
that other of Alderman is. In Saxon it is gerefa, from gerefen and reafen, to
take or carry away, to exact or gather. Whence this Officer ( Graphio or
Gravius from the Saxon) is in other Latin called Exactor regius; and by reason
that the Sheriff gathered the Kings Fines and other Duties, and returned them
to the Exchequer, he was called the Shire-greve or Shire-reev, that is, the
Gatherer of the County. But the truth is, that Greve or Reev came at last in
general to signify any Ruler or Governor set over any place almost whatever;
as the same word Grave does among the Dutch. So a Shire-greve, or hihgerefa,
the High Sheriff of a County; a Port-greve, the Governor of a City or Port. So
the Lord Mayor of London was called formerly. Tun-greve, the Bailiff of a Town
or Manor. Sometime Greve is taken for a Count or Earl, as Alderman is.

CHAP. XXI.
Page 98. lin. 22. For Toll and Gabell.] In the Latin pro theolonio and gablo.
Now telonium, from the Greek (...), properly signifies the place where the
Officers of the Customs receive the Kings duties; but is used also for a duty
paid for the maintenance of Bridges and River-Banks. So Hotoman. But in our Law
it is taken for the Toll of a Market or Fair. And Gablum or Gabellum, a Gabell,
from the Saxon gafol or gafel, signifies any Impost upon Goods; as that in
France, upon Salt, etc. also Tribute, Custom, any kind of Tax or Payment, etc.

Lin. 32. Through the Streets of Coventry.] There is a famous Tradition among
the people of that Town concerning this matter, that the Lady being to ride
naked, only covered all over with her hair, had given order for the more decent
performance of her Procession, that all the Inhabitants should that day keep
their Shops and Doors and Windows shut. But that two men tempted by their
Curiosity to do what fools are wont to do, had some such penalty, I know not
what it was, inflicted upon them, as Actaeon had for the like offense. And they
now stand in some public place cut out of Wood or Stone, to be shown to any
stranger that comes thither, like the Sign of the Two Logger-heads, with the
same Motto belike, Nous sommes trois.

Page 99. lin. 7. Brought in my Court a certain Toper.] In the Latin, attulit
in curia mea quandam Toper. I know what the adverb Toper signifies among the
ancient Latins; but what the word means here, I confess, I am in the dark. It
does certainly stand for some thing (I was thinking a Taper) which he brought
with him into Court, and swear upon it, as he should have done upon the holy
Gospels. I cannot imagine, that by quandam Toper, should be intended some Woman
or Girl, whose Name was Toper, whom he brought along with him, and in defiance
to the Court, laying his hand upon her, took his Oath as formally, as if he had
done it upon the holy Evangelists.

Reader,
ONe thing I forgot to acquaint thee with in the Preface, that, whereas the
Author himself had divided each Book into several Sections, which were very
unequal and incommodious, I thought it much more convenient for thy ease and
profit, to distribute them into Chapters; together with the Argument or
Contents of each Chapter at the beginning; and withal, that no one may
complain, that I have injured the Author, by altering his Method, I have left
his Sections also marked with a Numeral Note 1, 2, 3, etc. on the side of the
inner or outer Margin.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Translator's Preface, p. 4. l. 15. r. ( and has that of crabbed in it
beside) and as to the method is so intricate.

Page 11. l. 2. r. and strifes: p. 14. l. 50. r. Pieces: p. 17. l. 41. r.
Borderers: p. 20. l. 16. for facts, r. toils: p. 21. l. 24. r. and Money: p.
30. l. 16, r. Lazzes: p. 31. l. 28. r. and Breeding: p. 34. l. 14. r. peccatum:
l. 40. r. or his eyes: p. 35. l. 2. r. Quid: p. 43. l. 7. r. sorry old Verse:
p. 49. l. 48. r. too truly: p. 56. l. 6. r. Warden: p. 61. l. 13. r. Vulgar: l.
21. r. bestowing her: p. 62. l. 25. r. misdemeanour: p. 65. l. 11. r. add: p.
72. l. 43. r. seasonably: p. 74. l. 5. r. Gloucester. Whom: p. 85. l. 14. r.
strict: p. 86. l. 26. r. that in the: p. 87. l. 5. r. What. Of him: p. 91. l.
17. r. him: p. 92. l. 32. r. Cattle: p. 96. l. 34. r. turned: p. 108. l. 33. r.
retired: p. 110. l. 8. r. Neptune, as: p. 112. l. 34. r. unknown: p. 113. l.
34. r. Inlagh: p. 116. l. 18. r. three things: p. 117. l. 47. r. found: p. 122.
l. 6. r. arrested: p. 123. l. 9. r. quilleted.

FINIS.
ENGLAND'S EPINOMIS.

BY JOHN SELDOM, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleetstreet, and Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE READER.
THIS Appendix or Addition to what had been formerly collected by others, of
our ancient Constitutions, needs no farther Recommendation, than the great Name
and Learning of the Author: lt was an Essay of his younger years, and one of
the fruits of his first and earliest Inquiries. The Reader will here meet with
the true Original (as well under the Roman, as the Saxon and Norman
Governments) of several of our Laws which are now in force, and the Mistakes in
Polydore and others, discovered: The famous Constitutions of Clarendon (so much
opposed by Becket) faithfully recited, and purged from the Errors which had
crept into those Copies formerly published: An account of the Magna Charta of
King John, and the differences between it and that granted by his Son H. 3.
which we have in the Forefront of our Printed Statutes: A Correction of our
printed Charta de Foresta; with other Curious and Judicious Remarks upon these
Subjects, not heretofore extant; which it is not doubted will for their own
sake, as well as their Authors, find a welcome Reception from all knowing
Persons, especially from the Learned Professors of our English Laws.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. FRom the first supposed Inhabitants and Britains, until Julius
Caesar, Page 1. CHAP. II. Out of Roman Histories from Julius Caesar, to the
period of Rome's Empire in this Land, p. 4 CHAP. III.The Saxons Customs and
Laws (except what is in Lambard's Archaeonomy) during their Government, until
the Normans, p. 8 CHAP. IV. William the First: But none of that which under
Title of his Laws, is in Lambard, p. 12 CHAP. V. What was received under
William le Rous, p. 15 CHAP. IV. Henry Beauclerc restored, and invented common
Liberties, p. 16 CHAP. VII. Stephen of Blois, p. 19 CHAP. VIII. Henry
Fitz-L'empres, and his Clarendon Constitutions restored to themselves, and
purged from the faults wherewith they have been published, p. 20 Assisae
Henrici Regis factae apud Clarendon and renovatae apud Northamtune, p. 26 CHAP.
IX. Richard Ceur de Lion, p. 29 Forma Procedendi in Placitis Coronae Regis,
ibid. Capitula Placitorum Coronae Regis, ibid. Capitula Placitorum Coronae D.
Regis, p. 32 Haec est assisa D. Regis, and haec sunt praecepta de Forestis suis
in Anglia facta per assensum and concilium Archiepisc. Episc. and Abbat. Commit.
and Bar. and Militum totius Regni, p. 33 CHAP. X. King John and his Grand
Charter, p. 35 Consuetudines Scaccarii super Debitis Domini Regis inquirendis,
ibid.
England's Epinomis.
CHAP. I.
From the first supposed Inhabitants and Britains until Julius Caesar.

IF all published Authority were a legitimate Brother to Truth's certainty,
then could I affirm, that their common Father, old Time, once saw a Samothean
race in this Isle of Britany. V. Sr. W. Raleigh fol. 118.
The Italian-bred- Chaldee Berosus mentions one Samothes, Brother to Gomer and
Tubal, of Japhet's line, to be Author of the Celtes, which inhabited (with
other parts of Europe) that of Gaul, Beros. antiq. Chald. lib. 5. and ad cum
Annius de Viterbo.
which we now call la France: and his Commentator Annius de Viterbo thus
adds, Samothes fuit frater Gomeri atque Tubulis ex Japete patre, a quo primum
Britones, inde Galli, Samothei dicti fuerunt: and praecipue Philosophi and
Theologi Sectutores ejus. These Samotheans, by the testimony of Aristotle and
Secion, Diog. Laert. in vita Philosop. lib. 1. and vide Basingstocke hist. lib.
1.

Flor. hist. aetat. 3. hist. page 18.


divini atque humani juris peritissimi, and ob id religioni deditissimi, and
propterea Samothei (rather Semnothei) appellati, under the providence of these
and their race was the Law-government of the State, until that Trojan
celebrated branch, Brute, entered the Isle: who composed a Book entitled Leges
Britonum, collected out of the Trojan Laws. But to ruminate a little upon that
Saturnian Age, and omit all Shadow-fights touching controverted Brute (his
supposed existence and fortunes) it may be not without good reason doubted,
whether any such Laws of Troy were, out of which others might be extracted. Nor
will they peradventure upon examination (excepted only some Customs of
Religious Rites) appear more certain in particular, or more true in general,
than those of Aristophanes his Nephelococcygia. Times so near the Golden Age
(when as Georgic. 1.
Nec signare quidem, aut partiri limite campum -- Nec cuiquam (as Seneca has
it) aut animus aut injuria aut causa) have left few notes of expressly binding
Laws, Senec. Epist. 91.
the main Government consisting in the arbitrary disposition of those, in whom
being chosen as Princes for their eminency in Justice, and consequently in all
other Virtues (as Deioces was of the Medes) it was rather an Office, th^n a
Title of Dignity, Herodot. l. 1. Officium erat imperar^, non Regnum, Seneca.
Plat. in Minoc.
to undergo the style of Monarch. And although it be reported in Plato, That
Talus ('twixt whom and Rhadamanth, the Cretique Justice was by Minos, Jupiters
own Son, then King of Crete, divided) thrice every year did make his Circuit,
for maintenance of such Laws, as were established, and in Brazen Tables
registered; one of which (somewhat to particularize) was an Edict against
Drunkenness in merry meetings; so that Constitutions in written Tables may thus
derive their pedigree from the most ancient remembrance of Grecian discoveries
( Ceres and her Thesmophoria, with all such like omitted) yet upon that common
Epithet of Agamemnon in Homer, which saluteth him (...), i. e. Shepherd of the
people, where the phrase of Jove's free gift to Princes and Judges of Iliad
(...) and saepius alibi.
-- (...). is very frequent, Joseph. contra Appion. lib. 2. Plutarch. in lib.
de Homero.

(...). and Hesiod. in Theolog. Aeneid. 5. and 7.


the word (...), lex, being long since observed not only to be not found in any
of his works, but also to have been of later birth than his Age permitted,
(unless the contingency, which (...), coming from the same Theme, both by him
and Hesiod remembered, has with it, persuade the contrary, and upon the
ordinary phrases in Virgil of Jura vocatis dare populis, and such like, applied
to Trojan Princes) we may with probability enough conjecture that their Laws,
being, as the Platonists term it, secundae Veneris, were always closely
folded, rather within the treasury of his breast, which was only therefore
greater than other, Summa foelicitas erat gentium in quibus non poterat
potentior esse nisi melior. Senec. Epist. 91. L. 2. ff. orig. juris.
because he seemed best of them all, than published in enduring Tables, to be
observed as dumb Magistrates; Et quidem initio Civitatis (says Pompinus)
populus sine certa lege, sine certo jure agere instituit, omniaque manu Regis
gubernabantur. But from this d^gression into the way again.

One of this Succession Dunvallo Molmutius, instituted (as they write) ut
aratra, templa viaeque ad Civitates ducentes immunitate confugii gauderent.
Ranulph. Cestren. in polychronico. Galfred. Monumeth. lib. 1. cap. 16. and
Matthew. Westmonast. fo. 52. Camden in Romans in Brit.
Verum quia succedente tempore de viis (cum non essent certis limitibus
distinctae) orta esset dissensio, Belinus Rex filius praedicti Molmutii, ad
subducendum omne ambiguum, Quatuor regales vias, omni privilegio munitas, per
Insulam sterni fecit: Fossam scilicet, Watling street, Erming-streete and
Ikenild-streete; which rather (by Camden's Judgment) were the Romans works, as
out of Tacitus, Beda, and other Testimony he collecteth. Hic leges (meaning
Dunvallo) says Jeoffrey of Monmouth) quae Molmutinae dicebantur, inter
Britones statuit, quae usque ad hoc tempus inter Anglos celebrantur. Statuit
siquidem inter caetera, quae multo post tempore beatus V. Spelmans Gloss. del
ley Molmutii, tit. Lex. 441.
Gildas scripsit, ut templa Deorum and Civitates talem dignitatem haberent, ut
quicunque Fugitivus sive reus, ad ea confugeret, veniam coram inimico suo
haberet. Statuit etiam ut viae, quae ad praedicta templa and Civitates
ducebant, necnon and aratra colonorum, eadem lege confirmarentur. Of the
Gynaecocracy of Martia, Galfred. Monumeth. lib. 1. cap. 20. and Flor. histor.
page 56.
Wife to King Guinthelin, a Woman very learned, thus speaks the same Author;
Inter multa and inaudita, quae proprio ingenio invenerat, invenit legem, quam
Britones Martianam vocaverunt. Hanc etiam Rex Aluredus inter caeteras
transtulit, quam Saxonica lingua Marchenlage vocavit; which name by our great
English Antiquary, is rather deduced from the Mercii, Camden in append. ad.
Cornavios.
whose limits (meaepc in Saxon signifying a limit) adjoined in some part to all
the other Kingdoms of the Germans here established; and they thence so
denominated. I could wish for a sight of Jupiter's Diphtere, or an Oracle from
Apollo, that so, resolution might be had touching the certainty of these
reports, whether fabulous, or sealed with the stamp of a true History. The main
Authors are that Chaldee Priest and the Arthurian Jeoffrey; both exceedingly
suspected, but especially the first, by the penetrating Judgments of most
learned men. But admitting them, as your Mercurial Spirit shall move you, you
have a fair passage from these Mythick reports, selected out of Bardish Hymns,
unto most allowed truths of authentic Historians.

CHAP. II.
Out of Roman Histories from Julius Caesar to the period of Rome's Empire in
this Land.

JVLIVS CAESAR (who first of the Romans set foot in this little World divided
from the greater) discovered among the Gauls their order of Government, and
form of deciding controversies by Law: which was wholly the office of the
Druides, then being (as it seems) the Togata Militiae of the State. Their
Discipline, he affirms, was first found in this Isle, and hence transferred to
the old Gauls: They hither always sent their youth, as to a Seminary of that
Learning.

Caes. de bello Gall. lib. 6. and Strabo, lib. 4. Geograph.
I. Illi rebus divinis (Caesar's words) intersunt, sacrificia publica ac privata
procurant, religiones interpretantur.

II. De omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt, (the pontifical
College of old Rome, after the Twelve Tables received, did as much) and si
quod est admissum facinus, L. 2. ff. de Orig. juris.
si caedes facta, si de haereditate, de finibus controversia est, iidem
decernunt, praemia poenasque constituunt.

III. Si quis privatus, aut populus, eorum decreto non stetit, sacrificiis
interdicunt: haec poena (yet it was but like the minor excommunicatio used in
the Christian Church) apud eos est gravissima.

IV. Quibus ita est interdictum, ii numero impiorum ac sceleratorum habentur;
ab iis omnes decedunt, aditum eorum sermonemque defugiunt (these consequents
make it as the greater Excommunication) ne quid ex contagione incommodi
accipiant: Juxta item lex civilis and Canonica. Extra de except. c. except (de
sacrosanct. Eccles.) li. placet.
neque iis petentibus jus redditur (the self same in proportion remains yet
with us in practice) neque honos ullus communicatur.

V. Druidibus praeest unus, qui summam inter eos habet authoritatem.

VI. Hoc mortuo, si quis ex reliquis excellit dignitate, succedit; ac si sint
pares plures, suffragio adlegitur.

VII. Druides a bello abesse consueverunt, neque tributa una cum reliquis
p^ndunt (our Clergy in effect has retained as much) Militiae vacationem
omniumque rerum habent immunitatem.

VIII. Such large Privileges occasioned increase of their Scholars, Qui magnum
(says he) numerum versuum ediscere dicuntur. Itaque nonnulli annos vicenos in
disciplina permanent, neque fas esse existimant ea literis mandare, cum in
reliquis fere rebus publicis privatisque rationibus, Graecis literis utantur.
Hence some infer that the Tongue of the old Gauls was Greek, but clearly that
the Druides wrote in it: I am not persuaded to either. Graecae literae is not
always Latin for the Greek Tongue; So might we say, that the Syriack Testament
were perfect Hebrew, because Literis Hebraicis exaratur. As for instruments of
commerce written at Marsile, Strabo, lib. 4. Geograph.
(...) (as Strabo reports) it proves only that a Greek Colony (for it was
from the Phocians) used Greek. But Caesar also speaks of Tables found in the
Helvetians Tents, Graecis literis exaratas. We may interpret both for the
Character only, Caesar de bell. Gall. lib. 1.
which perhaps even the Graecians thence borrowed. Of this place of the Druides
it is the censure of a great Doctor, the Learned Hotoman, Hotoman in Francog.
cap. 2.

Absolvent te Lectori si consulas, Aldus Manutius ad lib. 6. Caesaris,
Hotomannus in Franciogalia, Paulus Merula in Cosmogr. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 15.
and de caeteris, quae hic ad Caesarem, Juffus Lipsius in Comm. ad Tacit. Hist.
lib. 1. sect. 100. and in quaest. Epistolic. lib. 2. cap. Elect. lib. 2 cap. 7.


that Graecis has crept in through fault of Transcribers; Humeris did in
another place in the same Caesar so thrust it self unto Dextris, as Lipsius
makes apparent; who is clear of opinion that the whole context of his
Commentaries has suffered much alteration and spoil by Julius Caesar his
interpolation; Nay some think they were never since the first Copy his own. But
to prove with a forcible Argument, think you that Greek was so familiar with
the Druides? Why then did Caesar write in Greek to Cicero, to this end, that
neither the Carrier, being a Gaulenor, Caesar de Bell. Gall. lib. 5.
nor other of the State, if they were intercepted, might understand them? to
whose hands in time of War should they have come sooner, than to the Councils,
where the Druides were chief? So much not amiss, because it touches the tongue
of the Lawyers, used in those times.

To the former Druidian Orders and Constitutions are added in Pliny, Strabo,
Marcellinus, Lucan, Tacitus, and others, diverse Rites of Religion and
Philosophy, which taste much of Pythagorean doctrine, worthy of observation,
and applicable as well to this Isle, as any part of Gaul. For as much as not
only the Infancy of that Sect had here its nurture, but also an identity of
Commonwealth, Order, Language and Religion, between the old Gauls, and our
Britains, is by learned Camden with sufficient reasons of strong proof, In
Prim. Incol.
in his excellent Chorography of this Country, declared. Fit enough therefore
is it to conjoyn also the Municipals of the Gauls, which by the same authority
were scarce different from the British.

IX. Suos liberos nisi cum adoleverint, ut manus militiae sustinere possint,
palam ad se adire non patiuntur.

X. Viri quantas pecunias ab uxoribus dotis nomine acceperunt, tantas ex suis
bonis, aestimatione facta, cum dotibus communicant; hujus omnis pecunia
conjunctim ratio habetur, fructusque servantur; uter eorum vita superaverit, ad
eum pars utriusque cum fructibus superiorum temporum pervenit.

XI. Viri in uxores, sicuti in liberos, vitae necisque habent potestatem;
Bodin. lib. 1 de rep. ca. 4. Just. instit. tit. de patria potestate.
Here John Bodin blames Justinian for confining this power only to the Romans.

XII. Cum paterfamilias illustriore loco natus decessit, ejus propingui
convenient, and de morte, si res in suspicionem venit, de uxoribus in servilem
modum quaestionem habent; and si compertum est, igni (for a Woman to kill her
Husband is now petit-Treason* and she suffers pains of death by fire) atque
omnibus tormentis extruciatas interficiunt.

XIII. Servi and Clientes quos ab iis dilectos esse constabat, justis funeribus
confectis, una cremabantur.

XIV. Sancitum si quis quid de rep. a finitimis rumore aut fama acceperit, uti
ad magistratum deferat, neve cum quo alio communicet.

XV. Magistratus, quae visa sunt, occultant, quaeque esse ex usu judicaverint,
multitudini produnt.

XVI. De repub. nisi per Concilium loqui non conceditur.

XVII. Plerique cum aut are alieno, aut magnitudine Tributorum, aut injuria
potentiorum premuntur, sese in servitutem dicant Nobilibus: In hos eadem sunt
jura, quae dominis in servos. Inde Wapentach.

Live. lib. 31.




XVIII. Armati, ita mos gentis erat, says Livy, in Concilium venerunt.

XIX. In respect of quiet composition of seditious tumults among themselves,
Plutarch. lib. de virtut. Mul. Women's rule. Tacit. in vita Jul. Agricolae and
vide Aristot. Polit. lib. 2. cap. 7.
made by intercession of their weaker Sex, a custom grew among them ( Plutarch
is my Author) that Women also had prerogative in deliberative Sessions,
touching either Peace-government or Martial affairs, and Sexum (says Tacitus
of the Britains) in imperiis non discernunt.

But Caesar is not without something, which expressly is attributed to our
ancient Britains.

Caesar, lib. 5. de bell. gall. Money.
XX. Vtuntur numero aereo aut annulis (some read laminis) ferreis, ad certum
pondus examinatis.

XXI. Leporem and Gallinam and Anserem gustare fas non putant; haec tamen alunt
animi voluptatisque causa. Cambd. 29.


XXII. Vxores habent Deni (no more disparagement be it to them, than the
indistinct and open carnal Congresse reported of the Thuscans, the best part of
the old Italians, Timon apud Athen. lib. 12. and 13. Dipnosophist.
or that of the Athenians before the Cecropian alteration) duodenique inter se
communes, and maxim fratres cum fratribus, and parents cum liberis; sed si
qui sunt ex his nati, eorum habentur liberi, a quibus primum virgins quaeque
ductae sunt.

Howsoever Julius his imposed Tributes did in some degree diminish their
public liberty; yet that under him, Octavian, Tiberius, and Caligula, they
were, in respect of any State-innovation, ATTONOMOI, i. e. using their own
Laws, is collected out of Dio's Roman History. He speaking of Plautius
(Lieutenant here to the Emperor Claudius) his victorious success against
Togodunus and Caractacus, affirms their ancient Aristocracy, without subjection
to strangers, as yet continuing: (...) (says he) (...). i. e. They were not
free to live at pleasure of the multitude (not free from superior Government)
but subject to diverse Kings, Dio Cass. hist. Romans lib. 60.
so that until that time continuing their plurality of narrow territoried
Princes, they were truly free from all foreign imposition of Laws; which is
expressly affirmed in that of Seneca the Tragedian, speaking thus of Claudius,
in the Person of Octavia his Daughter.

Se^ec. in Octa. act. 1.
Cuique Britanni terga dedere
Ducibus nostris ante ignoti
Jurisque sui.
But in his time their times changed, a good part of the Isle conquered, and
into a presidial Province reduced. Colonia (so speaks Tacitus) Camalodanum
(which was Cunobelinus's Palace or Town-royal, now Malden in Essex) valida
veteranorum m^nu deducitur, Tacit. annal. lib. 12. Dio Cass. lib. 60.

Colonia haec Victircensis dicta in antiqua Inscript. apud Lip. and Camdenum.

Spens. in ruinis Temporum.

Tacit. annal. lib. 14.

Camden in Cornaviis, Dovunis, Brigantibus.


in agros captivos subsidium adversus rebels, and imbuendis sociis ad officia
legum; The Verulanian Municipy, celebrated by our noble Spenser, and remembered
by Tacitus, the chief seat of Cassibellan, near S. Albans in Hartfordshire. The
Roman Colonies at York, at Chester, (as by an Inscription of an old Coin Camden
testifies) at Gloucester (proved out of an old stone in Bath-Walls by the
North-gate there thus charged, DEC. COLONIAE GLEV. VIXIT LXXXVI) compared with
Claudius his former recited, are great Testimonies of a great alteration. For
although Municipes (as Agellius has it) sunt Cives Romani ex Municipiis,
Agell. Noct. Attic. lib. 16. cap. 13.
suo jure and legibus utentes, muneris tantum cum Pop. Romans honorarii
participes, yet Coloniarum alia, says he, necessitudo est ex Civitate quasi
propagatae sunt, and jura institutaque omnia Pop. Romans non sui arbitrii habent.
Both, as well Municipies as Colonies, had their Decuriones, Duumviros, Aediles,
Equites, and such like Orders, and Offices different from all Places where the
Romans as yet had not seated their Empire. Under some of the succeeding
Emperors, Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, was Julius Agricola, Father-in-Law to
Tacitus, here Roman Lieutenant: through whose persuasion to civility, Habitus
(writes the same Tacitus among the Britains) nostri honor, and frequens toga.
The somewhat younger times also saw Papinian, that Oracle of the Roman Laws,
discussing at York, as, out of Forcatulus, Camden has noted. Camden in
Brigantibus.


When Commodus had the Empire, then was Britain's King Lucius (of Kings the
first Christian) who after the receipt of that holy token of regeneration, from
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, Lambard in Archaenom.
made a second demand, which by the Pope's returned answer you shall the better
understand: Petistis (so was his rescript, and, Juraque ab hac terra, caetera
terra petet, Ovid. 1. Fast.
was Ovid's prophecy) a nobis leges Romanas and Caesaris, vobis transmitti,
quibus in regno Britanniae uti voluistis. Leges Romanas and Caesaris enim nuper
miseratione Divina in regno Britanniae, and fidem Christi habetis penes vos in
regno, utramque paginam: Ex illis Dei gratia, per concilium regni vestri sum
legem, and per illam Dei patientia vestrum reges Britanniae regnum; vicarius
vero Dei estis in regno. What the sequel hereof was, Galfred. Monumeth. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
thus only appears: that after he had in lieu of the Archflamens at London,
York and Caer-leon, constituted three Archbishops, with twenty-eight Bishops in
other places, making large Gifts of Possessions to their Churches, Ecclesias
(Matthew the Monk of Westminster speaks it) cum suis coemeteriis (if we may
believe that then there were with us Churchyards for Burials) ita constituit
esse liberas, ut quicunque malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus ab omnibus
remaneret, with which the British Constitutions and Customs have here their
last limit.

CHAP. III.
The Saxon Customs and Laws (except what is in Lambard's Archaeonomy) during
their Government, until the Normans.

ITALY had at length so much to do in defense of her self, that she could
hardly afford help to others. Gothic incursions grew so violent and dangerous,
the Picts and Scots were as troublesome to the Britains, who desiring aid of
the Romans, were in their expectations frustrate: To provide therefore some
other way ( Vortigern being then King) Martial Succor against the Neighbor
violence of the Northern People of this Island was requested, and obtained from
Germany. Thence hither issued Saxons, Jutes (some will have the old name Vites)
and Angles: which differed more in name, than Nation, and are in good Authors
but Synonymies of the same Countrey-people. These in process of time, contrary
than the Britains first hoped, established to themselves in diverse parts of
that we now call England, several Kingdoms, extruding Vortigern's posterity,
and their subjects, into the Western parts, where to this day they remain. And
how can we but conjecture that of particular Customs of Law-government in
their own Country, they made requisite use in this their part of the Island?
What those were, De Germanis vid. plura apu^ Ca^sarem lib. 6. d^ Bell. Gall.
quae vero huc non proxime spectant.
until Christianity made some abolition, may best be observed out of Tacitus de
moribus Germanorum; who relates diverse of their Customs, and Rites Religious.
But at inquisition of their Superstition we aim not; their profane Laws being
chiefly proposed for Collection.

I. Rex vel Princeps (says Tacitus, speaking of some of them, whose antique
Relics seem yet to continue in our Municipals) prout aetas cuique, Tacit.
lib. de morib Germ.
prout nobilitas, prout decus bellorum, prout facundia est, audiuntur
authoritate suadendi magis quam jubendi potestate: si displicuit sententia,
fremitu aspernantur; sin placuit, frameas (of necessity you must here remember
our Wapentakes) concutiunt. Vide leges Ed. Confess. ap. Lamb.
Honoratissimum assensus genus est armis laudare.

II. Licet apud Concilium accusare quoque; and discrimen capitis intendere.
Distinctio poenarum ex delicto, proditores and transfugas arboribus suspendunt,
ignavos and imbelles and corpore (Lipsius will have it torpore, and shows great
reason for it, Lips. in not. ad Tacit. ibid.
in love toward his own Country) infames coeno ac palude, injecta insuper
crate mergunt. Diversitas supplicii illuc respicit, tanquam scelera ostendi
oporteat dum puniuntur, flagitia abscondi.

III. Levioribus delictis pro modo poenarune, equorum, pecorumque numero
convicti multantur. Pars mulctae Regi vel civitati, pars ipsi qui vindicatur,
vel propinquis ejus exolvitur.

IV. Eliguntur in iis Conciliis and Princeps, qui jura per pagos vicosque
reddunt. Centeni singulis ex plebe Comites (which observe to symbolize with our
Hundreds) consilium simul and authoritas adsunt.

V. Nihil neque publicae neque privatae rei nisi armati agunt, sed arma sumere
non ante cuiquam moris, quam civitas suffecturum probaverit. Tum in ipso
Concilio vel principum aliquis, vel pater, vel propinquus, scuto frameaque
Juvenem ornant. Haec apud illos Toga, hic primus (here have you resemblance of
our Knighting) juventae honos: ante hoc domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae.
Haec debemus virtutibus, ut non praesentes solum illas, sed etiam ablatas e
conspectu colamus. Senec. lib. 4. de benefic. ca. 30.


VI. Insignis nobilitas aut magna patrum merita, principis dignationem etiam
adolescentulis assignant. Note there the propagation of Gentry through true
honor deserving virtue, to whose memory is dedicated that worship, which is
oft-times bestowed on unworthy Posterity.

VII. Dotem non uxor marito, sed uxori maritus (I might compare this to our
most ancient and then common Dower al huis d'esglise) offert.

VIII. To their religious Rites in Marriage-knots he adjoyns the punishment of
her which violates her chosen bed. Vide Epistolam Bonifacii ad Aethelbald.
Accisis crinibus nudatam coram propinquis expellit domo maritus, ac per omnem
vicum verbere agit.

IX. Publicatae pudicitiae (understand it of unmarried Wenches) nulla venia,
non forma, non aetate, non opibus maritum invenerit.

X. Sororum filiis idem apud avunculum, qui apud patrem honor.

XI. Haeredes, successoresque sui cuique liberi, and nullum testamentum: Terre
nient devisable.
si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione fratres, patrui, avunculi;
neither until 32 H. 8. had we any Lands devisable, except by special custom
binding the Common Law.

XII. Suscipere tam inimicitias seu patris seu propinqui (our Northern
deadly-feud offers it self here to be thought on) quam amicitias necesse est;
Nec implacabiles durant. Luitur enim etiam homicidium certo armentorum ac
pecorum numero (this interprets the were in the Saxon Laws of William Lambard)
recipitque satisfactionem universa Domus.

XIII. Suam quisque Servus sedem, suos penateis regit. Frumenti modum dominus
aut pecoris aut vestis ut colono injungit; and servus hactenus paret.

Diverse others of their Manners and Customs has the same Author; but not any,
which except these recited, I think may be fitly styled Law, or constituted
Order of that Nation. But to be more particular, Einhard ap. Adam. Bremens. in
histo. Eccles. cap. 5, and 6.
Adam of Breme will tell us out of Einhard of the Saxons (which gave chief
denomination to such Germans as floated hither) thus;

XIV. Quatuor differentiis gens illa consistit, Nobilium scilicet and
liberorum, libertorumque atque servorum.

XV. Legibus firmatum ut nulla pars copulandis conjugiis propriae sortis
terminos transferat; sed Nobilis nobilem ducat uxorem, and liber liberam,
libertus conjungatur libertae, and servus Ancillae. Si vero quispiam horum sibi
non congruentem, and genere praestantiorem duxerit uxorem, cum vitae suae damno
componat.

XVI. Ejus gentis cum qua bellandum fuit (this is by Tacitus in the same words
repeated of the Germans) quoquo modo interceptum; cum electo popularium suorum
patriis quemque armis committunt, and victoria hujus vel illius pro praejudicio
accipitur.

XVII. Unto the times before Christianity among them was received, this is to
be referred; The first Christian King Ethelbert of Kent, Inter caetera (as
Venerable Bede reports) bona, Bed. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 5.
quae genti suae consulendo conferebat, etiam decreta illi judiciorum juxta
exempla Romanorum, cum consilio sapientum instituit. Quae conscripta Anglorum
sermon, hactenus, says he, habentur and observantur ab ea.

And very many Constitutions yet extant, written in the Saxon Tongue, are
attributed to Ine, Alfred, Edward, Athelstan, Edmund, Edgar, Ethelred and
Canutus or Knute, translated into Latin, and published long since by William
Lambard, a learned Gentleman, with the Laws of Edw. the Confessor, Malmesb. de
gest. Reg. lib. 2. cap. 11.
so called, non quod ille statuerit, says one, sed quod observaverit;
whereunto are joined diverse, with title of William the Conqueror, which being
so there already, according to several times in one Volume for that only
purpose compiled, they only shall here be inserted, which as yet lie dispersed
in the old Monuments of our Historians.

XVIII. Totius Angliae (of King Alured so writes Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland)
pagos and provincias in Comitatus primus omnium commutavit, Comitatus in
Centurias, i. e. Hundredas, and in decimas (as if he imitated Jethro Moses
Father-in-law) id est, Genesis cap. 31.
tythingas, divisit, ut omnis indigena legalis in aliqua centuria and decima
existeret. Rotulus Wintoniae.
Et si quis suspectus de aliquo latrocinio, per suam Centuriam vel decuriam,
vel condemnatus, vel al. absolutus.
invadiatus, poenam demeritam vel incurreret, vel vitaret. Praefectos vero
provinciarum (qui antea Vicedomini) in duo officia divisit, i. e. in Judices,
quos nunc Justiciarios vocamus, and in Vicecomites, qui adhuc idem nomen
retinent.

Malmesb. lib. 2. de gest. reg. c. 8.
XIX. Of King Edgar, the Monk of Malmesbury writes thus; Quia Compatriotae in
tabernis convenientes, jamque temulenti pro modo bibendi contenderent, ipse
clavos argenteos vasis affigi jussit, and dum metam suam quisque cognosceret,
non plus subserviente verecundia, vel ipse appeteret, vel alium appetere
cogeret. Constraint of such as were too indulgent to the desires of their
sensual appetite by ingurgitation of brain-smoaking Liquors, was by the Greek
Zaleucus (and so received among the Locrians) no less than capital. Athen. lib.
10. Deipnoloph.
But which has been always so far from this State, that until the third
Session of the present Parliament, Stat. 4 Jac. cap. 5.
not so much as any pecuniary mulct endeavored to refrain that temporary and
altogether voluntary madness.

Ingulph. hist. page 512. and 508.
XX. Nulla (says Ingulphus) electio Praelatorum erat mere libera and Canonica,
sed omnes dignitates, tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum, per annulum and baculum
Regis Curia pro sua complacentia conferebat.

XXI. Chirographa, until the Confessor's time, fidelium praesentium
subscriptionibus, cum crucibus aureis, aliisque sacris signaculis firma fuerunt.

XXII. Conferebantur primo (says he, but I understand it of the Infancy of the
Norman state) multa praedia nudo verbo absque scripto, vel charta; tantum cum
Domini gladio, vel galea, vel cornu, vel cratere, and plurima tenementa cum
calcari, cum strigili, cum arcu, and nonnulla cum sagitta. This somewhat
savours of Obertus Orto's form of investiture in his Feudals, Feud. lib. 2. tit.

Chart. Archiep. Cant. vide etiam Camden. in Cantio page 240. and Chartam
Aethelulphi super altar oblatam apud Ingulph. page 491.


or his of this, and differs much from our strict Livery of Seisin, which
regularly ought to be made with part of and upon the Land, by gift transferred.
Not unworthy (in this place) of observation is that Charter of Cedwalla King of
Sussex, (as among old Monuments of evidence belonging to the Archbishop of
Canterbury I have seen) in the Year DCLXXXVII. made to Theodore then Archbishop
of certain Lands, with this subscription; Ad cumulum autem Confirmationis, ego
Cedwalla cespitem terrae praedictae super sanctum altar Salvatoris posui, and
propria manu, pro ignorantia literarum, signum sanctae Crucis expressi, and
subscripsi. The like has Camden out of a Patent made by Withered King of Kent,
to a Nunnery in the Isle of Thanet. But to that form of conveyance which
Ingulphus speaks of, is thus added; Sed haec initio regni sui: posterioribus
annis immutatus est iste modus.

The antiquity of deeming the Queen, both as Covert, and also a sole person,
with such respective admittance, as is commonly agreed upon, and the Custom of
Land-forfeiture upon Felony committed, are both referred to these times. In
Praefat. ad lib. 6. Resp.
The first proved by that learned Chief Justice Sir Edw. Coke, out of a Gift
made by Aethelswith, Wife to King Burghred, to one Cuthwulfe her Servant
DCCCLXVIII. The other from an Example by him published of one Ethesig, whose
Lands were forfeited to King Ethelred, for feloniously stealing one Ethelwine's
Swine.

CHAP. IV.
William the First: But none of that which under title of his Laws, is in
Lambard.

NO sooner was the Norman William circled with the Crown of his Victory, but

Gervas. Ti^b. de Scac. ca. 32. conferas quae e Guil. Roville Alenconiens. in
Tract. de Duello transcript. cap 6. Camden in Divis. Brit.
I. Decrevit subjectum sibi populum (my Author is Gervase of Tilbury) juri
scripto legibusque subjicere. Propositis igitur legibus Anglicanis secundum
tripartitam earundem distinctionem, hoc est Merchenlage (this governed the
Shires of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxford, Chester, Shropshire,
and Stafford) Westsaxenlage (hereby were ordered Kent, Sussex, Surry,
Barkshire, Hamshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, Dorset and Devonshire) and Danelage
(by it York, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester, Lincoln, Northampton, Bedford,
Buckingham, Hartford, Essex, Middlesex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and
Huntingdon) quasdam reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans illis transmarinas
Neustriae (that is Normandy corruptly for Westriae, the opposite to that other
part of the division of France, Eustrasia) leges, quae ad regni pacem tuendam
efficacissime videbantur: which was not performed without earnest and most
humble request of the English. Hoveden. page 343.
For, as honoring with respect the Northern stock, whence his blood was
derived, the Danelage he preferred, as worthier and better for Government than
the mere English. But seeming at first inexorable, the persuasive remembrance
of his Soul, which bequeathed him the Kingdom, and whose Laws they desired,
being, as the best supposed motive, inserted in the Petitions of the conquered,
he granted so much, that from that time veneratae per universam Angliam,
corroboratae and observatae sunt, prae caeteris patriae legibus, leges Edwardi
Regis, Roger Hoveden. in Vit. H. 2. fo. 347.
quae prius inventae (it is Roger of Hoveden's Report) and constitutae erant in
tempore Edgari avi sui.

II. Fecit describi omnem Angliam, (the substance hereof is in most of the
Monkish histories, but Florence of Worcester is the Author I now use) quantum
terrae quisque Baronum suorum possidebat, Florent. Wigorn.
quot feudatos milites, quot carucas, quot villanos, quot animalia; imo,
quantum vivae pecuniae quisque possidebat in omni regno suo, Domesday 18. Will.
1.
a maximo usque ad minimum, and quantum redditus quaeque possessio reddere
poterat.

This Inquisition was returned into his Exchequer, and is a Book at this day
there remaining, Pro sua generalitate omnia tenementa totius terrae integre
continente: it is called Domesday, i. e. the Day of Judgment, as the Abbot of
Crowland, and Gervase of Tilbury have left written, Gervas. Tilb. cap. 32.
Ob hoc (says Gervase) nos eundem librum Judiciarium nominamus, non quod in eo
de propositis aliquibus dubiis feratur sententia, sed quod a praedicto judicio
non liceat ulla ratione discedere. A description of it in an old English
Historical Poet, is thus clad in Rhythmes.

The K. William vor to wite the worth of his land Rob. Glocest. in hist. Poet.

Let enqueri streitliche thoru al Engelonde,
Hou moni plou land, and hou moni hiden also
Were in euerich sire, and wat hii were wurth yereto:
And the rents of each town, and of the waters echone,
That wurth, and of woods eke, that there ne bileued none,
But that he wist wat hii were wurth of al Engelonde,
And wite al clean that wurth thereof ich understond
And let it write clean inou, and that scrit dude iwis
In the Cresorie at Westminster there it yut is.
So that ure Kings suth, when hii ransom took
And ready wat folc might give, hii fond there in yor book.
Nor a much unlike description in later times under Hen. 8. (as a preparatory
to the levying of that intolerable demanded Subsidy of DCCCL) was either
finished or attempted: as by a Warrant from the Commissioners directed to a
Constable of a Hundred, with charge of information, reported by J. Stow, is
more largely declared.

III. Of Church Livings and Ecclesiastical fees Matthew Paris has thus
recorded; Episcopatus and Abbatias omnes, quae Baronias tenebant, Matthew. Paris
in Guil. 1. page 8.
and eatenus ab omni Seculari libertatem habuerant, sub servitute statuit
militare, in rotulans singulos Episcopatus and Abbatias, pro voluntate sua,
quot milites sibi and successoribus suis, hostilitatis tempore, voluit a
singulis exhiberi.

IV. Exclusis haereditate avita Anglis, agros (learned Camden has delivered
it) and praedia militibus suis assignavit, Camden. in Norm. astipulatur Matthew.
West. Flor. Hist. lib. 2.
ita tamen ut dominium directum sibi reservaret, obsequiumque clientelari jure
sibi and successorib^s devinciret: id est ut omnes in feodo, sive fide teneret,
and nulli praeter Regem essent very domini, sed potius fiduciarii domini, and
possessores.

V. Gervase of Tilbury in a Discourse of the Trial of the purity of Silver paid
in ancient time into the Exchequer by weight, Gervas. Tilb. de Scac. ca. 23.
affirms that by Tradition it was received for truth, that in primitivo regni
statu, post conquisitionem, no Rents were paid to the Crown in Money: Sed sola
(says he) victualia solvebantur, ex quibus in usus quotidianos domus regiae
necessaria ministrabantur: and somewhat after, Tot^ igitur Willielmi primi
tempore perseveravit haec institutio usque ad tempora Regis Henrici filii ejus
(which was Henry the first) adeo ut viderim ego ipse (he lived under Henry the
second) quosdam, qui victualia, statutis temporibus, de fundis regiis, ad
Curiam deferebant. Certum quoque habebant Officiales domus regiae, a quibus
comitatibus triticum, a quibus diversae species carnium, and equorum pabula
debebantur. His vero solutis secundum constitutum modum cujusque rei, regii
officiales computabant Vicecomitibus, redigentes in summam denariorum, pro
mensura videlicet tritici ad panem centum hominum, solidum unum, pro corpore
bovis pascualis solidum unum, pro ariete vel ove IV. denarios, pro prebenda XX.
equorum similiter IV. denarios; But through the grievous complaints of Country
Husbandmen, oblatis vomeribus in signum deficientis agriculturae, respective
calculation was made under Henry Beauclerc, and every particular Tenants
services reduced to a certainty of Silver, De Summa vero Summarum quae ex
omnibus fundis surgebat in unoquoque comitatu, constituerunt Vicecomitem illius
Comitatus ad Scaccarium teneri, addentes ut ad Scalam solveret. More special
form whereof the same Author has largely reported.

Ingulph. hist. fo. 512.
VI. Chirographa chartas vocabant, and chartarum firmitatem cum cerea
impressione per uniuscujusque speciale sigillum sub instillatione trium vel IV.
astantium, conficere constituebant.

VII. Anglicum idioma tantum abhorrebant, quod leges terrae statutaque
Anglicorum Regum Gallica lingua tractarentur (Pleadings until reformation in
time of E. 3. remaining in the same Tongue) and pueris etiam in Scholis
principia literarum Grammatica Gallice ac non Anglice traderentur. S^. 26 E. 3.
cap. 15.
Modus etiam scribendi Anglicus omitteretur, and modus Gallicus in Chartis and
in libris omnibus admitteretur: Thus to be Frenchified grew so common, and
before all English Titles so respectfully alone honored, that Vlstan Prelate
of Worcester in the red King's time, was for his ignorance in that Tongue
chiefly deposed from his Bishopric.

Matthew. Paris.
VIII. Cervum vel Capreolum capienti oculi eruebantur.

IX. The Law of Coverfeu (the name yet remains) that by ringing a Bell at
Night, Polydor. Virg. hist. lib. 9.
all Lights and Fire in every House should retire from our appearance,
acknowledges him as first Institutor.

Hen. Hunting. lib. 6. hist. fol. 21.

Bract. lib. 3. tract. de Coron. cap. 2^.


X. Si aliquis quempiam (it is in Henry of Huntingdon) quacunque de causa
peremisset, capitali subjacebat sententiae.

XI. Si aliquem (I would read it aliquam, persuaded by what I find in Bracton's
Treatise of rape) vi oppressisset, genitalibus privabatur armis.

Polydor. hist. lib. ^. Lamb. explicat. verb. Camden in Norman D. Ed. Coke in
P^aefat. ad lib. 5.
XII. If we durst believe the Italian Polydore, here should succeed an
Institution of Sheriffs, and Trial by Jury of XII. Touching the last, Camden
and Lambard out of the Saxon Laws of Etheldred, have convinced him of an error
too fairly flourished with braving terms. For the first, and both since them
the right H. the L. Coke. But what else he has of any probability you thus
receive.

XIII. Constituit ut quater quotannis in multos dies conventus celebrarentur eo
loci quo ipse fieri juberet, quibus in conventibus Judices sedibus discreti
forum agerent, jusque populo dicerent.

XIV. Alios instituit Judices, qui sine provocatione jurisdictionem ac judicia
exercerent, a quibus, uti a sinu Principis, cuncti Litigatores eo confluentes
jura peterent, and ad eos suas controversias referrent.

XV. Praefectos alios constituit, qui maleficia vindicanda curarent. Hos
Justiciarios pacis nuncupavit. Yet I cannot so soon think that name to be
literally so ancient under his favor, with whom too curious in a strange
state, the kind Laws of religious hospitality may without injustice dispense.

CHAP. V.
What was received under William le Rous.

VAin it were to expect any good Constitutions of William the Second, Omnis
legum siluit justitia, causisque (says Florence of Worcester) sub justitio
positis; sola in principibus imperabat pecunia.

I. Polydore attributes to him the original of that custom, Polydor. lib. 10.
hist.
whereby his Successors claim profits or First Fruits of vacant Bishoprics and
Monasteries of the Patronage of the Crown. Matthew. Paris.
Indeed it is true and apparent, that he had a special gift of delaying new
Elections for prorogation of his gains. And at his Death were in his hands the
Temporalties of Canterbury, Winchester and Salisbury, and of Abbeys that number
quadrupled.

II. Publico (writes he) edicto vetuit unumquemque sine commeatu suo ex Anglia
egredi. That Archbishop Anselme was enjoined under no small pain, that he
should not pass the Seas, to visit Pope Urban under this Prince, is true and
plain enough; but for any such general Edict, I know no better authority, his
being in this, as in other things, suspicious: as yet my belief is, that the
constitution of non Aler ouster le Mere, is of some later birth.

III. Venationes quas Rex primo (the words are Malmesburies, but read primus)
adeo prohibuit, ut capitale esset supplicium prendisse Cervum. Malmesb. lib. 4.
de gest. reg.


CHAP. VI.
Henry Beauclerc restored and invented Common Liberties.

REformation was needful by the succeeding Beauclerc, of the common injustice
practiced throughout the Kingdom, especially by a delegation of exacting
authority made to one Ranulph, afterward Bishop of Durham, by le Rous: and was
thus endeavored. Immediately after his Coronation Charters of State-amendment
were by public authority sent into every County with particular Customs
expressed, allowed, abrogated or altered in them. That which was directed to
Hugh of Bockland, Sheriff of Hereford, reported by Matthew Paris, after
Church-liberty confirmed, Ita quod nec eam vendam, nec ad firmam ponam, nec
mortuo Archiepiscopo, Matthew. Paris, page 74.
vel Episcopo, vel Abbate, aliquid accipiam de domino Ecclesiae, vel de
hominibus, donec successor in eam ingrediatur, thus provides for the Subject;

Omnes malas consuetudines, quibus regnum Angliae injuste opprimebatur, inde
aufero: Quas malas consuetudines in part hic pono.

I. Si quis Baronum meorum, Comitum, vel aliorum qui de me tenent, mortuus
fuerit, Haeres suus non redimet terram suam sicut facere consueverat tempore
patris mei, sed justa and legitima relevatione relevabit eam.

II. Homines Baronum meorum legitima and justa relevatione relevabunt terras de
dominis suis.

III. Si quis Baronum, vel aliorum hominum meorum, filiam suam tradere
voluerit, sive sororem, sive neptem, sive cognatam, mecum inde loquatur; sed
neque ego aliquid de suo pro hac licentia accipiam, neque desendam quin eam
det, excepto si eam dare voluerit inimico meo.

IV. Si mortuo Barone vel alio homine meo filia haeres remanserit, dabo illam
cum consilio Baronum meorum cum terra sua.

V. Si mortuo marito uxor ejus remanserit, and sine liberis fuerit, dotem suam
and maritagium habebit, dum corpus suum legitime servabit.: and eam non dabo
nisi per secundum velle suum, and terrae liberorum Custos erit sive uxor, sive
alius propinquior, qui justus esse debet.

VI. Praecipio ut homines mei similiter se contineant erga filios and filias
and uxores hominum suorum.

VII. Monetagium commune quod capiebatur per Civitates vel Comitatus, quod non
fuit tempore Ed. R. hoc ne amodo fiat, omnino defendo.

VIII. Si quis captus fuerit, sive monetarius sive alius, cum falsa moneta,
justitia recta inde fiat.

IX. Si quis Baronum vel hominum meorum infirmabitur, sicut ipse dabit, vel
dare jusserit pecuniam suam, ita datam esse concedo; quod si ipse, praeventus
vel armis vel infirmitate, pecuniam suam nec dederit, nec dare disposuerit,
uxor sua sive liberi, aut parents, and legitimi homines sui pro anima ejus eam
dividant, sicut eis melius visum fuerit. Somewhat later times admitted the
disposition of Intestates Goods, V. Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 8.
and Probate of Testaments, to be in Episcopal Jurisdiction. John Stratford in
one of his Provincial Constitutions of Church-liberty, Lind. provinc. constit.
de immunit. Eccles. lib. 3. and de testament. Statutum Ecclesiast. 2 Rich. 3.
Testam. 4. v. inf. in Stephan. 1. C. tit. de testament. l. consulta divalia v.
in Johann. art. 15.
and Fairefax a Common Lawyer under Richard the Third, affirm that Power in
Ecclesiastic Courts to have been in ancient time (for the Civil Law it self in
express Text refers it to the Lay Magistrate) by Act of Parliament ordained.

X. Si quis Baronum, vel hominum meorum, forisfecerit, non dabit vadium in
misericordia pecuniae suae, sicut faciebat tempore patris vel fratris mei (they
were the two precedent Williams) sed secundum forisfacturae modum, nec ita
emendabit sicut emendasset retro tempore patris mei vel fratris.

XI. Si perfidiae vel sceleris convictus fuerit, sicut culpa sic emendet.

XII. Forestas communi consilio Baronum meorum in manu mea ita retinus, sicut
pater meus eas habuit.

XIII. Militibus, qui per loricas terras suas defendunt (i. e. which hold their
Lands per fee de Hauberke, V. Hotoman. verb. feudal. Hauberticum feudum.
to be ready in a Coat of Mail for Martial Service) terras dominicarum
carucarum suarum quietas ab omnibus Geldis and omni proprio Dominio meo
concedo, ut, sicut tam magno gravamine alleviati sunt, ita equis and armis been
se instruant, ut apti and parati sint ad servitium meum, and ad defensionem
regni mei.

XIV. Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus quibus pater
meus eam emendavit (you have them in Lambard) consilio Baronum suorum. Thus far
out of that transcribed Charter.

XV. Rapinas Curialium, furta, stupra, edicto compescuit, deprehensis oculos
cum testiculis evelli praecipiens. William of Malmsbury is hereof Author;
Malmesb. lib. 5. de gest. reg.

Atque alibi antiquitus quod docent Isocrates in oratione contra Lochic. Sen.
Epist. 7. Lamprid. in Alex. Severo and alii, caeterum an in bonos Motes, Remque
publicam. conducat, disputant: quin and ausi sunt negasle, Frisius in lib. de
Rep. Tho. Morus, in Utopia, etc.

Ex lib. Monarch. Cant. de M^rac. B. Tho. apud Foxum. in hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
fo. 228.


but Florence of Worcester, and Roger of Hoveden, that for Theft his punishment
was, as now by Hanging, Death; but for maintenance of Malmesbury's report, I
remember a miracle reported out of a Manuscript in Fox his Ecclesiastical
History, of one Edward of King's Weston in Bedfordshire, attainted in time of
Henry Fitz l' Empres, for stealing a pair of Hedging Gloves, and a Whetstone,
and having by execution lost his Eyes and Genitals, had through devout prayer
at Tho. Becket's Shrine in Canterbury, restitution (I fear the Monk that wrote
it, might have had a Whetstone without stealing) of whatsoever Members and
Faculties were by that inflicted punishment, taken from him.

XVI. Contra Trapezitas (quos vulgo monetarios vocant) praecipuam sui
diligentiam exhibuit; Malmesbur.
nullum falsarium quin pugnum perderet impune abire permittens, qui fuit
intellectus falsitatis suae commercio fatuos irrisisse: This falsifying of
money by Hoveden, was loss of our Eyes and Genitals: Guil. Gemiticens. de
Ducibus Norm. lib. 7. ca. 23. and Contin. ad Florent. Wigorn. page 498.
Gemiticensis and the Monk which made the continuance to Florence of Worcester,
agreeing to Malmesbury in this, that the offenders lost their right hands; but
further adding that, which the first God of the Gentiles was compelled to
endure, deprivation of his external parts of humane propagation.

XVII. Statuit ut nullus obolus (the Author is Roger of Hoveden) quos and
rotundos esse jussit, aut etiam quadrans, si integer esset, Roger de Hoved.
annal. 2. fo. 270.
respueretur.

Malmesb. l. 5.
XVIII. Mercatorum falsam ulnam (Malmesbury speaks) castigavit brachii sui
mensura adhibita, omnibusque per Angliam proposita.

XIX. Curialibus suis ubicunque villarum esset, quantum a Rusticis gratis
accipere, quantum and quoto pretio emere debuissent, edixit, transgressores vel
gravi pecuniarum mulcta, vel vitae dispendio afficiens.

XX. Much stir both at Rome and in England was touching Investiture of Bishops
and Abbots by Lay hands: Anselme, Arch-Prelate of Canterbury mainly opposing
himself against it; whose persuasion so at length wrought with the King, that
it was permitted ut ab eo tempore in reliquum (Matthew of Westminster after
others reports it) nunquam per donationem Baculi pastoralis vel annuli quisquam
de Episcopatu vel Abbatia, Math. Westminster. lib. 2. Flor. hist.
per Regem, vel quamlibet laicam personam, investiretur in Anglia; Retento
tamen electionis and regalium privilegio; Malmesb. l. 5. de gest. reg. Mat.
Paris page 87.
Notwithstanding this in the year M.C.VII. per annulum and baculum (as Matthew
Paris tells us) was by the same Henry one Rodolph made Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Stovaeus annal. p. 190.
XXI. He restored ( John Stow now speaks to you) to his Subjects the use of
Lights in the night, which lights, and also fire, had been forbidden by his
Father to be used, after the ringing of a Bell at eight of the Clock at night.

XXII. Fecit omnes Milites Angliae crines suos ad justum modum abscindere,
Flor. hist. l. 2.
qui prius longitudine capillorum (out of Flores Historiarum) cum foeminis
certabant.

XXIII. A Tribute of 3 s. of every Hide was exacted for augmentation of a Dowry
for the Kings Daughter Mawde', to be married to the Emperor Henry the Fourth:
Polyd. hist. lib. 11.
whereupon, says Polydore, Secuti sunt istud institutum quaerendarum dotum ad
collationem filiarum, caeteri deinde Reges, adeo posteritas suorum commodorum
tenax semper fuit; referring that known Service of aid a file marrier,
Halicarnass. 2. antiq. Romans and v. Sueton. in Caligula cap. 42.

Zas. in comm. ad lib. 2. F. de orig. Turr.


to this as the first example thereof; though the antiquity of that custom can
reckon as many years as since Romulus his first institution of Patrons and
Clients (whence Feuds and Courts-Baron, as Udalricus Zasius conjectureth, by
way of imitation, proceeded in following times) and no less the whole title
thereof. And the other a fair Fitz Chevaler, and de rancome, are in the old
Graund Custumier of Normandy.

XXIV. Imminent peril was then, lest French Conspiracies should get violent
possession of the Duchy of Normandy; to prevent it with a Sinewy Army, primum
omnium populo imponit (take it upon Polydore's credit) grave tributum causa
novi belli gerendi, Polyb. lib. 11. hist. Ang.
id quod apud posteriores Reges in consuetudinem venit. Of the Norman Line
Masculine he was the last; and this the last, I make of his Laws.

CHAP. VII.
Stephen of Blois.

CRashing of Armor and pronouncing of Laws, have such antipathy, that his
injurious Successor, Stephen of Blois will put us to the charge of small room.
At his Inauguration, by Oath he confirmed diverse generalities for liberties,
from ancient time used, of the Church, but so religiously, that, as one says
of him, He seemed to have therefore only sworn, that he might be forsworn. But
of them one was especially thus:

I. Si quis Episcopus vel Abbas vel alia Ecclesiastica persona, Malmesb. l. 1.
hist. novell.
ante mortem suam rationabiliter sua distribuerit, vel distribuenda statuerit,
firmum manner concedo: si vero morte praeoccupatus fuerit, pro salute animae
ejus Ecclesiae consilio (see before in the ninth of Henry Beauclerc) eadem fiat
distributio.

II. Castella per singulas provincias (says William of Newborough) studio
partium crebro surrexerant; erantque in Anglia quodammodo tot Reges, Guil.
Neubrigens. lib. 1. rer. Anglic. cap. 22.
vel potius Tyranni, quot Domini Castellorum, habentes singuli percussuram
proprii numismatis, and potestatem subditis regio more dicendi juris.

III. Danegeldum (which how it was first rated and imposed, Huntingd. l. 8.
hist. Hoveden part. 1. f. 276.
you may find in the Confessor's Laws) quod antecessores sui accipere solebant
singulis annis, in aeternum condonabat. Henry of Huntingdon and Roger of
Hoveden affirm it.

IV. An Ecclesiastical Synod was held at London under Theobald of Canterbury,
the King and Noblemen being also present, totumque illud concilium novis
appellationibus infrenduit. In Anglia namque appellationes in usu non erant,
donec eas Henr. Wintoniensis Episcopus, Ibid.
dum Legatus esset (which was about this time) malo suo crudeliter intrusit.

V. Tempore Regis Stephani (as I read in John of Salisbury's Polycraticon) a
regno jussae sunt Leges Romanae, Jo. Salisburiens. Polycrat. lib. 8. cap. 22.
v. disceptationem de castellis Episcoporum apud Malmesbur. lib. 1. hist. novel.
quas in Britanniam Domus venerabilis Patris Theobaldi, Britanniarum Primatis
asciverat; Ne quis libro etiam retineret edicto regio prohibitum est. What the
Roman Laws (if you understand the Imperials) had ever to do with this State as
a rule for squaring our Judgments, is not only by this relation made manifest,
but by an express assertion of the High Court of Parliament (which wrought
wonders) under Richard of Bordeaux; whenas Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of
Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundel, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Derby, and Thomas
Earl of Nottingham, appealed Alexander Nevill Archbishop of York, Robert de
Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, with others, of
seducing the Kings facile humor to their own desires, the particulars whereof
appear in the Thirty Eight Articles comprehended in the Parliament Rolls of the
Eleventh of his Reign; 11 R. 2. Rot. Parliam.
advice being demanded touching the formality of the Appeal both of Common
Lawyers and Civilians, they all agreed, -- That it was insufficient in both
Laws; but answer was given by the Baronage, that they would adjudge it by
Parliamentary authority; neither would they be directed by the Civil Law, pur
ceque la royalme d' Angleterre n'estoit devant ces heures, ny a l' intent de
nostre dit Seigneur Roy, and Seigneures du Parliament unq' ne serra rules ne
governes per la ley civil: and by Judgment of Exile with effect they
proceeded: But this is somewhat out of the lists.

CHAP. VIII.
Henry Fitz-L'Empres, and his Clarendon Constitutions restored to themselves,
and purged from the faults wherewith they have been published.

ADoption and right of Blood gave, after Stephen 's Death, the Crown to Henry
Plantagenet Fitz l'Empres; His first care tending wholly to the good of the
State, was to have the numerous increase of Castles and Forts (which in his
Predecessors time through multitude of Province-Tyrants, Guil. de novo burgo
lib. 1. rer. Anglic. cap. 22.
whom they nourished, were swollen to the number of M.C.XV.) abated; so was it
by express command performed, and the Laws of his Grandfather Beauclerc
likewise confirmed. A recognition also was made at Clarendon, Praesidente
Joanne de Oxonia, Matthew. Paris fol. 134.
de mandato ipsius Regis, praesentibus etiam Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus and Proceribus regni, of diverse
Customs and Rites of Government for decision of no small controversies between
the King, guarded with stout Maintainers of his Crown, and the Prelates, who in
their ambitious aims labored for exemption of their Persons, habits and
possessions, from secular Jurisdiction.

I. De advocatione and praesentatione Ecclesiarum; si controversia emerserit
inter Laicos, vel inter Laicos and Clericos, vel inter Clericos, in Curia D. R.
tractetur and terminetur.

II. Ecclesiae de feudo D. Regis non possunt imperpetuum dari absque assensu
and concessione ipsius.

III. Clerici rectati and accusati de quacunque re, summoniti a Justitia Regis,
venient in Curiam ipsius responsuri ibidem de hoc, unde videbitur Curiae Regis
quod ibi sit respondendum, and in Curia Eccles. unde videbitur quod ibi sit
respondendum, ita quod Justitia Regis mittet in Curiam S. E. ad videndum qua
ratione ibi res tractabitur.

IV. Si Clericus convictus vel confessus fuerit, non debet eum de caetero
Ecclesia tueri.

V. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and personis regni non licet exire regnum absque
licentia D. Regis: V. in Johan. art. 16.
and si exierit (here is the true root of the old restraint from passing the
Seas without License) si Regi placuerit, assecurabunt eum quod nec in eundo nec
in redeundo, vel moram faciendo, perquirent malum sive damnum D. Regi.

VI. Excommunicati non debent dare vadium ad remanentiam, nec praestare
Juramentum, sed tantum vadium and plegium standi judicio Ecclesiae, ut
absolvantur.

VII. Laici non debent accusari nisi per certos and legales accusatores and
testes in praesentia Archiepiscopi, vel Episcopi; ita quod Archidiaconus non
perdat jus suum nec quicquam quod inde habere debeat.

VIII. Si tales fuerint qui culpantur quod non velit vel non audeat aliquis eos
accusare, Vicecomes requisitus ab eo faciat jurare XII. legales homines de
vicineto, seu de villa coram Episcopo, quod inde veritatem secundum
conscientiam suam manifestabunt.

IX. Nullus qui de Rege tenet in Capite nec aliquis dominicorum ministrorum,
sub interdicto (that is a censure Ecclesiastical, whereby the Administration of
Sacraments is prohibited in some particular place, or among some certain
Persons) ponatur; nisi prius Dominus Rex, si in terra fuerit, conveniatur, vel
Justitia ejus, si fuerit extra regnum: and rectum de ipso faciat, and ita ut
quod pertinebit ad regiam Curiam, ibidem terminetur, and de eo quod spectabit
ad Ecclesiasticam Curiam, ad eandem mittatur, ut ibidem tractetur.

X. De appellationibus, sicubi emerserint, Vide vero Rogerum Hovedenum page 303.
ab Archidiacono debent ad Episcopum, and ab Episcopo ad Archiepiscopum, and si
Archiepiscopus defuerit in justitia exhibenda, ad D. Regem perveniendum est
postremo, ut praecepto ipsius in Curia Archiepiscopi terminetur controversia:
Ita quod non debet ulterius procedere absque assensu D. Regis.

XI. Si Calumnia emerserit inter Clericum and Laicum, vel inter Laicum and
Clericum, de ullo tenemento quod Clericus velit ad eleemosynam trahere, laicus
vero ad laicum feudum, recognitione XII. legalium hominum per Capitalis
Justitiae Regis considerationem terminabitur, utrum tenementum sit pertinens ad
Eleemosynam sive ad feudum laicum, coram ipsa Justitia Regis; Et si recognitum
fuerit ad Eleemosynam pertinere, placitum erit in Curia Ecclesiastica; si vero
ad laicum feudum, nisi ambo tenementum de eodem Episcopo vel Barone
advocaverint, erit placitum in Curia regia; sed si uterque advocaverit de feudo
illo eundem Episcopum vel Baronem, erit placitum in Curia ipsius, ita quod
propter factam recognitionem seisinam non amittat qui prius seisitus fuerat,
donec per placitum disrationatum sit.

XII. Qui de Civitate vel castello vel Burgo vel Dominico Manerio D. Regis
fuerit, si ab Archidiacono vel Episcopo super aliquo delicto citatus fuerit,
unde debeat eis respondere, and ad citationes eorum satisfacere noluerit, been
liceat eum sub interdicto ponere; sed non debet excommunicari, priusquam
Capitalis Justitia D. Regis villae illius conveniatur, ut justiciet eum ad
satisfactionem venire; Et si Justitia R. inde defecerit, ipse erit in
misericordia D. R. and exinde poterit Episcopus eum accusatum Ecclesiastica
justitia coercere.

XIII. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and universae personae regni qui de rege tenent
in Capite, and habent possessiones suas de D. Rege, sicut Baroniam, and inde
respondent Justiciis and Ministris Regis, and faciunt omnes rectitudines and
consuetudines regias, sicut Barons caeteri, debent interesse judiciis Curiae
D. Regis cum Baronibus suis, usque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad
mortem.

XIV. Cum vacaverit Archiepiscopatus vel Episcopatus vel Abbatia, vel Prioratus
de Dominio Regis, debet esse in manu ipsius, and inde percipiet omnes redditus
and exitus, sicut dominicos; Et cum ventum fuerit ad consulendum Ecclesiae,
debet D. Rex mandare potiores personas Ecclesiae; and in capella ipsius Regis
debet fieri electio, assensu D. Regis, and consilio personarum regni quas ad
hoc faciendum vocaverit, and ibidem faciet electus homagium and fidelitatem D.
Regi, sicut ligio Domino, de vita sua, and membris, and de honor suo terreno,
salvo ordine suo, priusquam sit consecratus.

XV. Si quisquam de proceribus deforciaverit Archiepiscopo, Episcopo vel
Archidiacono, de se vel de suis Justitiam exhibere, Rex debet justitiare.

XVI. Si forte aliquis deforciaverit D. Regi rectitudinem suam, Archiepiscopus,
Episcopus, and Archidiaconus debent eum justitiare, ut Regi satisfaciat.

XVII. Catalla eorum qui sunt in Regis forisfacto, non detineat Ecclesia, vel
coemeterium contra justitiam Regis, quia ipsius Regis sunt, sive in Ecclesiis,
sive extra fuerint inventa.

XVIII. Placita de debitis quae fide interposita debentur, vel absque
interpositione fidei, sint in Curia Regis.

XIX. Filii Rusticorum non debent ordinari absque assensu Domini, de cujus
terra nati dignoscuntur.

Different in particulars of no slight moment are the reported Clarendon
Constitutions in the greater History of Matthew Paris, first published (as I
think) by that Reverend Father Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, whose
Archetype, as it was transcribed by a Country Vicar, and delivered to the
Printer's hands (I have part of that Transcript to witness it, in mine own
hands) is but equal in every Iota to the published Copy: But as they are here
written I have seen them added, Ex MS. vita Thom. Cantuar.
without discrepancy of a syllable, at the end of the Life and Death of St.
Thomas of Canterbury, drawn in ancient hand, and out of a quaternity of former
Authors, Herbert of Doseham, William a Monk of Canterbury, John of Salisbury
and Alan Abbot of Teukesbury, into a just Volume collected: Huic libello nostro
(says the Author, that you may know what work they make here) inserere
studuimus funestum illud and famosum Decreti Chirographum, consuetudines (viz.)
illas regias apud Clarendonam promulgatas, quas ideo hic interseruimus, ut
legant secula post futura, and hinc cognoscant quam justa, quam perspicua
fuerit gloriosi Neomartyris Thomae, primo Exilii and post Martyrii causa. What
contention (after confirmation by Oath of the whole Baronage) grew hereupon
'twixt the King and that Canonized Archbishop, is in every Chronologer of
those times enough declared. But it cannot be ungratefully received, if both
for respect to an old English endeavoring Wit, and also for matter, form and
phrase of relation, out of Robert of Gloucester, be made this superaddition.

Robert Glocest. hist. Poet.
No man ne might thenche the love that there was
Bitwene the K. H. and the good man S. Thomas;
The devil had enui thereto, and set bitwen them feu,
Alas, alas thulke stond, vor all to well it greu.
Uor there had ere ibe kings of Luther deed
As W. Bastard, and his son W. the read.
That Luther Laws made inou, and held in all the land
The K. uold not believe the laws that he fond,
Ne that his elderne bulde, ne the godeman S. Thomas
Thought that thing age right never law uas.
Ne sothnes and custom mid strength up ihold,
And he wist that ure dear Lourd in the Gospel told
That he himself was sothnes, and custum naught,
Theruore Luther custumes he uould graent naught.
Ne the K. uould bileue that is elderne ad ihold,
So that conteke sprung bituene them manifold.
The K. drou to right law mani Luther custume,
S. Thomas thom withsed, and granted some.
The Laws that icholle now tell he granted vawe.
Zuf a yuman has a sone to clergi idraw
He ne sall without is lourdes icrouned naught be,
Uor yuman ne may naught be made again is lourds will free.
In the eighteenth of Clarendon Customs is the substance of this particular;
where Rusticorum interpreted Yumen in this Poet, is mentioned: To both, as a
Synonymy, Reg. Indic. fol. 7.
is homines used as well in the Law-Annals of later times, and in Writs of Ven.
fac. xii tam milites quam alios liberos and legales homines de vicineto, etc.
as in older Constitutions before expressed. Gemen is the common allowed Saxon
root, whence our now usual name of Yeoman had his beginning: but my conceit
with a painted imposture deceives me, if the ancient Latin be not Father of
both, but in a Dialect different. Nor let it be a fault ad Appios and Coruncas
redire, some taste in Yeomen is of Homines, but more of Hemones; Fest. in verb.
Hemones. Paul. Merul. ad lib. 1. annal. Ennli.
which in Ennius and Festus, is not otherwise significant, than Themen in
English, altered only in Character in gemen the Saxon word. But to my
Law-rhythms again; Another thing he granted eke as ye mow nouise;
Yuf a man of holy Chirch has eni lay fee;
Parson, other what he be, he ssal do therevore
Kings service that there ualth, that is right ne be vorlore,
In plaiding and in assise be and in judgment also.
Bote war man ssal be bilemed, other to death ido.
He granted eke yuf eni man the Kings traitor were,
And eni man is chateux to holy chirch bear
That holy chirch ne sold naught the chateux there let
That the K. there other is as is own is ne wette.
Uor all that the felon has the Kings it is
And each man may in holy church is own take iwis.
He granted eke that a church of the Kings fe
In none stead ene and ever ne ssold igiue be
As to house of religion, without the Kings leve,
And that he other the patron the gift first gave.
S. Thomas granted well these and other mo,
And these other he withsede that did him well woe.
I. Yuf bituene twei lewd men were eni striving,
Other bituene a lewd and a clerc, for holy chirch thing,
As vor vouson of chirch whether should the chirch give,
The K. would that in his court the ple ssold be drive;
Uor as much as a lewd man that the o parti was
Chanliche was under the K. and under no bishop nas.


What he styles Lewedmen, is by our common phrase Laymen, Leudes in the old
Teutonique and Saxon ( as (...) in Greek from (...), Pind. Olymp. 9.

Lipsius lib. 5. Poliorceticon


i. e. a Stone, referred, as Pindar has it, to that mythick instauration of
hard mankind by Deucalion and Pyrrha) is equivalent to the Multitude or common
people, in the present English.

Chauc in Prolog. and in the Somners talc.
For yef a Priest be foul, on whom we trust,
No wonder is a leude man to rust.
But then the ignorant are by it noted, rather than who are not Clerks; For the
same Jeoffrey in another place says, This every lewd Uicar and Parson can say.

Robert of Gloucester speaks again: II. Another was no bishop, ne clerc nathe mo,
Ne ssolde without Kings leave out of this land go.
And than hii ssolde suere upe the book ywis.
That hii ne sold purchase no uvel the K. ne none of is.
III. The third was yuf eni man in mausing were ibrought,
And suth come to amendment, ne age were naught,
That he ne suore up the boc, ac borowes find sold
To stand to that holy Chirch there of him toky would.
IV. The verth was that no man that of the K. huld ought
In chief or in eni servise in mausing were ibrought,
Bote the wardeins of holy chirch that brought him thereto,
The K. sede or is bailifes wat be ad misdo,
And looked verst were they to amendment it bring,
And vote hii would by their leave do the mausing.
V. The vist was, that Bishoprikes and Abbeis also
That vacans were of prelas in the K. hand were ido,
And that the K. sold all the land as is own take,
Uort at last that him lust eni prelat there make.
And than thulke prelat sold in is chapel ichose be.
Of is clarks which he wuld to such prelate bise.
And than wan he were ichose in is chapel right there,
Homage he sold him do ar he confirmed were.
VI. The sixth was yuf eni play to chapitle were idraw,
And eni man made is appele, yuf me dude him unlaw,
That to the Bishop from Ercedeken is appele sold make,
And from Bishop to Arcebissop and suth none other take,
And but the Ercebissops court to right him would bring,
That he sold from him be cluthe bivore the King.
And from the K. non other mo so that attan end
Plaining of holy chirch to the K. should wend.
And the K. amend sold the Ercebissops deed,
And be as in the Popes stead, and S. Thomas it withsede.
VII. The seuenthe was that plaiding that of det were
To yield well thoru truth iplight, and naught ihold nere
Althei thoru truth it were, that ple sold be ibrought
Bivore the K. and is bailies and to holy chirch naught.
VIII. The eighth was that in the land citation none nere
Thoru bull of the Pope of Rome, and clean bileued were.
IX. The nithe was that Peter's pence that me gadereth manion
The Pope nere naught on isend, ac the K. echone.
X. The tethe was yuf eni Clarke as felon were itake,
And vor felon iproved and ne might it not forsake,
That me sold him verst disordein and suth thoru there law,
And thoru judgment of the land hong him other to draw.
Uor these and vor other mo the Godeman S. Thomas
Fleu verst out of England and eke imartred was,
Uor he sei there uas bote o way, other he must stiff be,
Other holy chirch was isent, that of right was so fre.


Absolution of the Prelates Oath, which among others confirmed what he soon
made retractation of, was obtained from Alexander the Third, Bishop of Rome;
who gave an insolent repulse to the Kings Ambassadors, sent for his
ratification of that which the Baronage had thus concluded. The King herewith
exceedingly provoked, made present dispatch of Letters to every Sheriff in the
Kingdom, thus pronouncing;

XIX. Praecipio tibi, quod si aliquis Clericus, vel Laicus in balliva tua,
Matthew. Paris page 137.
Romanam Curiam appellaverit, eum capias and firmiter teneas, donec voluntatem
meam praecipiam; and omnes redditus Clericorum Archiepis^opi, and possessiones
seisias in manum meam, and omnium Clericorum qui cum Archiepiscopo sunt,
patres, matres, fratres, sorores, Nepotes, and Neptes pones per salvos plegios,
and catalla eorum, donec voluntatem meam inde praecipiam. Et hoc breve tecum
afferas cum summonitus fueris.

XX. Si quis inventus fuerit ferens literas D. Papae (this is spoken of before
in my Poet) vel mandatum, aut Thomae Archiepiscopi, continens interdictum
Christianitatis in Anglia, capiatur and retineatur, donec inde voluntatem meam
praecipiam. But in the Annals of Roger of Hoveden, Roger de Hoved. annal. 2.
fo. 284.
Dedo sicut de Regis traditore and regni, sine dilatione justitia fiat.

XXI. Promulgation also, by way of prohibition, was made of most of the former
diminutions of Papal or Episcopal authority: The Clergymen, that were beyond
Sea, under forfeiture of their Livings, were charged, by Summons in their
places of due residence, to return.

XXII. Londoniensis and Norwicensis Episcopi summoneantur, Matthew. Paris.
and sint coram Justitiariis Regis ad rectum faciendum, quod contra Statuta
regni interdixerunt terram Comitis Hugonis, and in ipsum sententiam anathematis
intulerunt.

XXIII. Denarii S. Petri colligantur and custodiantur.

XXIV. In the 22th of his Reign at Nottingham, celebravit (says Hoveden)
magnum Concilium de Statutis regni sui, and coram Rege filio suo, and coram
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Hoveden part. 2. p. 313.
Comitibus and Baronibus regni sui communi omnium consilio divisit regnum suum
in VI. parts, per quarum singulas tres Justitiarios Itinerantes constituit;
Quadripartitam etiam regni ad hunc modum sub eodem principe habes divisionem
apud eundem, fo. 337.
Here was the infancy of that form of Circuits by Justices in Air, whose names
and described limits my Author in a Sexpartite division has remembered. Et
postea (you hear him again) fecit D. Rex omnes praedictos Justiciarios jurare
super Sacrosancta Evangelia, quod ipsi bona fide and sine malo ingenio, has
subscriptas assisas custodirent, and inviolabiliter ab hominibus regni facerent
custodiri; The subscribed Articles with this Title thus he has Recorded:

Assisae Henrici Regis factae apud Clarendon and renovatae apud Northamtune.
XXV. SI quis rectatus fuerit coram Justiciis D. Regis de murdro, vel
latrocinio, V. Camden in Ord. Angl. page 123. quicum conferas Feud. lib. 2.
tit. 10. and 21. quin and Malmesb. hist. Nov. lib. 2. fol. 103. l. 25.
solidatus, etc. Reg. Brev. Judic. fo. 1. in Hab. fac. vis.
vel roberia, vel receptatione hominum tale facientium, vel de falsoneria, vel
iniqua combustione, per Sacramentum XII. militum de Hundredo, and si milites
non adfuerint (I here understand by Milites no other than such as were
fendatorii, or held of some Superior by Knight's service, thereby distinguished
from milites solidarii or Servientes, i. e. hired Soldiers, and both from the
name of dignity used in ceremonious Chivalry far separated) per Sacramentum
XII. liberorum and legalium hominum, and per Sacramentum IV. hominum de
unaquaque villa Hundredi, eat ad Judicium Aquae (i. e. to the watery Ordeal,
described with the fiery in Lambard 's exposition of words before his Saxon
Laws, and in the Antiquities of the Church of Britany, published, as I suppose,
by Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury) and si perierit, alterum pedem
amittat; And apud NORTHAMTVNE additum est pro rigore Justitiae, quod dexterum
similiter pugnum cum pede amittat, and regnum abjuret and infra XL. dies a
regno exulet; Et si ad aquam mundus fuerit, inveniat plegios, and remaneat in
regno, nisi ^ectatus fuerit de murdro vel aliqua turpi felonia per commune
Comitatus and legalium militum patriae: de quo, si praedicto modo rectatus
fuerit, quamvis ad aquam mundus fuerit, nihilominus infra XL. dies a regno
exeat, and catalla sua secum asportet, salvo jure Dominorum suorum, and regnum
abjuret in misericordia D. Regis.

XXVI. Nulli liceat, neque in burgo, neque in villa, hospitari aliquem
extraneum ultra unam noctem in domo sua, quem ad rectum habere noluerit, nisi
hospitatus ille essonium rationabile habuerit, quod hospes domus monstret
vicinis suis, and cum recesserit, coram vicinis recedat and per Diem.

XXVII. Si quis seisitus fuerit de murdro, vel de latrocinio, vel roberia, vel
falsoneria, and inde sit cognoscens, vel de aliqua alia felonia, quam fecerit,
coram praeposito Hundredi, vel Burgi, and coram legalibus hominibus, id postea
coram Justitiis negare non poterit. Et si idem sine seisina coram eis aliquid
hujusmodi recognoverit, hoc simul coram Justitiis negare non poterit.

XXVIII. Si quis obierit Francus tenens, haeredes ipsius remaneant in tali
seisina, qualem pater suus habuit die qua fuit vivus and mortuus, de Feodo suo,
and catalla sua habeant unde faciant divisam defuncti, and dominum suum postea
requirant, and ei faciant de relevio and aliis, quae eis facere debent de feodo
suo.

XXIX. Si haeres fuerit infra aetatem, Dominus feodi recipiat Homagium suum,
and habeat in custodia illum quamdiu debuerit; alii Domini, si plures fuerint,
homagium ejus recipiant, and ipse faciat eis quod facere debuerit.

XXX. Vxor defuncti habeat dotem suam, Ranulph de Glanv. lib. ^. ca. 5. Bract.
lib. 2. de acq. rer. dom. cap. 26. sect. 2.
and partem de catallis ejus quae eam contingit, which by the Law in those days
was a third part, if the dead had left issue, but a moity, if he were (...).

XXXI. Si Dominus feodi negat haeredibus defuncti seisinam ejusdem Jeodi quam
exigunt, sustitiarii D. Regis faciant inde fieri recognitionem per XII. legales
homines, quatem seisinam defunctus inde habuit die qua ficit vivus and mortuus;
This is the very Mortdancester; Et sicut recognitum fuerit, ita haeredibus ejus
restituant; and si quis contra hoc fecerit and inde attaintus fuerit, remaneat
in misericordia Regis.

XXXII. Justitiae Domini Regis faciant fieri recognitionem de disseisinis
factis super assisam, a tempore quo D. Rex venit in Angliam proximo post pacem
factam inter ipsum and Regem filium suum.

XXXIII. Justitiae capiant fidelitates D. Regis infra Claus. Pasch. and ad
ultimum infra Claus. Pentecost. ab omnibus videlicet Comitibus; Baronibus,
Militibus and libere tenentibus, and etiam rusticis qui in regno manner
voluerint; and qui facere ^oluerit fidelitatem, tanquam inimicus D. Regis
capiatur.

XXXIV. Habent etiam Justitiae praecipere quod omnes illi qui nondum fecerunt
homagium and ligeantiam D. Regi, quod ad diem, quem eis nominabunt, veniant and
faciant Regi Homagium, and ligeantiam, sicut ligeo Domino.

XXXV. Justitiae faciant omnes Justitias and rectitudines spectantes ad D.
Regem, and ad coronam suam, per breve Domini Regis, vel illorum qui in loco
ejus erunt, de feodo dimi^u milit. V. Camden in Ordin. Angl. Casum item
Nevillae in libr. 7. Relat. D. E. Coke huc refer.
and infra (If the account of a Knights fee be by the annual value, then
confidently according to the quadruple proportion of the known Relief, you may
affirm it, by xx l. Lands; and so likewise by comparison with Soccage payment
upon the Stat. of West. 1. for aid, A fair Fitz chivalier, or a File marryer;
but by a calculation prefixed to the red Book of the Exchequer, DCLXXX. Acres
make exactly the Sum) nisi tam grandis sit querela, quod non possit deduci
sine D. Rege, vel talis quam Justitiae ei reponent pro dubitatione sua, vel ad
illos qui in loco ejus erunt; intendant tamen pro posse suo ad commodum D.
Regis faciendum.

XXXVI. Faciant assisam de latronibus iniquis, and malefactoribus terrae quae
assisa est, per concilium Regis, filii sui, and hominum suorum; per quos ituri
sunt Comitatus.

XXXVII. Justitiae provideant quod castella diruta prorsus diruantur, and
diruenda been prosternantur; Et nisi hoc fecerint, D. Rex Judicium Curiae suae
de eis habere voluerit, sicut de contemptoribus praecepti sui.

XXXVIII. Justitiae inquirant de Escaetis, de Ecclesiis, de terris, de foeminis
quae sunt de donatione D. Regis.

XXXIX. Ballivi D. Regis respondeant ad Scaccarium, tam de assiso redditu, quam
de omnibus perquisitionibus suis, quas faciunt in balliviis suis, exceptis
illis quae pertinent ad vicecomitatum.

XL. Justitiae inquirant de custodiis castellorum, and qui, and quantum, and
ubi eas debeant, and postea mandent D. Regi.

XLI. Latro, ex quo capitur, Vicecomiti tradatur ad custodiendum, and, si
Vicecomes absens fuerit, ducatur ad proximum Castellanum, and ipse illum
custodiat donec illum liberet Vicecomiti.

XLII. Justitiae faciant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae, illos qui a regno
recesserunt, and nisi redire voluerint infra terminum nominatum, and stare ad
rectum in Curia Regis, postea ut lagentur, and nomina ut lagorum afferantur ad
Pascha, and ad Fest. S. Mich. ad Scaccarium, and exinde mittantur D. Regi.

While thus the King made provident Order for Lay-business, Hugo a Petra
Leonis, the Pope's Legate in England, labored for dila^ation of Church; to
whom was granted by the King:

XLIII. Quod de caetero Clericus (Matthew Paris his report) non trahatur ante
Judicem secularem personaliter, Matthew. Paris page 177.
pro aliquo crimine vel transgressione, nisi pro foresta and laico feudo, unde
Regi vel alii D. Seculari laicum debetur servitium.

XLIV. Vt Archiepiscopatus, Episcopatus, vel Abbatiae, non teneantur in manu
Regis ultra annum, nisi pro causa evidente, vel necessitate urgente.

XLV. Vt interfectores Clericorum convicti vel confessi, coram Justiciario
regni, praesente Episcopo puniantur.

Rog. de Hoved. part. 2. f. 446.
XLVI. Quod Clerici duellum facere non cogantur.

XLVII. Statuit apud WOODSTOCK, quod quicunque forisfecerit ei de foresta sua,
semel de venatione sua, de ipso salvi plegii capiantur; and si iterum
forisfecerit, similiter capiantur de ipso salvi plegii; si autem tertio idem
forisfecerit, nulli plegii capiantur, sed proprium corpus forisfactoris: which
concludes what of his Laws common Histories afford.

CHAP. IX.
Richard Ceur de Lion.

THIS Henry's Successor was the stout Richard Ceur de Lion: Himself in Person
attending the Eastern Wars. Division by his Commission was made for maintaining
the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, of the whole Government, 'twixt Hugh of
Pusar, Bishop of Durham, and William Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor. The stream
of all, howsoever there was an association of Hugh Bardulph and William
Briwere, was carried as the Prelates pleased, until their ambitious insolency
made a period to their too great authority. After his return Justices in Air
were sent into every County, and secundum subscriptorum formam capitulorum
(says Hoveden) processerunt in justiciis exequendis. Roger de Hoveden, par. 2.
fo. 423.


Forma Procedendi in Placitis Coronae Regis.
I. INprimis eligendi sunt IV. milites de toto Comitatu; qui per Sacramentum
suum eligant II. legales milites de quolibet hundredo, vel Wapentacco. Et illi
II. eligant super sacramentum suum X. milites de singulis Hundredis, vel
Wapentaccis^; vel si milites defuerint, legales and liberos homines, ita quod
illi XII. insimul respondeant de omnibus capitulis de toto Hundredo vel
Wapentacco.

Capitula Placitorum Coronae Regis.
II. DE placitis Coronae novis and veteribus, and omnibus quae nondum sin^
finita, coram Justiciariis D. Regis:

III. Item de omnibus recognitionibus and omnibus placitis, quae summonita sunt
coram Justiciariis per breve Regis, vel capitalis Justitiae, vel a capitali
Curia Regis coram eis missa.

IV. Item de Escaetis, quae sunt and quae fuerunt postquam Rex arripuit iter
versus terram Jerusalem, and quae fuerunt tunc in manu Regis, and sunt modo in
manu ejus, vel non; and de omnibus Escaetis Domini Regis, si a manu sua sint
remotae, quomodo, and per quem, and in cujus manus devenerunt, and qualiter and
qui exitus inde habuerit, and quos, and quid valuerint, and quid modo valiant,
and si aliqua eschaeta sit, quae ad D. R. pertineat, quae in manu ejus non sit.

V. Item de Ecclesiis quae sunt de Donatione D. Regis.

VI. Item de custodiis puerorum quae ad D. Regem pertinent.

VII. Item de malefactoribus and eorum receptoribus and eis consentientibus.

VIII. Item de maritagiis puellarum vel viduarum, quae ad D. Regem pertinent.

IX. Item de falsonariis.

X. Item de Interfectoribus Judaeorum, qui sint, and qui vadii Judaeorum
interfectorum, and catallis, and terris, and debitis, and chartis, and quis ea
habuerit, and quantum eis debuerit, and quae vadia habuerint, and quis ea
teneat, and quantum valiant, and quis exitus inde habuerit, and quos: and omnia
vadia and debita Judaeorum interfectorum capiantur in manum Reg. and qui ad
occisionem Judaeorum fuerant, and non fecerunt sinem cum D. R. vel Justitiariis
suis, capiantur, and non deliberentur nisi per D. R. vel Justitiarios suos.

XI. Item de omnibus auxiliis datis ad redemptionem Domini Regis (which were
for his ransom out of the hands of the Emperor Henry......... to whom Limpold
Duke of Austri^, who took him Prisoner, had sold him and amounted to CXL. Marks
of Silver) quis quantum promiserit, and quantum reddiderit, and quantum aretro
sit.

XII. Item de Fautoribus Comitis Johannis (it was his Brother who affected the
English Diadem, in the time of Richard 's Captivity) qui finem fecerunt cum D.
Rege and qui non.

XIII. Item de Catallis Comitis Johannis, vel fautorum ejus, quae ad usum D.
Regis non sunt conversa, and quantum Vicecomites receperunt, vel ballivi sui,
and quis aliquid contra antiquas consuetudines regni dederit.

XIV. Item de omnibus terris Comitis Johannis, de Dominicis and Wardis, and
Escaetis, and de donis suis; and qua de causa data sunt ei illa dona, and omnia
dona Comitis Johannis capiantur in manum Regis, praeterquam illa quae per Regem
confirmata sunt.

XV. Item de debitis and fi^ibus quae debentur Comiti Johanni and qua de causa,
and omnia exigantur ad opus D. Regis.

XVI. Item de foeneratoribus and eorum catallis, qui mortui sunt. For by an old
Law of the Confessor, Leg. Ed. Confess. cap. 37.
Usury under pain of loss of the Offender's substance, is forbidden.

XVII. Item, de vinis venditis contra assisam, and de falsis mensuris, tam vini
quam aliarum rerum.

Vide Guil. de novo Burgo Rer. Angl. lib 3. cap. 22.
XVIII. Item de cruciatis mortuis ante iter suum arreptum versus Jerusalem, and
quis eorum catalla habuerit, and quae, and quanta.

XIX. Item de magnis assisis, quae sunt de centum solidatis terrae, and infra.

XX. Item de defaltis.

XXI. Praeterea in quolibet Comitatu eligantur 4. Milites, and unus Clericus,
Custodes placitorum Coronae, and nullus Vicecomes sit Justitiarius in
vicecomitatu suo, nec in Comitatu, quem tenuerit post primam Coronationem D.
Regis.

Annexed is to all these an intricate kind of Inquisition, appropriated to that
time, of the Kings profits in Wards, and Escaets, with Farms, and other
Country-Commodities, which would receive larger place here, than the
inconveniency demands.

XXII. Omnia debita and vadia Judaeorum imbrevientur, terrae, domus, redditus
and possessiones. Guil. Neubrig. lib. 5. cap. 4. Matthew. Paris 237. post
Hovedenum page 424.
Judaeus vero, qui aliquid horum celaverit, sit in forisfactura D. Regis de
corpore suo, and concelamento, and de omnibus possessionibus suis, and omnibus
catallis suis, nec unquam concelamentum Judaeo recuperare licebit: With
particular form of Place and Persons, where, and before whom this imposition
might be performed.

XXIII. For especial exercise in Chivalry, that practice might breed skill, and
both alacrity to Arms, he instituted by grant, Torneaments, but not without
certain restraints; as by his Charter thereof made to Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, and reported in the red Book of the Exchequer, is thus apparent;
Lib. Rub. Scace.
Sciatis nos concessisse, quod Torneamenta sint in Anglia, in quinque plateis
inter Sarum and Wilton, inter Warwick and Kelingworth, inter Stamford and
Walingford, inter Brakeley and Mixeber, inter Bly and Tikehill: Ita quod pax
terrae meae non infringatur, nec de forestis nostris damnum inferatur. Et
Comes, qui ibi torniare voluerit, dabit nobis XX. Marcas (understand it of
Silver) and Baro X. Marcas; and Miles, qui terram habuerit, IV. Marcas, and qui
non habuerit, II. Marcas. Nullus autem extraneus ibi torniabit; unde vobis
mandamus quod ad diem Torneamenti habeatis ibi II. Clericos, and II. Milites
vestros, ad capiendum sacramentum de Comite and Barone, quod vobis de praedicta
pecunia ante Torneamentum satisfacient; and quod nullum torniare permittant,
antequam super hoc satisfecerit; Et X. Marcas pro carta ad opus nostrum
capiatis, unde Comes Sarum and Comes de Clara and Comes de Warrena plegii sunt.
Test meipso apud villam Episcopi, xxii. die Augusti. First use of these
Torneaments was (as William of Newborough delivers) in the time of Stephen,
prohibited under Henry Fitz-L'Empres, and by this Lyon-hearted Prince, to
Martial Honor, restored.

XXIV. Praecepit, quod omnes, qui chartas habebant, venirent ad novu^ sigillum
suum (this new Seal was, after the old lost, Roger de Hoveden, page 424, and
440.
with one Roger, the King's Vice Chancellor, drowned in the Cyprian Sea) ad
chartas suas r^novandas.

XXV. Constitutum est, quod omnes mensurae totius Angliae sint ejusdem
quantitatis, tam de bladis, quam de leguminibus and de rebus consimil^bus;
scilicet una bona summa aequi: and haec mensura sit rata, tam in Civitatibus
and Burgis quam extra; Mensura etiam vini and Cerevisiae, and cunctorum
liquorum, sit ejusdem quantitatis, secundum diversitatem liquorum; Pondera
etiam and librae, and caeterae Pesiae, sint ejusdem quantitatis in toto regno,
secundum diversitatem mercaturarum.

XXVI. Mensuris Bladorum and liquorum, vini and Cerevisiae, inclaventur claves,
ne per dolum possint falsari.

XXVII. Lanei Panni, ubicunque fiunt, fiant de eadem latitudine, scilicet de
duabus ulnis infra lisuras, and ejusdem bonitatis in medio and in lateribus.

XXVIII. Eadem ulna sit in toto regno, and ejusdem quantitatis, and ulna sit
ferrea.

XXIX. Ne quis Mercator praetendat Seldae suae rubros pannos, vel nigros, vel
scuta, vel aliqua alia, per quae visus emptorum saepe decipiuntur, ad bonum
pannum eligendum.

XXX. Nulla tinctura vendenda, nisi solummodo nigra, nec fiat (so I distinguish
the words) alicubi in regno, nisi in capitalibus civitatibus, aut Burgis IV.
aut VI. legales homines de ipsa villa secundum quantitatem villae; similiter,
in vicecomitatu; aut cum praepositis Civitatis aut Burgi, si in manu
Vicecomitis non fuerint, assignentur ad assisam custodiendam; scilicet sub hac
forma, ut ipsi videant and certi sint quod omnia vendantur, and emantur per
eandem mensuram, and omnes mensurae sint ejusdem quantitatis, secundum
diversitatem mercium.

XXXII. The punishment of the offenders, was corpora eorum capiantur, in
carcerem detrudantur, and omnia quae ipsius sunt, Matthew. Paris, page 257.
ad fisci commodum, seisiantur.

XXXIII. If the instituted Comptrollers fail in that trust committed to them,
de catallis suis in misericordia Regis remaneant.

XXXIV. An Aid of 5 s. the hide, was taken through the Kingdom: for collection
were Commissions granted, Hoveden part 2. f. 443.
and power of conventing the Land tenants, and charging them by Oath to make
true report of Hides in every Manor; Ad poenam vero Juratorum, qui aliquid
contra Juramentum suum celaverint in hoc negotio, statutum erat, quod quicunque
Rusticus convictus fuisset de perjurio, daret domino meliorem bovem de caruca
sua, and insuper responderet de proprio ad opus D. Regis, tantum pecuniae,
quantum fuisset declaratum per suam perjuriam fuisse celatum. Tempore E. 1. tit
Avowry 10^. and Reg. orig. so. 9. a.
Si vero liber homo (by the opposite of the title (Rusticus) I conceive
generally Tenants in ancient demesne, which are not allowed the addition of
Freeman, and Copyholders) convictus fuisset, esset in misericordia Regis, and
insuper refunderet de proprio, ad opus D. Regis, quantum fuerit per eum
celatum, sicut and Rusticus.

XXXV. Statutum fuit, quod quilibet Baro cum Vicecomite faceret districtiones
super homines suos, and, si per defectum Baronum, districtiones factae non
fuissent, caperetur de dominico Baronum quod super homines suos restaret
reddendum, and ipsi Barons ad homines suos inde caperent: and libera feoda
Ecclesiarum parochialium de hoc Tallagio excipiebantur, and omnes excaet.
Baronum quae fuerunt in manu Domini Regis, communicaverunt.

XXXVI. Serganteriae D. Regis, quae non erant de feodis militum, excipiebantur:
^o. li. 6. Avowry 267.11. li. 4. fo. 31. b.
Take it of Graund or petit Serjeanty, and it fully accords with some Term
Books, of later times allowed, and published.

Capitula Placitorum Coronae D. Regis,
Hoveden part 2. fo. 445.
WHereof Hugh Bardulph, Roger Arundel, and Geffrey Harset, Justices in Eire
through the Northern parts, held Plea.

XXXVII. De omnibus assisis, and de magnis assisis, usque ad X. libratas
terrae, and infra.

XXXVIII. De Advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and capiantur coram eis electiones
magnae assisae per mandatum D. Regis, vel ejus capitalis Justittae.

XXXIX. De Ecclesiis vacantibus vel non vacantibus, quae fuerunt de donatione
D. Regis.

XL. De Excaetis D. Regis.

XLI. De Donationibus and de valectis, and puellis, quae sunt, vel esse debent,
in donatione D. Regis, and de valentiis terrarum suarum, and si quis eorum vel
earum sit maritatus, and inquiratur cui, and per quem, and a quo tempore.

XLII. Quae viduae non finierunt pro se maritandis, and finis capiatur ad opus
D. Regis.

XLIII. De Serganteriis D. Regis, quis ea habet, and per quem, and quantum
valent, and qui finem non fecerunt ad auxilium Domini Regis (look before in
art. xxxvii.) and qui fecerunt, and finis capiatur.

XLIV. De usuris Christianorum, and eorum catallis, qui sunt mortui.

XLV. De illis, qui sunt in misericordia Regis, and non amerciati.

XLVI. De purpresturis D. Regis.

XLVII. De viis D. Regis estreciatis.

XLVIII. De thesauris inventis.

XLIX. De malefactoribus and eorum receptoribus.

L. De fugitivis retatis, reversis post ultimam assisam.

LI. De omnibus ponderibus, and mensuris, and ulnis renovatis, and si IV.
homines (refer hither the xxxii. Article) qui sunt attornati ad haec
custodienda in unaquaque villa, fecerint quod inde statutum est, and si
attachiaverint transgressores illius assisae, and si non attachiaverint, prout
debent, puniantur sicut ipsi transgressores.

LII. Totum vinum illius qui vendidit contra assisam, capietur ad opus D.
Regis, and praeterea Dominus vini and venditores, sint in misericordia Regis.

LIII. Of defaults in the Commissioners, appointed for levying the aids.

LIVE. De Custodibus portuum maris, si quid receperunt quod non reddiderunt, and
si mercedem aliquam receperunt pro jure Regis retinendo, and si quis aliquid
receperit, qui non fuerit ad hoc attornatus.

The Justices of the Forest, H^gh of Nevill chief Justice, Hugh Wac, and Ernise
of Nevil made their Circuits, authorized by the King's Commission; that in
every County, where they were to pass, they should call before them ad placita
forestae, Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, all Freeholders, the chief of
every Town, and IV. Yeomen ad audienda praecepta Regis.

Haec est assisa D. R. and haec sunt Praecepta de forestis suis in Anglia,
facta per assensum and Consilium Archiepiscop. and Episc. and Abbat. Commit. and
Bar. and Militum totius regni.
LV. THat none should trust, in hope of easy composition for offenses,
touching Venison, or other matters of the Forest, but that Justice should be
done to the Convict, qualis facta fuit tempore Henr. avi patris D. Regis (viz.)
ut amittant oculos and testiculos.

LVI. That none presume to keep Bows, Arrows, Greyhounds, or other Dogs in
the King's Forest, nisi habeant ipsum R^gem ad Warrantum suum, vel aliquem
alium, qui eum possit inde warrantizare.

LVII. Quod nullus donet vel vendat aliquid ad destructionem bosci sui, vel ad
wastum quae sit infra forestam Regis, sed concedit been quod capiant de boscis
suis quod necesse eis fuerit, sine wasto, and hoc per visum forestarii sui and
viridariorum suorum.

LVIII. Quod omnes illi, qui boscos habent infra metas forestae D. Regis,
ponant idoneos forestarios in boscis suis, de quibus forestariis ipsi, quorum
bosci fuerint, sint plegii, vel tales inveniant plegios idoneos, qui possunt
emendare, si forestarii in aliquo forisfecerint, quod D. Regi pertineat.

LIX. That the King's Foresters take special survey, lest other Men's Woods,
intra metas forestae, be destroyed; and sciant been illi, quorum bosci fuerint,
quod de ipsismet, vel de eorum terris, capietur emendatio, and non de alio.

LX. Quod sui forestarii jurent, quod secundum omne posse suum, tenebunt ejus
assisam, qualem eam fecit de forestis suis, and quod non vexabunt milites,
neque probos homines, de hoc quod D. Rex iis concessit de boscis eorum.

LXI. That in every County, where he has Venison, there be placed XII.
milites, ad custodiendam venationem suam and viride in forestis suis, and quod
IV. milites ponantur ad adgistandos boscos suos, and ad recipiendum pannagium
suum, and custodiendum and defendendum.

LXII. Quod nullus adgistet boscos suos infra metas forestae (I think you had
need translate metas into regard oft-times among these Orders) antequam bosci
eorum adgistentur; Et est sciendum quod incipit adgistamentum D. Regis XV. Dies
ante Festum S. Michaelis; and durat XV. Dies post Festum S. Michaelis.

LXIII. Si forestarius ejus habet in Custodia sua dominicos boscos regis, and
bosci illi destructi fuerunt, and non possit nec sciat justam causam monstrare,
quare bosci destruantur, nihil aliud capiatur de forestario illo, nisi proprium
corpus suum.

LXIV. If any Clergyman offend in the Forest, non dubitent Forestarii in eos
manus imponere, ad eos resistendos and capiendos, ipse enim eos inde
Warrantizabit.

LXV. That every three Years view be taken of all Assarts, as well new as old,
and of all purprestures, and of all wastes of the woods, and that they be
severally enrolled.

LXVI. That Archbishops, Bishops, Barons, Knights, Freeholders and all Yeomen
of the Land, appear at the Summons Magistri Forestarii sui, ad placitanda
placita de forestis suis.

LXVII. Ne aliqua Caretta exeat Chiminum in Foresta Regis, neque porci sint in
Foresta Regis tempore de Foinesun, (it is now a foetatione, called the Fence,
or rather the Fawnes Month) scilicet XV. Diebus ante nativitatem S. Joannis
Baptistae, and XV. Diebus post idem Festum.

LXVIII. Who so shall offend in taking the King's Venison, and be thereof
attainted, shall have Judgment of loss of his Eyes and Genitals; Qui autem
forisfecerit in Foresta Regis de viridi, sive per culpaturam, sive per
esbrancaturam, sive per foditionem turvarum, sive per escoriationem morae, sive
per culpationem de Subvemore, sive per essartum, sive per novam purpresturam;
per sepem, vel fossatam; vel per Al. renovationem.
remotionem molendini, vel cursus aquae, vel Bercariae; vel aliarum domorum,
vel per foenum falcandum extra sepes vel extra fossata; erit in misericordia
Regis de pecunia sua, nisi habeat viridarios, vel forestarios Regis ad
Warrantum.

LXIX. Similiter qui arcus vel sagittas portaverint vel Canes duxerint sine
Copula per forestam Regis, and inde attaintus fuerit, erit in misericordia
Regis.

LXX. Videnda sunt in reguardo nova assarta and vetera inbladata post ultimum
reguardum, and quo blado vel legumine inbladata sunt.

LXXI. Nova assarta in manu Regis, si vetera assarta inbladata sunt de frumento
vel siligine, unaquaeque acra dabit regi XII. denarios de illa vestitura, and
si inbladata fuerint de avena, vel hordeo, vel fabis vel pisis, vel alio
legumine, unaquaeque acra dabit regi VI. denarios de illa vestitura; Et
sciendum est quod tempore Henrici Regis F. Mat. IMP. permissum erat intra metas
Forestae fossata fieri loco sepium.

LXXII. Exiit Edictum a Rege, ut quicunque in regno suo forisfecisset Clerico,
aut alii viro religioso, non cogeretur satisfacere illi: sed si Clericus, aut
alius vir religosus, forisfecisset alicui laico, statim compelleretur ad
satisfaciendum illi: unde factum est quod viri religiosi ad redemptionem coacti
sunt: The main end of all was Exchequer profit; which this Richard too much
laboring for by published Edicts at home, and contending for by Arms abroad,
at length lost it, and together unluckily his Life.

CHAP. X.
King John and his Grand Charter.

THE burden of the State after Richard's death, was laid upon his Brother John
Earl of Moreton. He in the immediate times after his Inauguration, made diverse
Laws, touching Sale and Prices of French Wines, reported in Roger of Hoveden's
Annals. But all convenience of Merchandise and they were so incompetible, that
they were almost as soon abrogated, as enacted.

Consuetudines Scaccarii super debitis D. R. inquirendis. Roger de Hoveden page
463.

I. STatutum est in Anglia, and per praeceptum R. Joannis confirmatum, quod
nullus Vicecomes recipiet aliquem ad praesentationem Baronis in Seneschallum,
qui non possit respondere de misericordia pertinente ad transgressionem fidei,
si forte in eam inciderit. Quod autem Seneschallus ad praesentationem Baronis,
quod pacem faciat Vicecomiti de debitis domini sui ad Scaccarium, intelligendum
est quod super Computum Vicecomitis mittatur in prisonam statutam, secundum
legem Scaccarii, and debitum Regis capiatur de catallis Domini sui, secundum
legem Scaccarii: Quod si fidem praestitam non servaverit, ita quod ad Computum
Vicecomitis non venerit, vel si venerit and sine Licentia recesserit, corpus
ejus capiatur, and in prisonam ponatur statutam, nec deliberetur nisi per
speciale mandatum D. Regis. Item mittatur ad terram Domini cujus seneschallus
defecerit, and de catallis suis solvatur pecunia quae debetur, secundum legem
Scaccarii, and si pecunia illa debeatur pro fine terrae, and catalla non
inveniantur, unde pecunia illa solvatur, ipsa terra, pro qua finis facta fuit,
capiatur in manum D. Regis, and teneatur donec illa pecunia solvatur, secundum
legem Scaccarii.

II. In poena laesionis fidei, seneschallus, qui finem transgressus fuerit,
nunquam de hoc vel de alio debito per fidem suam credatur, vel recipiatur, nec
dominus credatur, vel recipiatur de hoc debito, nisi de gratia and voluntate
Regis, secundum legem and consuetudinem Scaccarii.

III. Fecit (not long after) generaliter acclamari, ut legalis assisa Panis
inviolabiter sub poena Collistrigiali observaretur: Matthew. Paris page 278.
Quae probata fuit per pistorem Gaufridi filii P. Justitiarii Angliae, and
pistorem R. de Thurnam. Ita quod pistores poterint sic vendere and in quolibet
quarterio lucrari III. Denarios, exceptis brennio and 2. panibus ad furn. and
4. servientibus IV. obolos, 2. gracionibus 1. quadrantem, and in busia III.
denarios, and in bultello obolum: with a proportionate price and weight 'twixt
Corn and Bread at large reckoned.

IV. Celebrating the Christmas at Bristow, Idem page 303 and 304.
Capturam avium per totam Angliam interdixit.

V. Praecepit per forestas totius Angliae sepes comburere, and fossata
complanare, datis frugibus circumquaque bestiis ad devorandum.

VI. After transaction of that great controversy 'twixt the King and Innocent
III. Bishop of Rome, public Commandment was given for observation and
maintenance of the Laws of Henry his great Grandfather. Hen. 1.


VII. Denuntiatum est praeterea Vicecomitibus, Forestariis aliisque Ministris
Regis, sicut vitam suam diligunt, ne a quopiam aliquid violenter extorqueant,
vel alicui injuriam irrogare praesumant, aut scottalla alicubi in regno
faciant, sicut facere consueverunt. Idem page 32^.


But notwithstanding those general forms of reformation, a more serious and
recapitulated was desired by the whole Baronage; A grand Council is appointed
at Paul 's in London, and there by Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, is
produced a Copy of Henry Beauclerk 's free Charter (which is before expressed)
and the same delivered to the chief Clerk there, to be openly read and
pronounced. As soon as the Barons heard it, was a uniform consent, that
maintenance and assertion of those liberties should rest, as of more dear
account, in their Martial resolutions, than blood or life. Nay in short space
after, mutual combination by solemn Oath taken upon the Altar was made among
them, that their band of Fealty dissolved (for so they deemed John 's
Government had occasioned) their Swords should compel him to enseal their
demands. To that place, which now only is called the Temple (then the
new-Temple) where the King lay in Warlike order, they go to execute their
designs; He binding himself with an interlocutory Sentence, and giving caution
of future satisfaction, takes day until Easter following; But all was no less
delusory, than dilatory: Nor any thing done with a face of composition, until
the appointed meeting of the King and Barons (whose part hourly increased) in
Renimed, alias Runingmede near Stanes in Middlesex; whereof in the marriage of
Tame and Isis, thus sings no small Favorite of the Muses; Camden in agro
Middlesex.
Subluit hic (i. Thames) pratum quod dixit Renimed Anglus,
Quo sedere Duces armis annisque verendi:
Regis Joannis cuperent invertere sceptrum,
Edwardi Sancti dum leges juraque vellent,
Principe contempto, tenebroso e carcere duci.
Where an instrument of public liberties, through mediation of what is above
all law, Necessity, was, as you shall hear it speak, sealed and delivered to
the Baronage.

JOHANNES Dei gratia Angliae, etc. Sciatis nos intuitu Dei, and pro salute
Animae nostrae, Matthew. Paris page 341. and seqq.
and antecessorum omnium, and haeredum meorum, and ad honorem Dei, and
exaltationem S. E. and emendationem regni nostri, per consilium venerabilium
patrum nostrorum Stephani Cant. Archiep. totius Angliae Primatis, and S. R. E.
Cardinalis, Henrici Dublingensis Archiep. Will. Londoniens. Episc. Petri
Wintoniensis, Jocelini Bathoniens. and Glascon. Hugonis Lincoln. Walteri
Wigorniens. Will. Coventrensis, Benedicti Roffensis Episcoporum, and M.
Pandulphi D. P. Subdiaconi, and familiaris fratris M. Militiae Templi in
Anglia, and Nobilium virorum Will. Marescalli Com. Penbriae, Will. Com.
Sarisburiensis, Will. Com. Warrenae, Will. Com. Arundel, Alani de Leweia
Constabularii Scotiae, Warini F. Genoldi, Petri F. Herberti, and Huberti de
Burgo Senescalli Pictatiae, Hugonis de Nevilla, Matthaei F. Herberti, Thomae
Basset, Alani Basset, Philippi de Albeni, Robert de Ropesle, Joannis Marescalli
and Johannis F. Hugonis, and aliorum fidelium nostrorum.

VIII. Inprimis concessisse Deo, and hac praesenti charta nostra confirmasse,
pro nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum, quod Anglicana Ecclesia libera
sit, and habeat jura sua integra, and libertates suas illaesas, and ita volumus
observari, quod apparet ex eo quod libertatem electionum, quae maxima and magis
necessaria reputatur Ecclesiae Anglicanae, V. stat. West. 1. cap. 5. art. cler.
ca. 15. de Election.
mera and spontanea voluntate ante discordiam inter nos and Barons nostros
manifest motam, concessimus and charta nostra confirmavimus, a D. PP.
Innocentio tertio confirmari, quam and nos observabimus, and ab haeredibus
nostris in perpetuum bona fide volumus observari.

IX. Concessimus etiam, and omnibus liberis hominibus nostris regni Angliae,
pro nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum, omnes libertates subscriptas,
habendas and tenendas eis and haeredibus suis, de nobis and haeredibus nostris.
These premises are in the grand Charter of Henry the III. commonly published
in our printed Statutes, nor in any word of moment is there a difference found
'twixt this of John and that of Henry, until the prohibition of disparagement
in marriage of young Wards; which thus commands, haeredes maritentur absque
disparagatione: to this is added in a continued sentence; Ita tamen, quod
antequam contrahatur matrimonium, ostendatur Propinquis de consanguinitate
ipsius haeredis. The VII. and VIII. Chapters of Widows and their Quarentines,
with that of the King's debtors, are also in like words following: But this of
John has this further additament.

X. Si quis mutuo acceperit aliquid a Judaeis, plus vel minus, and moriatur
antequam debitum illud persolverit, Merton cap. 5. Confer. 35. li. 6. fo. 61.
Plo. Com. fo. 236. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 26. sect. 2. and indicem ad Plo. Comm.
part 1.
debitum illud non usuret quamdiu haeres est infra aetatem, de quocunque tenet;
and si debitum istud incidat in manus nostras, nos non capiemus nisi catallum
contentum in charta: who elsewhere seeks the true understanding of the Statute
of Merton under title of usury, must still remain in an extravagant search,
until he return to that exposition which lies here open.

XI. Si quis moriatur, and debitum debeat Judaeis, uxor ejus habeat dotem suam,
and nil reddat de debito illo; Et si liberi ipsius defuncti, qui fuerunt infra
aetatem, remanserint, provideantur eis necessaria, secundum tenementum quod
fuerit defuncti: and de residuo solvatur debitum, salvo tamen servitio
dominorum: simili modo fiat de debitis quae debentur aliis quam Judaeis.

XII. Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium ponam in regno nostro, nisi per commune
consilium regni nostri (according is a grant of E. 1. in Thomas of Walsingham
's history) nisi ad corpus redimendum (in the Norman Customary it is Aid de
rancon, Walsing. hist. E. 1.
which in an ancient Manuscript of xxi Ed. 1. in the case of Robert of Wentham,
I have seen released between common Persons) and ad primogenitum filium nostrum
militem faciendum, and ad primogenitam filiam nostram semel maritandam; Et ad
hoc non fiet nisi rationabile auxilium: simili modo fiat de auxiliis de
Civitate Londoniense. Here is adjoined the general Franchises of London, other
Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Ports verbatim as in the IX. Chapter, which
concluded ensues.

XIII. Ad habendum commune consilium regni de auxiliis assidendis aliter quam
in tribus casibus praedictis, and de Scutagiis assidendis, submoneri faciemus
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites and majores Barons regni,
singillatim per literas nostras; Et praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali
per Vicecomites and Ballivos nostros, omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de
nobis, ad certum diem, scilicet ad terminum 40. dierum ad minus, and ad certum
locum; and in omnibus literis submonitionis illius causam exponemus, and facta
submonitione, negotium procedat ad diem assignatum, secundum consilium eorum
qui praesentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes summoniti venerint.

XIV. Nos non concaedimus de caetero alicui, quod capiat auxilium de liberis
hominibus suis, nisi ad corpus suum redimendum, and ad faciendum primogenitum
filium suum militem, and ad primogenitam filiam suam semel maritandam; and ad
hoc non fiat nisi rationabile auxilium: Unto the XVIII. Chapter inclusively of
Henry's Charter from hence, are in both almost the same syllables; But whereas
the printed close of the same Chapter, is, Salvis uxori ejus (i. e. of one that
is dead) and pueris suis rationabilibus partibus suis, here is further:

XV. Si quis liber homo intestatus decesserit, catalla sua per manus
propinquorum parentum and amicorum, per visum Ecclesiae distribuantur (see Art.
IX. in Hen. 1.) salvis unicuique debitis, quae defunctus ei debebat; and in
diverse old written Copies of the common and usual Magna Charta 's, the self
same words continue that Chapter; All is in both alike unto the end of the
provision for safe conduct of Merchants; But thereto in this historical report
succeeds,

XVI. Liceat unicuique de caetero exire de regno nostro, and redire salvo and
secure per terram and per aquam, V. in H. 2. art. 5.
salva fide nostra, nisi in tempore guerrae per aliquod breve tempus propter
communem utilitatem regni, exceptis imprisonatis and utlagatis, secundum Legem
regni, and gente contra nos guerrina, and mercatoribus, de quibus fiat sicut
supradictum est. What follows in either is the same as well in words as sense.
And as we have now in every Man's hands a Charter of the Forest also distinct
from the other, so had the Barons then to them granted; and very small or no
difference is found between theirs and that, whose forefront is since signed
with King Henry 's Name.

I suppose it fit place and time here to give remembrance of an escaped, and in
every impression that I have seen allowed, fault, in the VII. Article of the
Forest Charter, which by little alteration, and thus pointing, is corrected;
Nullus forestarius vel alius balivus de caetero faciat Scottallum, vel colligat
herbas, (you may read garbas) vel avenam, vel bladum aliud, vel agnos, vel
porcellos, nec aliquam collectam faciat (nisi, so is the Print but in King John
's Copy, and in diverse Manuscripts of our Statutes, one having the subscribed
authority of Exam. per Rot. In Bibliotheca D. To. Cotton a Connington Eq.
Aurati.
I have warrant to read, and distinguish with a full period at faciat, and
turning nisi into and go thus forward) and per visum and Sacramentum XII.
Regardatorum, quando faciunt reguardum (taking away the Point there) tot
forestarii ponantur ad forestas custodiendas, quot ad illas custodiendas
rationabiliter viderint sufficere; How much the sense differs, small
observation soon discovers.

The concluding Date of these granted Franchises, and restored Laws, John Stow
says was, Stat. Annal. page 258.
Given by our hand in Runingmede, betwixt Stanes and Windsor, the xvi. of June,
the xvii. of our Reign: Unto which all the whole Realm was sworn. But the
fluxile nature of this deceitful Prince, aided by Pope Innocent III. and his
Nuntio Pandulph, soon loosed that kind of Royal faith and promise; As quick
were the Barons (they by Oath had bound themselves to constrain him by Arms, if
their expectations in his future carriage were frustrate) and ready to, and
did, revolt. Death of the King prevented their projects, which for this purpose
in the IX. Year of the succeeding Henry Fitz John (as the first page of our
printed Volumes of old Acts of Parliament give to every Reader testimony) were
with some ease attained, and by his Posterity, as the main freedom of the
English Commonwealth, has been since more than thirty times, by the true
authority of the State, in their High-court, confirmed.

Soli Deo Gloria.
Chronologia huic nostrae inserviens EPINOMIDI.
Ante CHRISTVM. M.C.VIII. Brutus ille, quem Trojana aiunt, sed potissimum
Bardi, stirpe oriundum, a quo post Samotheos (magis Semnotheos) sumus
auspicati, sed aliena nempe and dubia fide fertur adpulisse. CCCCXII. Dunvallo
Molmutius. CCCLVI. Martia R. Guinthilin Vxor. LV. Julius Caesar, Is primum
Romany ostendit Britanniam, and territa Britannis terga. Ab Incarnato Deo.
LII. Claudio Caesare deducta Camalodunum colonia Insulaeque pars in
praesidialem redacta provinciam. CLXXX. Commodo Imp. obsignatam recepit
palingenesiam Lucius Rex ab Elutherio PP. Ab Incarnato Deo CDXLIX. Britanniam
Anglo-Saxones advehuntur, Theodosio Jun. Romans Imp. Nec multis inde curriculis
Annorum interceptis Heptarchas inter quae jam Anglia dispertita. Sed Camdeno e
fastis consularibus Beda and Ninnio rationibus subductis CDXXVIII. Floruere
DLXI. Aethelbertus Rex Cantii, Primus Anglo-Saxonum (foelicissimo ducta sibi in
uxorem auspicio Bertha Francorum Regis filia) Princeps Christianus. DCCCLXXII.
Alfredus seu Aluredus Rex. DCCCCLIX. Edgarus Rex. MLXVI. Willielmus Normanniae
Dux Haroldum conserta in planitie juxta Hastings in agro Suthsexiensi manu,
atque Anglorum copias devicit. II. Nempe Id. Octobr. and regio se insignivit
hic titulo. M.LXXXVIII. Willielmus Rufus primi Filius. M.C. Henricus primus
Rufi Frater. M.CXXXV. Stephanus Blesensis. Ab Incarnato CHRISTO M.C.LIII.
Henricus filius Matildis Imp. and Galfridi Com. Andegavensis. M.C.LXXXIX.
Richardus primus Henr. Fill. M.C.LXXXXIX. Joannes R. Richardi Frater.

FINIS.
TWO TREATISES Written by JOHN SELDOM OF THE INNER TEMPLE, Esquire. The First,
Of the ORIGINAL OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF TESTAMENTS: The Second, Of
the Disposition or Administration OF Intestates Goods.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments.
CHAP. 1. THE Intrinsecal Jurisdiction not given to the Church by the Civil
Law, Page 1 CHAP. II. Nor by the Canon Law. p. 3 CHAP. III. The Extrinsecal
Jurisdiction by the Civil Law, in whom, ibid. CHAP. IV. In whom by the Canon
Law, p. 4 CHAP. V. Of the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Saxons time, p. 5
CHAP. VI. Whence Linwood thinks the Jurisdiction Intrinsecal came to the
Church, p. 9 CHAP. VII. Testimonies of King John and Henry the Third's time,
that may serve to prove the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction then in the Temporal
Courts, p. 11 CHAP. VIII. Suits of Legacies personal in the Spiritual Court
from the beginning of Henry the Third, of the beginning of that Course, p. 12
PART II. Of the Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods.
CHAP. I. In whom it was in the time of the Saxons, p. 15 CHAP. II. In whom
after the Normans until King John's time, p. 17 CHAP. III. In whom after the
time of King John, p. 18 CHAP. IV. How that so granted by King John's Charter
in Parliament has continued in practice, p. 20 CHAP. V. Of that of bona
Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant, p. 22
PART I. OF THE ORIGINAL OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF TESTAMENTS.
CHAP. I.
The Intrinsecal Jurisdiction not given to the Church by the Civil Law.

THE Jurisdiction of Testaments being either Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal, (that
is) either touching Probate, or Recoveries of Legacies: First for the
Intrinsecal, it is clear that it came not to the Bishop by Imitation; or
otherwise, from the Imperial Civil Law: for by the elder part of that Law,
regularly the Probate or Aperture of Wills was before the ff. Test. quemadmodum
aperiant. per tot. Et vide etiam Auth. 74. c. 2. sit igitur Licentia.
Praetor. And afterward the obsignation, insinuation and Probate of them in
Rome, was before the Magister Census, or De Episc. l. 41. and tit. de testam.
l. 10. and 23. and Caput Theodos. li. 4. tit. 4. l. 4. Ubi visendus interpres
vetus.
apud officium Censuale, as it were before the Barons of our Exchequer; and
that continued into later time. And the same Officer by the name of Authent.
44. and ibid. Cujacius, and videsis Gloss. Graecobarb. ^eursii in (...).
(...), or generalis in Constantinople, had the same authority: But also
afterward as well the Questor's Seal, as that of the generalis became to be
used at the obsignation, and his authority also in the Probate or Aperture. And
the Emperor Leo Novel 44. formulas vet. Testam. aperiendorum, videsis I. Paul
Regest. senrent. l. 4. tit. 6. and Marculph. Formul. l. 2. c. 37. and 38.
about the year 890. transferred all that herein belonged to the Generalis into
the Questor's place; yet so, that some other Civil Magistrates had the like
authority: and what was done before these in Rome and Constantinople, was in
other Cities before their Chief Governors, as Defensores or Praefides: neither
was the Church permitted to have to do with the Insinuation of Testaments, but
expressly forbidden by a rescript C. de Episc. and c^er. l. 41. repetita.
of the Emperor Justin: nor is any thing that gives it either among the
Novells of the Greek Empire, or in the Lombarda, or Capitulares, which have
Hostiens. in prooem. sum. and vetustio^es canonist. passim.
been reputed as parts also of the Imperial Law.

CHAP. II.
Nor by the Canon Law.

NEither in any General Council, or other part of the received Canon Law, does
any Testimony occurr, that gives the Church this Intrinsecal Jurisdiction. But
in the fourth Council of Cap. 18.
Carthage holden in the year 398. it was ordained, Vt Episcopus tuitionem
testamentorum non suscipiat. And this being then established by two hundred and
fourteen Bishops, was afterward made a part of Did. de secular. negotiis,
cap. 5.
the Decrees, or Canon Law, collected by Gratian, and published and authorized
by Pope Eugenius the Third about 1150. and the Gloss upon that Canon interprets
tuitio for Aperture or Probate. So also Pope Ad c. nos quidem extra tit. de
testament.
Innocent the Fourth understands it: publicatio (says he) fieri non debet apud
Episcopum; and he vouches that Law, Tit. de Instrum. edit. S. ostens. 34. vid.
D. D. ad c. nos quidem, etc. si haeredes extra tit. de test. and Linwood de
test. c. item S. infin. and cap. stat. S. approb.
Consulta ducalia tit. de Testament. to prove it. Speculator, Hostiensis and
others of the same time, and generally the rest that follow them, make the
Civil Law only the square of the Jurisdiction of the Probates; and so it is
truly affirmed in our Books, that the Probate belongs not to the Church 2 R. 3.
Test. 4.14 H. 7. fo. 12. b.
by the Spiritual Law; neither is any such thing given by any later Quod
discimus ex Bullarii summa quam edidit S. Guaranta.
Bull, or Decretal from the Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. III.
The Extrinsecal Jurisdiction by the Civil Law, in whom.

FOr the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction that gave Recoveries of Legacies, by the
Imperial Civil Law, where the Legacies were in pios usus, the C. de Episc. and
Cler. l. 28. Nulli, and l. 49. si quis ad declinand. authentic. 135. c. 10. and
vid. c. 11.
Bishop of the Diocese sometimes by himself, sometimes with the Civil
Magistrate, provided for the execution of the Testators meaning: otherwise the
Jurisdiction of Legacies, and what else falls under Testamentary disposition,
was and ff. de Petit. haered. and tit. de legate.
is the Magistrates only.

CHAP. IV.
In whom by the Canon Law.

BUt by the Canon Law, the general care of execution of Testaments is committed
to the Bishop: yet I find not any Canon to that purpose received into the Body
of that Law, now in authority, before the time of the Decretals; which have out
of some Council of Mentz these words, viz. Extr. de test. c. 6.
Si haeredes jussa Testatoris non impleverint, ab Episcopo loci illius omnis
Res quae eis relicta est Canonice interdicatur, cum fructibus and caeteris
emolumentis, ut vota defuncti impleantur. Out of what Council of Mentz this is
taken, I have not yet learned; Lib. 15. c. 34.
but in the same syllables it occurrs in Burchard, that lived about six hundred
years since, with the Marginal Note of ex Concilio Moguntino. What other Texts
are, touching the power of the Canons over performance of Testaments, have
reference to that course ordained by the Civil Law, where any thing was given
in pios usus, not to a general Jurisdiction; for so is the Canon Nos quidem
extr. tit. de testam. Neither is that Canon Vltima Voluntas in C. 13. q. 2.
taken out of S. Gregory, otherwise to be understood, if you interpret it as you
ought by those Videsis Greg. lib. 3. Epist. 9. and lib. 9. Epist. 20.
places of Gregory whence it is taken: but the Canonists generally upon that
Canon Si haeredes, take it, that executio testamentorum ad Episcopos spectat.
And so those old ones Pope Innocent the Fourth, Bernard, and others of the rest
deliver; and the Vid. Gonzal. Zuarez Prax. Eccles. Lam. 2. Praelud. 2. Sect.
44. and Zerula prop. Episcop. verb. leg. ad quaest. 9.
latter follow them, yet they commonly restrain it (and that in practice in
other States) to Legacies given in pios usus. And in the Council of Trent,
where twice the Bishops power over Testaments is provided for, Sess. 12. de
reform. cap. 6. and Sess. ult. de reformat. c. 4.
nothing is spoken of but Commutations of Legacies, and of such as are given in
pios usus: yet from Ancient time both the Intrinsecal and Extrinsecal
Jurisdiction of Testaments made of personal Chattels in England, has been and
is in the Church, except in places where special Custom excludes it: the
original whereof being not sufficiently found in either of these Laws (the
Civil and Canon) diverse parts of which according to the various admission of
several Estates have been much dispersed through Christendom, and some remain
now exercised by imitation among us; It rests, that disquisition be made for it
in the Monuments of the Kingdom, that according as they together with the
Canons afford light, some conjecture may be had touching the Antiquity and
ground of it.

CHAP. V.
Of the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Saxons time.

THe Eldest Testament that I have seen made in England, is that of King Edgar's
time, made by Lamb. Peramb. Cant. p. 548.
one Birthric a Gentleman or Thane (it seems) of great worth, and his Wife
Elswith; wherein they devise both Lands and Goods; and in the end of the Will
says her husband. (...); And I pray for Gods love my leefe Lord, that he do
not suffer that any man our Testament do break.

It may perhaps thence be collected, that the Protection or Execution of this
Testament was within the Jurisdiction of the Lords Court, as also the Probate;
and that especially, because diverse Lords Hensloes C^se 9. Rep. b.
of Manors have to this day the Probate of Testaments by Custom continued,
against that which is otherwise regularly settled in the Church. But the same
Testament being for Lands as well as for Goods, it may be that this Clause had
reference to the Lord in regard of the Land only, (to the Alienation of which,
his Assent might be requisite) or to denote him for the Testators best friend,
as one chosen Overseer of his Will; and indeed he desires all other good people
to see his Will be not broken; which makes me only offer it, as what another
man's fancy may work on: but I conceive not out of it enough to prove either way
any thing touching the Jurisdiction of Testaments.

Nor in the Saxon times appears any thing that can sufficiently direct us to
know, how it was exercised here, unless out of that example of Siwerth of
Durham's Testament, in the In Bibliothec. Cottoniana.
Book of Ely, you may collect, that the Probate was supplied in the lifetime
of the Testator by Inrolment, or leaving an Indented Copy of it with the
Alderman or Sheriff of the County, in whose County Court the most of
proceedings of Temporal Justice, and of the Spiritual also (for the Bishop sat
with him, as in his Consistory) were in the Saxon times: for so much perhaps
may be conjectured out of it, as we faithfully here relate it. Siwerth in King
Edgar's time, lying sick at Lindane in the Isle of Elie, makes his Testament,
and sends for Brithnorth Abbot of Elie, and diverse of the Monks, and others of
the Gentry; and the Abbot writes the Testament in tribus Chirographis, coram
(so are the words of the Book) cunctis fecit recitari, lectumque fecit incidi,
unamque partem Chirographi retinuit Siferthus, Alteram autem dedit Abbati,
tertiam vero misit statim per praefatum Brithelmum (that was one of the
Gentlemen of the Country then present) Ailwino Aldermano, qui tunc temporis
degebat in Elie, and petiit ab illo ut suum Testamentum stare concederet,
quomodo Abbas illud scripserat, In lib. concessisset.
and ordinaverat apud Lindane coram praedictorum Testimonio virorum.

Cum itaque Ailwinus Alderman hoc audisset, and Chirographum vidisset, remisit
illico ad eum Wlnothum de Stowe cum Brithelmo, sciscitatusque est ab eo quid
aut quomodo vellet de Testamento suo: qui mox per eosd^m renuntiavit ei, sic
suum Testamentum absque omni contradictione vel mutatione se velle stare, sicut
praefatus Abbas illud in Chirographo posuerat, quod ut Ailwinus Alderman
audivit, totum concessit, ut staret sicut ipse Siverthus Testatus erat. But in
deed, in it Lands lying in Durham were devised to the Abbey; and so, it was not
only of personal Chattels.

The Saxon Laws are very silent of any thing touching Testaments; and we must
remember, while we think of that example of Siwerth of Durham, that the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts of Common Justice, held as one by the
Sheriff and Bishop, were not severed as now, into the Consistory, and County
Court, until the Conqueror did it by a Law yet remaining and elsewhere
published V. Spicilegia in Eadmerum.


In what intercedes from this time, until about H. 2. I find not any Testimony
that gives light to this purpose; as the Saxon Laws, so those of the
Conqueror, and of H. 1. and H. 2. mention nothing that tastes of either kind of
Jurisdiction of Testaments; only of a Charter of H. 1. extant in Matthew. Paris,
and in the Red Book of the Exchequer this occurrs, Si quis Baronum vel hominum
meorum infirmabitur, sicut ipse dabit vel dare jusserit pecuniam suam, ita
datam esse concedo. This may perhaps seem to denote, that the Kings Court
determined of Legacies, especially of the Kings Tenants.

But indeed it proves not so much. But the eldest passage that proves clear
enough here, is that which makes the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction to have been in
the Church, and the Extrinsecal in the Kings Court; I mean that which is found
in the Treatise attributed to Randall of Lib. 7. cap. 6. and 7.
Glanvill Chief Justice under H. 2. where he says, that if a Legacy be
detained, the Executors or other friends of the Testator, were to get the Kings
Writ to the Sheriff, commanding quod just and sine dilatione facias stare
rationabilem divisum, (that is, the Bequest or Legacy). N. sicut rationabiliter
monstrari poterit quod eam ^ecerit, and quod ipsam stare dibeat, etc. And it is
plain by the words there preceding and subsequent, that it has reference to
moveable or personal possessions, not to Lands, etc. So that it seems clear by
that in H. 2. his time, the Jurisdiction of personal Legacies was in Secular
Courts. But if the Issue in Secular Courts upon that Writ came to be, whether
the Testament were true or no, or well made, or whether the thing demanded were
in facto bequeathed, Tum (says he) placitum illud in Curta Christianitatis
audiri debet, and terminari, quia placitum de Testamentis coram Judice
Ecclesiastico fieri debet, and per illorum qui Testamento interfuerint
testimonia secundum juris ordinem terminari: that is, as it must be understood,
that upon issue of bequeathed or not bequeathed, of Testament made, or no
Testament, the Trial must have been otherwise than by the practice of the
latter 29 Ed. 3.33. a. 44 Ed. 3.16. a. Perk. 493.22 H. 6.52.
Law, wherein the Testament is traversable, and the Traverse tryable in the
Kings Court by Certificate to the Temporal Court from the Ecclesiastical, as at
this day, of Institution, Bastardy, and Profession in Religion, and the like:
and thence may it be well concluded, that at this time by the practiced Law,
the Probate or the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction was in the Church; for as the
Institution, Bastardy and Profession are to be certified, because within the
Bishops Juris^iction. Some recorded Testimonies remain of the first and third,
and the nature of the Marriage or Cohabitation (that directs in the second) is
to be judged of only in the Spiritual Courts; so the Validity of the Testament,
or the truth of this or that particular Legacy was to be certified from the
Spiritual Court, because the Probate had there proceeded, and the Copy there
remaining was most authentic; otherwise to what purpose should they have sent
to the Spiritual Court in such a case?

But on the other side, as in the case of Institution, Profession and Bastardy,
the consequence of them, which are objects of their Extrinsecal Jurisdiction,
as Descent, Exclusion from Inheritance, gaining it by a descent cast, or legal
making a Church full, or the like are determinable only at the Common Law; so
the consequence of a Testament, that is, the Recoveries of Legacies, and such
like, as it seems by that Writ, were in the Temporal, not in the Spiritual
Court. I know the authority of that Treatise is suspected, and some of the best
and ancientest Copies having the name of E. de N. which I have heard from
diligent searchers in this kind of Learning, affirmed to have been sometimes E.
de Narborough, and not R. de Glanvilla, it has been thought to be another
Work, and also of later time. But, as on the one side, I dare not be confident,
that it is Glanvills, so I make little question, that it is as ancient as his
time, if not his Work. The Tests of the Precedents of Writs under his name, the
language, especially the name of Justitia always for that which we now from
ancient time call Justitiarius; and Justitia was so used in Ita Jo.
Salisburgensis de Nugis Curial. lib. 5. cap. 15. and 16.
Writers under H. 2. and the Law delivered in it tastes not of any later Age.
And howsoever it comes to pass, the Regiam Majestatem of Scotland published by
Command of David the First under the time of our Hen. 1. has for the most part
the same syllables with this supposed Glanvill, and expressly Regiam Majestar.
lib. 2. cap. 38.
the very passages and the Writ that we have now here noted for Testaments.

That Extrinsecal Jurisdiction of those times in the Secular Courts, was
perhaps denoted by those words in the Testament of Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury under King Stephen, Jo. Sarisburg. Epist. 57.
Supremis (says he) deficientium voluntatibus suum accommodant jura favorem,
where he devises only personal things and uses. I think, Jura is rather to be
taken for the Common Law, than the Spiritual; which is, in the most usual
phrase of that time, designed by Canones.

In this time of Hen. 2. diverse fierce Controversies fell between the Law and
Spiritual Jurisdiction, and the particulars of them are largely related at the
end of Quadrilogus, in Gervase of Dover, in Roger of Wendover, in John of
Salisbury, and Matthew Paris, but in him most abruptly; yet not the least
mention is in them touching any matter of this Jurisdiction; and in the main
Cases of our Spiritual Courts depending under H. 2. and sent by appeal to Rome,
which yet remain in the Epistles of John of Salisbury, there is not one that
touches upon either of these Jurisdictions of Testaments in the Church; but
indeed there is one that may seem somewhat to prove for that which we note out
of Glanvill, concerning the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction at that time in the
Temporal Court: for in an Appeal sent to Pope Alexander the Third, the Case, as
John Epist. 89.
of Salisbury relates it, was, that one Richard de Anestia in foro secularium
Judicum petitionem haereditatis ad bona avunculi obtinenda instituit, against
Mabile de Franckvilla, being Daughter to William of Sackvill, to whom the
Plaintiff was Nephew by his Sister: and the point of the issue between the
Daughter here and the Nephew, being upon the Bastardy of the Daughter, the
Spiritual Court had the Trial of it. If ( bona) here be understood for
Chattells, as in our Law it is, and so restrained, then was this petitio
haereditatis, as a Suit for Sackvill's Goods, grounded also, as it seems, upon
a Testament of his: for in the relation of the Case also, Richardus insistebat,
says the Author, institutioni Avunculi, petitionem haereditatis instituens;
and on the other side, Mabile maxim Patris novissimae voluntati innitebatur:
which shows, that here was a Testament in the Case, and a Suit for what was
challenged by it in the Temporal Court: But haereditas and bona, it is likely,
included here (as by the Civil Law) all possessions of the Ancestor, both real
of Inheritance, and personal, that is, the universum jus defuncti, and not only
our inheritance; although it does also amongst some Barth. ad tit. de summa Tr.
l. 1. number. 42.
Civilians denote no more, if at least they understand aright what they say,
while they write, that consuetudo est in Anglia qua primogenitus succedit in
omnibus bonis: and in this Case, if the Issue had been upon the Truth of the
Testament, as it was upon the Bastardy, it had been referred also to the
Spiritual Judges.

CHAP. VI.
Whence Linwood thinks the Jurisdiction Intrinsecal came to the Church.

BY what is before delivered, it appears, that the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction or
Probate was in the Church; and that by express testimony, as anciently as the
time of H. 2. and by all probability it was in settled use before that time,
being spoken of in that Treatise called Glanvill's, as a known course of
proceeding: although indeed yet I could never see an express Probate in any
particular case, elder than about H. 3. But the beginning or course of this
Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Church, is not for ought I have yet learned,
extant: however Fairefaxe tells us, that it was by an Act of Parliament, 2 R.
3. tit. Testam. 4.
which perhaps he took from that of Linwood; Haec libertas (Ecclesiae) quoad
approbationem hujusmodi (says Linwood) fundatur super consensu Regio, Tit. de
Test. C. stat. verb. Ecclesiae libert.
and suorum Procerum (in talibus) ab antiquo, concesso. Where he means by in
talibus, their power of committing of Administration of Intestates goods, as it
is plain by his quotation of that Constitution of Archbishop Stafford tit. de
immunitate Eccles. accidit. novitate perversas quidam etiam: That power was
given, as I guess, by Parliament in King John's time: but thereof more in due
place. And Linwood adds, Item fundatur super consuetudine in ea part de
scientia Regum Angliae, diutius conservata: Which is indeed, that it is founded
upon the Common Law or Customary Law of the Kingdom; or that it has like
antiquity or original as other parts of the Common Law, that is, immemorial
Custom. For though it be exercised according to the Civil and Canon Law in the
Spiritual Courts, with some reference had to the Customs of England; yet it is
clear, that the power which the Spiritual Courts have to exercise it, is merely
by the Common Law; although we find not when it came first to them, no more
than we find diverse of our settled Courses and Maxims in the Common Law;
touching which yet we can without much difficulty prove, that at such or such
times they were not in practice; as perhaps in the more ancient Ages, this was
not in these Courts. But that it was originally belonging to the Crown, that
is, to the Temporal Courts, which are all, and ever were derived from the
Dignity Royal, is affirmed also, as in that cited in Hensloe's Case, out of
Jocelin's History of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Writ Cod. MS. Hosp. S.
Leonardi in Biblioth. Cottoniam.
2 H. 5. that prohibiteth the Archbishop of York to call the Executors of the
Tenants of S. Leonard's Hospital to prove their Wills before him; because as
the words are, placita de cognitionibus scriptorum in Regno nostro Angl. ad
Nos, Co^onam and dignitatem nostram specialiter pertinent: and also they had
time out of mind used to prove them before the Masters and Brothers of the
Hospital. Here we see the Testaments reckoned as other Evidences, Hensloes Case
apud v. cl. Ed. Cook par. 9. fo. 37, 38, 48.
the Trial and Conusance whereof belongs only to the Temporal Courts: and at
this day by special Custom many Lords of Manors have like Probate in their
Courts Baron.

That in France Probates are in the Spiritual Courts.
By the way, for that which Fairefaxe, and others following him, tells us, that
in all other Countries the Probate belongs to Lay-Judges, he is deceived, and
deceives his Readers. Indeed, in the most places of other States it belongs to
the Lay-Judges: but in France Choppin. de Dom. Franciae lib. 2. page 230. Edit.
1588. and videsis restam. Leolodi Abbatis Floriani Helgundi initio.
generally the Spiritual Judges, both before Fairefaxe his time and since, had
this Jurisdiction of Probate, and so have had without controversy ever since
the disputations about it and other parts of Jurisdiction had with some
Clergymen, by Coniers Attorney General to Philip Valois, and Peter Dreux in
behalf of the Duke of Britain, at such time as the Clergy had there so extended
their Jurisdiction, Que les Fauxbourgs estoint trois fois plus grands que la
uille, as Pasquire speaks of them.

CHAP. VII.
Testimonies of King John and Henry the Third's time, that may serve to prove
the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction then in the Temporal Courts.

FOr the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction, as it seems by Glanvill and other
Testimonies, that it was in the Kings Courts under H. 2. and so by all
probability before: so out of other Records of following time, somewhat may
perhaps be collected to prove, that it continued long in them, as out of the
Patent of King John for Oliver of Rochford's Testament, Sciatis (says Patent.
3. Reg. Johan. membr. 6.
the King) Nos concessisse Testamentum Oliveri de Rupe forti sicut
rationabiliter conditum est, and apud S. Florentiam veterem and Rupem fortem
scriptum and ordinatum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod nullus
Executorum Testamenti ipsius impediat quin illud sicut rationabiliter conditum
est faciant. Then out of that of Peter de Roches Bishop of Winchester, and
Chief Justice of England, touching the Will of Adam of Gurdun, Rex Rot. Claus.
16 Joh. Membr. 22.
Dom. P. Winton. Episc. Justic. Angl. etc. Mandamus Vobis quod teneri facias
Testamentum Adae de Gurdun quod fecit de Rebus suis mobilibus and omnibus aliis
in Angl. secundum dispositionem testamenti excepta terra quam de domino nostro
habuit septimo Augusti. Test meipso: this expressly gives some legal execution
of a Testament made of personal things unto the Chief Justice of England. And
in Claus. 5 H. 3. part. 2. m. 7. and 15.
5 H. 3. Robert of Lexinton having the possession of all the goods of Philip de
Vletott the Testator, a Writ goes out to him to pay William Earl of Salisbury a
debt of Ninety Marks out of them, and that the rest should be delivered to the
Executors ad faciendum Testamentum; and another Writ was sent, that he should
per visum and Testimonium Execut. sell all Vletott's goods, and denarios quos
inde fieri feceritis, salvo faciatis reponi sub sigillo vestro and sigillo
Executor. praedict. donec aliud mandatum nostrum inde habueritis. And in 7 Hen.
3. a Writ is directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, Claus. 7 H. 3. part. ^.
membran. 16. idem. id ipsum est quod habetur in commentario 9. v. c. Ed. Cook,
f. 38.6. sumptum est.
reciting, that whereas it appeared, that Richard Fitz-dune dyed not Intestate,
Ideo tibi praecipimus quod omnia Catalla ipsius Richardi in Manum nostram capta
in balliva tua sine dilatione habere facias Priori de Noketon, and other
Executors of his Testament ad faciendum inde rationabile testamentum: and other
like Writs occurr in the Rolls of King John and H. 3.

CHAP. VIII.
Suits of Legacies personal in the Spiritual Court from the beginning of Henry
the Third, of the beginning of that Course.

BUt however it may seem by those Testimonies, that the Temporal Courts had
some Extrinsecal Jurisdiction of Testaments in the time of King John and Hen.
3. it is clear, that in the beginning of H. 3. Suits for Legacies personal were
in the Spiritual Courts, and that it seems from Custom settled in practice of
the former times that were then newly past. And perhaps it might be in the more
ancient times fori mixti, and as well exercised in the one, as in the other
Court; as we have elsewhere showed of the more ancient Jurisdiction of Tithes;
or it may be, that those Writs in the former Chapter, and the like, were but in
case of Tenants being Testators, upon whose deaths all their goods were to be
seized by the Sheriff, or other such Officer, and the debt (if any were) paid
to the King, Et residuum relinquebatur Executoribus testamenti defuncti, as the
words are, both of the Charters of King John and H. 3. Cap. 15. magn. Char.
quam etiam donavit Johannes Rex, uti videre est apud Matthew. Paris.
and perhaps by that Chapter of the Charter those Writs may be interpreted, and
faciatis teneri testamentum may be but only an amoving of the Kings hands from
the goods, that so the Executor might perform the Testament; for that the
Spiritual Court did from the beginning of H. 3. exercise a Jurisdiction for
recovery of Legacies, is infallibly proved by 2 H. 3. tit. prohib. 13.

4 H. 3. ibidem. 28.

6 H. 3. ibid. 17.

8 H. 3. ibid. 19.


Cases of 2, 4, 6, and 8 Hen. 3. and the Attachments upon Prohibitions extant
in Records of that time, are, quare secutus est placitum in Curia Mich. 16 and
17 H. 3. Rot. 15. etc. and 18 H. 3. coram W. de Raleigh, etc. Rot. 36. in arce
Londinensi.
Christianitatis de Catallis quae non sunt de Testamento vel matrimonio: and
many such more are both in the Rolls and in Matthew. Paris. It appears also in 2
H. 3. in the Case of Simon Fitz-Simon, that even that Suit for deviseable Land
being devised, was thought to be good in the Spiritual Court ex Causa
testamentaria, as if Laicum feodum versum esset in Catallum, until the devisee
had recovered it: and after the recovery, iterum incipiebat esse Laicum feodum
-- as Lib. 5. Tract. de exceptionibus, cap. 12. page 4091. b.
Bracton says, where his Printed Copy is exceedingly corrupted. But it was
clear Law in the time of this Bracton, who was a Judge in the Common Pleas in
the latter part of H. 3. that locum Idem fo. 4076.
non habet probatio in Causa testamentaria si Catalla legentur and inde agatur
in foro Ecclesiastico: and he reckons that of Testaments inter spiritualia, and
spiritualibus annexa, which agrees exactly in the known and practiced
Consultations in the Register. Orig. fo. 48. ( b) etc.
Register, placita de Catallis and debitis, quae sunt de Testamento and
Matrimonio, ad forum Ecclesiae specialiter dignoscimus pertinere, etc. And
although in case of Legacy, as in case of Tithes, the Jurisdiction that gave
the recovery of them, was sometimes in the one, sometimes in the other Court,
before it was restrained to the Spiritual only, yet it seems by those Cases of
Henry the Third's time, which are Testimonies beyond exceptions, that the
Spiritual Jurisdiction over Legacies, was long before in practice; otherwise I
guess that exception de Testamento, and de Matrimonio, had not been so familiar
in the Prohibitions of that Age. And notwithstanding those Cases out of the
Records of King John's and Henry the Third his time, the Temporal Court not
only prohibited not the Spiritual Court, espec^ally in H^nry the Third's time,
but also had not any Conusance of Suits for personal Legacies; for neither have
I ever met with any Suit in that kind in the Plea Rolls of H. 3. or King John,
or Richard 1. (but very few are extant of the time of the two last) neither
does Bracton admit any such thing. And the Author of Fleta in the time of E. 1.
tells us expressly, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 57. Sect. Executor.
de Causa Testamentaria sicut nec de causa Matrimoniali Curia Regis se non
intromittet. But the beginning of that practice of the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction
in the Spiritual Court, is even as difficult to find, as that other of
Probates. Linwood tells us, that Ad tit. de testam. c. Statut. verb.
Ecclesiast. libertat.
libertas quoad secundum scilicet, puniendum impedientes quo minus testamenta
and ultimae voluntates defunctorum procedant, ortum habet a privilegiis etiam
in ea part concessis, and a consuetudine similiter de scientia Regum Angl.
diutius observata: and further, potuit (says he) habere ortum out of those De
Episc. and Cler. and nulli 28. and siquis ad designandum, 49, etc.
Laws in the Code that made the Bishop a Protector of Legacies in pios usus. It
might be also in regard of the purpose of those Laws in themselves; and it were
no great wonder, that the Ecclesiastical Court might have gained Jurisdiction
over all personal Legacies under color of such as were given in pios usus: But
perhaps it will not be admitted for probability enough, that any part of the
Code being of the Imperial or Civil Law, was ever so received here in England,
as that it could induce any alteration touching the Jurisdiction of the Crown,
that is, touching this Extrinsecal Jurisdiction which (as is showed) did belong
to the Temporal Courts: but whosoever will not admit of any such conjecture,
must yet remember, that presently from King Stephen's time, when the Civil Law
was new born into the light, it having lain forgotten by the space of Six
Hundred years before in the Western Empire, the Code and other parts of that
Law were familiarly read by our English Lawyers; and I think as well by our
Common as Canon Lawyers: to omit that Case of Mabile of Franchiville, wherein,
it seems, a special regard was had to the Civil Cod. de lib. Nature. l. 2. Matr.
and Author. 89, etc.
Law, that permits not a mere Bastard and Succession ex Testamento against a
lawful Heir of Blood; for otherwise how could Richard the Uncle's Institution,
as it seems by a former Will have made color of right for him, against the
latter Will which Mabile pretended, unless he relied upon her being a Bastard.
But I should think it probable enough, that the Original of this Jurisdiction
for Legacies, was out of the Canon Law. And that especially from that Canon Si
haeredes, etc. before cited; for although the Decretals, wherein it stands now
authorized for a general Law, were first published but in 24 H. 3. by Gregory
the Ninth, and that we see by infallible testimony already brought, that
Legacies before that time, were recoverable in the Spiritual Court, yet by
likelihood that very Canon was inserted in all or some of those eight more
ancient Compilations of the Canons authorized by some former Popes; (which is
the more probable, because we find it also in Burchard) and so it might be,
long before sufficient ground of this Extrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Ordinary;
but I sought here for Authority more than I durst be bold in conjectures, which
I leave to every man's judgment.

PART II. OF THE Disposition or Administration OF Intestates Goods.
CHAP. I.
In whom it was in the time of the Saxons.

IN the Saxons time it was in the Lord of him that dyed (understand the Chief
Lord) in case the Intestate were a Tenant, and dyed at home in peace: But in
case he were no Tenant, or dyed in his Lords Army, then it was (it seems) as
other Inheritance under the Jurisdiction of that Temporal Court within whose
Territory the goods were: This may be proved out of the Laws of that time,
which ordain, that upon the death of an Intestate, whom they call cwiale awe,
the Lord Canuti. leg. cap. 68.
is only to have the Heriotts due to him, which are also appointed by Ejusdem
leg. cap. 68.
the Laws of the same time, That by his (the Lords) advice or judgment his
(the Intestates) goods be divided among his Wife and Children and the next of
Kin, according as to every one of them of right belongs, that is, according to
the nearness of Kindred, if no Children or Nephews from them be; for it must, I
suppose, be understood, that the succession was such, that the Children
excluded all their Kindred, and of their Kindred the next succeeded, according
to that in Tacitus De moribus Germanorum.
of his Germans, whose Customs were doubtless mixed with our English Saxons,
haeredes, says he, successoresque sint cuique liberi, and nullum Testamentum.
But it seems, Christianity afterward brought in the free power of making
Testaments amongst them, Si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione
fratres, patrui, Avunculi.

But this is expressed only in case the Tenant dyed at home and in peace; for if
he dyed in his Canut. legibus, cap. 75.
Lords Army, both the Heriott was forgiven, and the Inheritance both of Goods
and Lands was to be divided as it ought, which was, it seems, by the
Jurisdiction of the Temporal Court within whose Territory the Death or Goods
were; for in that case, it is not said, that the Lords Judgment was to be
used, but that the Heirs should divide all; or, as the words in the Confessor's
Law are, habeant Leg. Ed. Confess. cap. de heretochiis.
h^redes ejus pecuniam and terram ejus sine aliqua diminutione, and recte
dividant interse; where the right of the Heir both to Lands and Goods is
expressly designed, but the Judge that should give it them, not mentioned.
Therefore it seems, it remained as other parts of the Common Law, under the
Temporal Jurisdiction, as by the F. S. Instit. de bonorum possessione.
Civil Law it is under the Pretors.

CHAP. II.
In whom after the Normans until King John's time.

UNtil King John's time it seems the Jurisdiction over Intestates Goods, was as
of other Inheritance also, in the Temporal Courts: yet no sufficient Testimony
is found to prove it expressly; only when the Common Laws of those times speak
of Intestates, they determine the succession by like division as those of the
Saxon times. In Laws attributed to William the First we read, Adjiciuntur
Ingulph^ Crolandensi MS. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Si home morust sans devise, si departent les Infants l'erite inter sei per
ovell. And afterward in H. 1. Apud Matthew. Paris.
Laws, si quis Baronum vel hominum meorum praeventus vel Armis vel infirmitate
pecuniam suam nec dederit, nec dare disposuerit, uxor sua, sive liberi, aut
Parents, and legitimi homines sui pro anima ejus eam dividant, sicut eis
melius visum fuerit. Here is the first mention, as I remember, of any thing
occurring in our Laws or Histories, of the disposition of the Intestates Goods,
pro anima ejus, which indeed might have been fitly subjected to the view at
least of the Church. But no mention as yet being of any Ecclesiastical Power
that tends that way, I rather think that heretofore no use or practice was of
Administration committed, direction given, or meddling with the Goods by the
Ordinaries; but all was by the Friends or Kindred juxta Consilium discretorum
virorum, as the words are in Will. Novoburg. hist. l. 3. c. 22.
the Statutes made for such as should dye in the Holy War with Richard the
First.

Neither does that of Glanvill, which was written under H. 2. tell us of any
thing of the Ordinaries Power in this case, although it has express mention of
Testaments, and the Churches Jurisdiction of them. Indeed we there find, that
if no Executor be named, then Glanvill. li^. 7. cap 6.
possunt propinqui and consanguinei Testatoris, take upon them the
Executorship, and sue in the Kings Court against such as hinder the due payment
of Legacies; which also agrees well enough with that before cited out of the
Laws of H. 1. Neither is there in Gualter Mapes his Apocalypsis (being a bitter
Satyr against the Abuses of the Spiritual Courts in Henry the Seconds time) nor
in John of Salisbury's Epistles, that have many particulars of the exercised
Jurisdiction of the Church, any thing occurring, that touches upon any
Ecclesiastical Powers of this nature.

CHAP. III.
In whom after the time of King John.

BUt in that Charter of Liberties both for the Church and Laity made to the
Baronage of England in the seventeenth of King John Reperiuntur seorsimsaepius
exemplaria illius diplomatis and penes Math. Paris, Rogerum Wendover MS. and
Thom. Rudburne MS. extant, sed in Archivis non extant.
in Reningmead an express Ordinance is, That if any Freeman dyed intestate,
his Chattels were to be disposed of by the hands of his next of kin, by the
view of the Church, that is, direction and advice being thereto given by the
Ordinary, as I understand, saving to all Creditors their debts: the words of it
were, Si aliquis liber homo intestatus decesserit, Catalla sua per manus
propinquorum, parentum, and amicorum suorum, per visum Ecclesiae distribuantur;
salvis unicuique debitis, quae defunctus eis debebat. That Charter of King John
is almost the same syllables with the common one that we now use by the name of
the Grand Charter of 9 H. 3. exemplified by the Kings Patent of 28 E. 1. But
this of Intestates, and two or three other Chapters for the Subjects Liberty,
are more in that of King John's, than is found in the Exemplification of 28 E.
1. However Matthew Paris and Roger of Wendover when they speak of H. 3.
granting it, so refer their Readers to this of King John, that they tell us,
that that of H. 3. was the self same in every particular; and therefore omit
the repetition of it. And indeed, although in the common Printed Magna Charta
of H. 3. and in the Roll also of 28 Ed. 1. in the Tower, where the
Exemplification is, V. Manuscriptum nostr. de Magn. Charta, cap. 16. in fine.
this Ordinance touching Intestates be wanting, yet in very many of the
ancientest Manuscripts of the old Statutes, that of H. 3. has the same words
as we have here transcribed it from King John's, and that in the same place of
his Charter as that in King John's; that is, between the eighteenth Chapter, Si
quis teneus, etc. and the nineteenth, Nullus Constabularius, etc. And it is to
be understood, that the greatest Prelates of the Clergy of that time, as
Canterbury, London, Winchester, Pandulphus the Popes Nuncto, the Master of the
Temple, and diverse other Bishops were on the Kings part, when that of King John
was granted. And it is probable enough, that when they saw that a Charter of
Liberties must of necessity be granted to the Baronage, they so wrought also,
that they might insert this one for the advantage of their Episcopal
Government. And they had good color to think and persuade, that some such
thing was fit for them, in regard it was now clearly taken, that some
distribution was to be made pro anima intestati, the care of souls being the
chiefest part of their common pretenses for increase of their power and
greatness. And hence I suppose, it soon came to pass, that the next of kin had
the power of disposition committed by the Ordinaries, and that in Letters or
otherwise by virtue of that per visum Ecclesiae, which was, I think, the
textual ground of right of committing of Administration by the Clergy: This of
King John's being iterated in Henry the Thirds Charter (however omitted in the
Exemplification) was it seems that provision spoken of in Cardinal Othobon's
Legatins, Proinde super bonis ab intestato decedentium, Cap. cum mortis incerta.
so are the words, provisionem quae olim a Praelatis Regni Angliae cum
approbatione Regis and Baronum dicitur emanasse, firmiter approbantes,
districtius inhibemus ne Prelati vel alii quicunque bona intestatorum quocunque
modo recipiant, vel occupent contra provisionem praemissam. What provision is
it more likely that this was, than that of the Grand Charter both of King John
and H. 3. and the words a Praelatis dicitur emanasse, justifies what we have
conjectured of the purpose of the Prelates, when they saw they could not but
yield with the King, to an establishment of Laws, by that Charter, made indeed
in a Parliament of that age. The same I suppose that which is meant in the
Provinc. Constitut. tit. de immunitate Ecclesiae, C. accidit novitate.
Constitution of Archbishop Stafford, where it is taken for granted, that the
Churches power of disposition of Intestates goods pro salute animarum and in
pios usus, was a thing consensu Regio and magnatum Regni Angl. tanquam pro jure
Ecclesiasticaque liberate ab olim ordinatum, etc. Where Linwood modestly
confesses, that he could not find in what Kings time this Ordinance was made.
But Johannes de Athona, upon that of Othobon, though he rightly call that
provision, Provisio Parliamentalis: yet most ignorantly and ridiculously Jo. de
Athona ad Legate. Othobonum c. cum mortis incerta.
tells us, that the provision there understood, is the Statute of Westminster,
2. Cap. 21. cum post mortem, which he makes also to have I know not what
reference to the Statute of Gloucester. But this slipped from him either in a
dream, or through the utmost neglect of those infallible characters of truth,
that the denoting of times affords us, for that Legatin of Othobon was made in
London in Praeter Annals obvios, Linwood ad C. quia verb. Octoboni, tit. de
constitutionibus.
53 H. 3. and at such time as that Provision was yet extant in the Magna
Charta, used by our Lawyers. But the Statutes of Westminster the second, and of
Gloucester were under E. 1. the one in the sixth, the other in the thirteenth of
him; how then could Othobon think of it in his Legatin, or could John de Athona
have thought so, if he had allowed the Title of his Gloss, which supposes in
the point, that the Constitutions of Othobon were published in the year 1248.
which had it been in 1268. had agreed with truth; but doubtless the Numeral
Letters of MCCLXVIII were transposed into MCCXLVIII. and thence only that Error.

CHAP. IV.
How that so granted by King John's Charter in Parliament has continued in
practice.

AFter that Law of the seventeenth of K. John, it seems the next of kin
disposed of Intestates Goods by the testimony and direction of the Church; for
so per visum denotes, as we see in per visum proborum and legalium hominum in
Writs of Summons and the like: but I have not seen any practice of it testified
in King John's time. And under H. 3. however it were omitted in his Charter at
the Exemplification, the same visus Ecclesiae continued; so says Bracton that
then lived, and was a Judge of that time, Si Bracton. lib. 2. de acq. rer. dom.
cap. 26. sect. 2.
liber homo intestatus and subito decesserit, dominus suus nil intromittat de
bonis defuncti, nisi de hoc tantum, quod ad ipsum pertineret, (sc. quod habeat
suum Heriott.) sed ad Ecclesiam and amicos pertinebit executio bonorum. Yet it
seems also, that notwithstanding the right of the Church thus ordained, and the
succession of next of kin so included in the Ordinance, both the Lords in some
places, according to their former right, still usurp some power over the
disposition of Intestates Goods, against the will of the Ordinaries: and on the
other side also, the Ordinaries, instead of giving direction for a true
disposition of such Goods, get possession of them, and commit them often, or
at, least too great a part of them, to the use either of themselves, or of the
Church, and so defrauded those to whom by the right of natural succession they
pertained. For that of the Lords, Bracton his noting it as a thing denied them,
compared with what we find among Articles granted in the Synod of London held
under Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury in 42 H. 3. proves it, Idem quod
mortuo (so is the In Annal. Burtonensis coenobii penes v. cl. Thom. Allen
Oxoniensem MS. A. 1257.
Article) laico sine Testamento non capiantur bona ipsius in manus dominorum.
Sed inde solvantur debita ipsius, and residua in usus filiorum suorum, and
proximorum indigentium pro salute animae defuncti in pios usus per Ordinarios
committantur, nisi quatenus fuerit domino suo obligatus. Here we see by the way
plainly that the distribution in pios usus, was the devising them among the
next of kin, according to their nearness and want; not an employing them to
other uses, at the Ordinaries arbitrary disposition. But also that the Ordinary
did in this Age sometimes usurp the Goods of Intestates against the next of
kin, is enough proved out of that Legatine Constitution of Othobon, cum mortis
incerta, etc. where it was ordained as you see before; so in the words of it,
that they should not dispose of them otherwise than according as that Grant was
in the Grand Charter; that is, to the benefit of the next of blood: But the
Ordinaries had about this time, against the intent of that Charter, so abused
the right of succession, that it was related Innocent. 4. tit. de Simionia, c.
ad Apostolicum.
for a constant truth, that the Custom in Britania was, that tertiae pars
bonorum decedentium ab intestato in opus Ecclesiae and pauperum dispensanda,
etc. as Innocent the Fourth his words are, who lived and wrote in the time of
H. 3. What other ground than the Ordinaries ill dealing with the next of blood
was for that tertia pars I conceive not; unless the Pope had some such other
Testimony touching it, as we find in an old Manuscript Volume titled MS in
Thesauro Cottoniano c. 31. de divisione hareditatis.
Statuta Synodorum written in an hand of near seven hundred years since, being
a Collection out of the Fathers and old Councils, made as it seems by some
Britain or Irishman, as we have elsewhere conjectured. In that Statuta
Synodorum occurrs Orig. in lib. de haeredibus: pater moriens det tertiam partem
filiis, and tertiam Caesari, and tertiam Ecclesiae; si non habuerit Ecclesiam,
det pauperibus, and si non habuerit Caesarem nec Ecclesiam, dividat inter
filios and pauperes. But what Author this is cited out of, I am equally
ignorant, as I know not at all who was the Author of the whole Collection, or
whence he had many other of his Authorities. And other things that Volume has
out of some old Synod of Ireland, which makes to our present purpose, if the
Canons of that Synod had been at all binding in this State. And it was no such
wonder, that some such practice might be under H. 3. for since also in the time
of E. 3. the Church so usurped in their Jurisdiction of Probates, that they
made the Executors wait on their Officials at uncertain and remote places, and
then also put them, at times, to the Ransom of the fourth or fifth part of the
Testators Goods, before they would give them Probate; which was complained
Parl. 21 E. 3. Cro. Hill. art. 51. and consule si vis Parl. octab. Purif. 23 E.
3. art. 35. in Archiris.
of in Parliament amongst the Grievances of the Commons.

CHAP. V.
Of that of bona Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant.

FOr that of bona Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant, for which
is cited Hensloes Case apud v. cl. Ed. Coke part 9. sect. 39, 40.
the Close Roll of 7 H. 3. Rot. 16. it is also most true, if rightly
apprehended. All that appears in the Record is, that the King wrote to the
Sheriff of Lincoln, that constat nobis per inquisitionem nobis missam sub
sigillo Stephani de Segrave, and aliorum proborum and legalium hominum, quod
Richardus filius Dunae non obiit intestatus, and therefore he commands, that
the Sheriff should deliver all the Goods of the said Fitz-dune in manus nostras
capta, to the Prior of Loketon, and others his Executors, ad faciendum
Testamentum: neither are there any words that tell us of any capi solebant, or
that these were taken in regard of dying intestate only. Indeed it appears not
sufficiently in the Writ, why they were taken; but it is most probable, that
the seizure was for some debt due to the Crown from the Intestate, which
afterward not appearing, or being satisfied, or it appearing that the Executors
by the taking upon them the execution of the Testament, would subject
themselves to the payment of it, it was fit enough to amove the Kings hands,
and deliver all over to the Executors: He that well considers the Statute of
Magna Charta cap. 18. Si quis tenens, and compares it with that of Bracton,
where he tells us, that the Law was clear, that if any man dyed indebted to the
King, the Sheriff might ^racton. lib. 2. de acq. rerum dom. cap. 26. sect. 2.
imbreviare, and attachiare cattalla defuncti, will soon see the probability of
this, howsoever the words of the Statute are only of the Kings Tenants: And it
concludes also, as if it were only in case of the death of a Testator in regard
of relinquatur executoribus ad faciendum testamentum defuncti; but plainly,
that ad faciendum, etc. has equal reference to the Intestates as to Testators:
for no name of an Administrator being then usually known, all were called
Executors that meddled with the Intestates Goods; and those Executors were
executores qui faciebant Testamentum, that is, which instead of the Intestate
Ita facere testamentum nomine defuncti sumitur apud Canonici juris peritos.
videsis Zebulam prax. Episcop. verb. legatum, sect. 8.
did take such order after his death with his Goods, as they thought he would
have done if he had made a Testament; which may be conceived also out of the
use remembered in that time, wherein sick men being unable, neither having time
to express their meaning, chose out some friends that might be super Mos iste
reperitur apud Matthew. Paris, histor. major, page 982. Ubi de Pontificia
constitutione de intestatis edit. Londinens.
hoc expressores and executores; which friends appointing of Legacies (as if
the Intestate had given them) and making disposition of Intestates Goods, were
as Testaments of those Intestates; and they did truly as Executors facere
Testamentum defuncti, in which sense it might be spoken of any Executors or
Administrators that intermedled in those times. And many Writs occurr in the
Close Roll of King John and H. 3. that have expressly in them the amoving of the
Kings hands from the Goods of the dead, when the seizure had been only for the
debts to the Crown, according to the Statute of Magna Charta (which in
substance is the Law at this day) and Bracton, by reason whereof, I see not
cause enough, why we should understand that of 7 H. 3. to prove any such thing,
as a Custom of the Kings disposing or seizing of the Intestates Goods,
especially in regard that in the passages of the Law, Lawyers and Records of
that time, no mention is of any thing that affirms it to be a Custom, or
touches it as a common use.

But admit that in Fitz-dunes Case it had been so, that the taking of the Goods
into the Kings hand, had been because of his dying Intestate only. It may
therefore be accounted rather as a particular of the irregular practice of that
time, than any example to prove a Custom; and whosoever is but acquainted with
the course of the Records of King John and Henry the Third his time, must soon
see Writs enough that agree not so much as with any settled course of Law, but
taste rather of some sudden or arbitrary course of granting them. Indeed some
two years before that of Fitz-dune, there is an example in Bedfordshire, that
might seem more fully to prove what is collected out of the other: the Writ is
thus, Rex Clauf. 5 H. 3. par. 2. memb. 3.
Vicecom. Bedford salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod blada and catalla quae fuerunt
Roberti de Insula and Rossiae uxoris ejus defunct. in Wahall and Brokeberge
arestari facias and salvo custodiri, donec discussum fuerit in curia nostra ad
quem catalla illa pertinent, and aliud inde praecipimus; but this is often
enough seconded with other examples that have for the most part a mention of
the Defuncts debts to the Crown, that it cannot otherwise be understood, but
either as founded upon that Law of seizing upon the Goods for debt to the Crown
by Prerogative, or as an example (amongst many of other kinds) that discovers a
more arbitrary course sometimes in proceeding, than later time has permitted.
And according to one of those ways (but the first that is upon the Statute of
the Grand Charter is the fittest and most probable) must that also be
interpreted, where Claus. 17 H. 3. memb. 8.
H. 3. sends a Writ to the Sheriff of Rutland to command him, that
notwithstanding that Robert de Weston a Parishioner of Weston were drowned, and
dyed intestate, he should yet facere Willielmo de S. Lando (that is, to the
Parson of the Parish) habere nomine Ecclesiae suae id quod ad eum pertinet,
habendum de catallis quae fuerunt praedicti Roberti, secundum consuetudines
partium illarum: that was for the mortuarie, which properly and under that name
then was determinable in the Spiritual Court.

But surely we must conclude, that if there were any such practice by the
Officers of the Crown in the time of Hen. 3. to seize Intestates goods
generally, it was not so much the Law of the time; for if so, the Records could
not be but as full of examples of it, as the time was of the death of
Intestates, which questionless were very many; but some such temporary
usurpation, as in 31 H. 3. Pope Innocent the Fourth here had for a while
executed by his Ministers the Franciscans and Dominicans, in not only getting
into his own hands, but also to his own use, all the Goods of the Clergymen
that dyed Intestate through England, which as Matthew Paris that then lived,
relates it, Matthew. Paris, fo. 959. Edit. Londinens.
cum audisset dominus Rex, detestans Romanae Curiae augmentosam and multiplicem
avaritiam, hoc fieri prohibuit, comperiens illud ad damnum Regni and suum
redundare praejudicium. Afterward in the time of Edw. 1. it appears by the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 21. cum post mortem, etc. that the Goods of
Intestates did come ad Ordinarios disponend^; which agrees with that of Bracton
before cited, and iterated in the same syllables in Fleta Fleta l. 2. c. 57.
which was written under E. 1. And the disposi^ion of Intestates Goods was
enquired after in those days Quod videre est in Cro. Wigorn. Ecclesiae in
Biblioth. Cott. sub initio E. 1.
an ongst Articles of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And afterward by the
Statute of 31 E. 3. the Ordinary was compelled to commit the administration of
Intestates Goods to the next of kin: after which Statute the name of
Administrator was common as their Office; and by that name such to whom the
Ordinary committed were sued, although before that time they were suable by the
name of Executors, 28 E. 3. fo. 21. a.
and perhaps also by the name of Administrators: Videsis 25 E. 3. fo. 54. a.
sed and plura in l. 9. Vir. cl. E. Cook par. 5. fo. 82. and par. 9. f. 39. and
40. and 19 Ed. 3. tit. Covenant. 24.
but that name is scarce found (as I think not at all) given a Defendant to an
Action brought before seven years after the Statute of 31 E. 3. And in the
Parliament Rolls of 17 Ed. 3. the Administrators are designed only by the Ceux
quesont per l' Evesque ordines en lieu des Executors, where a Petition is
offered Quindena Pasch. 17 E. 3. Artic. 49.
by the Commons, that such might have the like Actions as their Intestates: but
the King answers, Quant a ceux qui devient intestate le Roy voet que l' Evesque
eit action en tien case depuis que il doit responder as autres. But from that
of 31 E. 3. saving only the alteration by 21 H. 8. the Law has continued
uniformly to this day.

FINIS.

