Sad and Lamentable NEWS FROM SUFFOLK, BEING A True and Perfect Relation of
the great Thunderclaps, and Lightning, that fell upon the House of Mr. Absolon
at Wangford, where Mr. Torril, Mr. Blowgate, Mr. Brom, Mr. Lemon, and diverse
other Gentlemen were Drinking of HEALTHS.

AND The manner how the said Thunderclaps rent and tore the House in diverse
places, striking diverse of the aforesaid Gentlemen Lame, Senseless, and
carrying of Mr. Blowgate out of the Parlour to the top of the Room, and casting
of him upon a Table.

AS ALSO, The striking of Mr. Torril Dead, the hair of his head being almost
all burnt of with the Lightning, his legs somewhat bruised, and his head, face,
and body, changed black.

Attested by the Foreman of the Jury, Mr. John Gibson, who on Thurday was
sevennight was summoned upon the Crowners Quest.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1661.

Sad and Lamentable NEWS FROM WAINFORD IN SVFFOLKE; B^ing a true Relation of
the great and terrible Thunderclaps that fell upon the House of Mr. Absolon,
where diverse Gentlemen were a Drinking.
THE greatest thing that we can desire, (next the glory of God) is our own
Salvation; and the sweetest thing we can desire, is the Assurance of our
Salvation. In this life, we cannot get higher, than to be assured of that,
which in the next life is to be enjoyed.

All Saints shall enjoy a Heaven when they leave this Earth: Some Saints enjoy
a Heaven, while they are here on Earth. That all might enjoy two Heavens, is
the project of this Discourse; and that this project may be published, some
cautionary motions we shall here lay down, for preventing of excess in
Drinking; considering the late sad and heavy Judgments that befell diverse
Gentlemen in Suffolk, as they were Drinking of healths at Wainsord; the manner
thus,

AT Wainford in Suffolk, at one Mr. Absolon's house, the last of July, Sir John
Row, Mr. Torril, Mr. John Lemon, and his Brother Mr. Brom of Henham, and his
Brother Bartholomew Blowgate, Mr. Robert Brown servants to the said Sir John
Row, with diverse other Gentlemen, on purpose met to Drink out a Barrel of March
Beer, about four of the Clock in the afternoon the same day, there happened a
very terrible Clap of Thunder, the force thereof fell upon the House of the
said Mr. Absolon, where the abovenamed Gentlemen were a Drinking, and broke
down many of the Tiles of the House, and one Spar, and several Studs, and
Glass-windows of the House, and broke one Bed-stead in the Parlour chamber, the
Room over which these Gentlemen were Drinking in, and fell down into the said
Parlour where the said Gentlemen were, and struck most of them lame, and
senseless, some of which remain very ill at this time, as Barth. Blowgate, who
were took up to the top of the Room, and thrown upon a Table; but above all,
the aforesaid Mr. Torril, sitting right against the Window where the force of
the Thunder came in, was struck dead, the hair of his head being almost all
burnt off with the lightning, his legs somewhat bruised, his head, face and
body as black as any hat, or other thing whatever.

The dead body, and Relation aforesaid, I was on Thursday last both an Eye and
Ear-witness thereunto, being summoned upon the Crowners Quest, and ferved as
Foreman in the Jury.

John Gibson.
Thus having given you a true Relation of this great and wonderful
Thunderclap, be pleased to take this by way of admonition.

That, having seen the salvation of God exceeding great, it will be allowed us,
to be exceeding glad of his Salvation; an excess of gladness is allowed, but
not of Drunkenness; O let that be abhored. Wine or Beer in a Drunken excess, it
inflames the heart, intoxicates the Brain, and turns all Fanatic.

You must, you will say, drink the Kings Health; but tell me, is it congruous in
cups of excess to drink the Kings health, when he preserves his health by
little drinking?

Again, beware of Execrations and Oaths, least their sinful provocations
outcry our lowdest acclamations.

No, no, let us rejoice with Temperance and devotion, as well as with
cheerfulness, and exultation; as good Christians, as well as good Subjects, and
indeed we are no longer good Subjects, than we are good Christians; and with
the Ensigns of joy and jubilation, let us all heighten the joyful shout of a
King amongst us.

But still let me mind you to preserve your Moral Temperance, the better to
perform your Loyal Exultations; that rejoicing for your King, you may do it in
the Lord; and then I am sure it will be very much our Gracious and Dread
Sovereigns joy, to hear that we have so rejoyc't.

And let this the devotion of some have the imitation of others, to work this
effect of grace upon the hearts of men, to melt them to Loyalty and Allegiance,
which certainly will be as joyfully welcome to every conscientious, and loyal
Subject, as are the refreshing Streams to the thirsty Traveller, in the dry and
parched Desert. For that God has tutored us by affliction, to melt in
Simpathies of compassion; and we have learnt this Lesson of Christian
Experience, that there is no greater joy then the Souls Conversion, no truer
Honor, then Errors retraction, and no firmer Tie then Loves Communion.



FINIS.

