The Fourscore and Eleventh Epistle OF LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA The PHILOSOPHER.

WRITTEN Upon Occasion of the sudden BURNING OF Lions in France.

Translated out of the Original into English Verse.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid. 1666.

The Fourscore and Eleventh Epistle of Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher:
Written upon occasion of the sudden Burning of LIONS in FRANCE.
OUR Liberalis is with grief and Pity
Filled at the burning of his Native City.
This direful accident might any move,
Though to that City not concerned in love:
And even to his mind might add more strength:
Who, what he feared, has found to come at length.
But this un-look'd for chance, and which is more
Un-heard of, it is no wonder that before
'Twas heard or thought on, it was fiercely sent,
Since it was also without President.
A raging Fire has very much annoyed
And damaged Cities, but has none destroyed.
For where quick fire is thrown with hostile hand,
Houses un-touch'd in many places stand.
And no Earthquake has been so fatal known,
That a whole City has been overthrown.
And no consuming flame has been so dire,
But it left something for another fire.
So many famous Piles, which singly might
Crace several Cities, fell down in one night.
And in a time of Peace as much fell out
As scarce a cruel war could bring about.
Who could believe wars ceasing every where
When through the World no dangers did appear,
That Lions so renowned should by that chance
Be sought and doubted, where it stood in France.
Fortune permits even those who suffer woe,
To fear the ill they were to undergo.
Great things have time before the are overthrown,
This famous City in one night was none.
Lastly, I Am longer telling thee the thing,
Than all those Buildings were in perishing.
These things disturb our Liberalis mind,
To patience in his own affairs confined.
Nor is he so perplexed without a cause,
The un-expectedness of chances draws
More trouble, and the novelty of things
To all calamity Addition brings.
And there is no mortal man, being struck with wonder,
But some conceived trouble must lie under.
Wherefore in nothing we should be surprised,
Our minds in foresight should be exercised,
To weigh not only what is un-usual
But to consider too what may befall.
What is so strong, against which when Fortune's bent
Though glorious, cannot receive detriment?
Or which she does not shake, or more molest
By how much it was greater than the rest?
What Is difficult by Fortune to be done?
She walks in no way always, nor alone.
Sometimes our own hands against our selves she bends,
And then without an Author mischief sends.
No time is free, our very pleasures turn
Into great woe, and often make us mourn.
War sometimes rises in the midst of Peace,
And that which seems our troubles to release
Turns into fear: a Friend does love forgo,
And a Companion is become a foe.
A Summers calmness many times does draw
A Storm more fierce than any Winters flaw.
Without an Enemy we find a war,
Such is our fate, that many times we are
By our too great Felicity, to woe
Exposed, when we no other causes know.
Diseases the most temperate will assail,
The Ptissick on the strongest will prevail.
Upon the guiltless punishment is laid,
And tumults will men's quietness invade;
Fortune often chooses something new, whereby
On those who have forgot her power, she will fly.
Whats'ever many ages have erected,
By the gods favor, and men's pains effected,
One day dissolves. He gives a long delay
To hastening Evils, who allows a day.
An hour, a moment is sufficient space
Great Kingdoms to throw down, and quite erace.
It would some solace to our weakness bring,
And to the Affairs of men, if every thing
Did not increase with slowness, and with have
Dissolve and fall. There Is nothing that stands fast
Private or public. Fear in those things which please
And flourish most, does soonest on us sease.
And ills which are by us least thought upon,
Without tumultuous causes will fall on.
Kingdoms which have endured both Civil wars
And Foreign, have without public jars
Been ruined. And few Cities have enjoyed
Felicity, and never been annoyed.
We therefore should weigh all things, and advance
Our constant minds, against every sad mischance.
Think therefore still on Wars, and Sicknesses,
On Shipwracks, Banishments, and the Excess
Of Torments. Think thy Country may be taken
From thee, or else by thee may be forsaken.
Think Fortune may expose thee in a rude
Desert; and think that where a Multitude
Is stifled, there a Desert may be made.
Let the condition of Mankind be laid,
Before our eyes, and let us not only weigh
What happens often, but let us think what may
Befall: and would we not our errors rue,
Mistaking things un-usual for new,
Let us on fortune look in her full power.
How many Cities did her rage devour
In Asia and Achaia by one way?
How many in Syria, and Macedonia?
Cyprus in many parts could not avoid
That fate, but has been many times destroyed.
How often has Paphus Earthquakes felt, and sped
As ill, in her own ruins buried.
We who have often heard of Towns thus tossed,
How small a part are we of men so lost?
Then let us against Misfortunes our minds raise,
And think the are not so great as rumor says.
Fire has consumed a City great and rich,
The Ornament of Provinces, in which
It did both seated and exempted lie,
Yet built upon one hill not very high.
Nay, all those Cities famous through the world,
Will at the length be into ruin hurled.
And there will not in future time appear
A Mark, or any Footstep where they were.
See thou not that Achaia's stately Towns
Are so destroyed, that there remains no Bounds
Nor yet Foundations to make it good
To the Beholders, where those Cities stood.
Not only what is framed by hand and art
Time does consume, the tops of Mountains start
And tumble down, whole Regions have been found
To sink, and many Countries have been drowned
Far distant from the sea. High hills which were
Famous by fire, fire did in sunder tear.
And Promontories, which have been a Mark
For Mariners to guide and steer their Bark;
At fight whereof they usually have joy'd,
Have been laid flat, and utterly destroyed.
The very works of Nature troubled are,
And therefore we with equal minds should bear
All Cities fate. Things made, were made to fall,
And Dissolution waits upon them all.
Whether the violence of inward wind,
Striving a passage through the Earth to find,
Shakes the great weight of Earth? Or whether
Those hidden torrents join their force together?
Or that the heat of inward flames does wast
The Ligaments of Earth which tied it fast.
Or whether Age against which there is no defense,
Does by degrees effect this violence.
Or that a poisonous Air the Land bereft
Of People, and infected what was left?
To repeat all the vvays of destiny
Were long, but by experience I
Am sure of this, that mortal things are all
Condemned into Mortality to fall.
We live not where we can find any thing
That is secure, but daily perishing.
These comforts and the like I re-commend
To Liberalis our un-doubted friend,
Exceedingly inflamed with the love
Of his own Country, whose sad fate may prove
No small advantage; for perhaps that chance
Ordained was its glory more to advance.
Many great things have fallen, to rise more high,
And often are improved by injury.
Timagines, a foe to the happiness
Of Rome, would often when 't was burnt profess,
The burning he did not so much deplore,
As that it would rise greater than before.
And in this City we may well suppose
No labor will be wanting, till it grows
From a vast heap of ashes and of dust,
Greater and firmer than it was at first;
I whish 't may last, and being built again
With better Omen, longer may remain;
For since that Town was built, it is not past
An hundred years, an age which some men last.
Plancus, by fitness of the place first made
The Town a great and noted Mart for Trade.
Which notwithstanding has endured much rage
Within the space but of a humane age.
And therefore let us be prepared still
To suffer patiently all sorts of ill;
And know there is nothing Fortune cannot do,
Both to advancement and to ruin too.
And that her power on Empires does prevail
As upon Emperors, and does assail
Cities as well as Men; at which things we
Should not repine, or discontentd be.
We are brought into a World where we must live
Under those Laws. Do they thee please? Then give
Obedience. Do they displease? Thou art
At Liberty at all times to depart.
Thou might complain if any of these were put
And thrown on thee alone unjustly, but
Since this necessity as well does wait
On high as low, be reconciled to Fate,
Which all things will dissolve. Reason presents
No cause at all, that we by Monuments
And Tombs should measured be. One fate attends
On mortal men, and brings them to their ends.
W' are born un-equal, but we equal dye.
The same of Cities as of Dwellers, I
Do here declare. Ardea was as well
Taken as Rome, though this did that excel.
The great Ordainer of all humane right
Makes no distinction of us by the bright
Splendor of birth and titles, longer than
We are alive, and conversant with men.
And when we end this Mortal life, begone
From hence, says he, depart ambition;
All Mortals walk one way, and all things ly
Equally under common destiny.
None, then an other can be more secure,
Or know what he to morrow shall endure.
Young Alexander King of Macedon
Geometry unhappily begun
To learn, the smallness of the Earth to know
Whereof the least part did him homage owe.
Unhappy, I say, in that he should have known
How false a Surname he did vainly own.
For what can in a little place be great?
The points whereof the Master did entreat
Were subtle, and not easily discerned,
But with a diligent attention learned;
Not apprehended by a Frantic man
Whose thoughts did rove beyond the Ocean.
Teach me, said he, those things which will be made
More easy to me: TO whom the Master said,
These things are still the same, altered to none,
And are as difficult to all, as One.
Think Nature thus to all men does declare
Those things at which you grumble, the same
To all, nor can they be more easy made
To any, but whosoever shall persuade
B^t himself, without compulsion, to forsake
All fear of chances, will them easy make.
But how? By equalness of mind. The art born
To endure sorrow, hunger, thirst, and scorn.
And if thou longer shall with men remain,
Thou fickness, loss, and ruin may sustain.
But yet there is no reason thou should give
Belief to those things which about thee strive.
For none of them are ill, or hard to bear;
It is report of men that brings this fear.
And what can be more vain, than to be vexed
At rumor, and to be for words perplexed?
Demetrius that he might drive away
Such foolishness, often wittily would say,
I care no more what foolish people speak
Than whether wind upward or downward break.
It is a madness we are brought to, when
We fear to be defamed b' infamous men;
As thou without good reason did fear fame,
So what thou did not fear, when once the same
Shall bid thee, thou will fear; can it be thought
A good man suffers by false rumors, fraught
With scandals? Nor is Death hurt, by what
Is said of it, though some be scared there-at.
None, who accuse Death, have experience got.
It Is rashness to condemn what we know not.
But this we know, that it is a benefit
To many, and that many are by it
Discharged from torments, poverty, and grief.
And find in weariness, and wrongs relief.
If Death be under our own power, then where
Is any other power that we should fear?
FINIS.

