THYESTES A Tragedy, Translated out of SENECA.

To which is Added MOCK-THYESTES, IN BURLESQUE.

By J. W. Gent.

-- Miscentur seria Ludis. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N.T. for Allen Banks,
at St. Peter's Head in White-Fryars, 1674.

TO THE Right Honorable, Bennet LORD Sherard.
MY LORD,
A Part of Old Seneca presents it self by my Hand to your Lordships Patronage.
I should justly blush at such a mean Return to your Lordships many Favors, had
I not read how the Spanish Monarch, who Commands the Indies, accepts the
Biscains Homage in the worthless Present of a few Maravidis, nor is the Gift
ungrateful to him, since it speaks Subjection: In like manner my Lord, my only
Anbition in this Dedication is to appear your Servant. I know your Lordships
Goodness will pardon my Confident Address: It Is that Obleiging Nature, so
radicated in the Sherards, that Commands the hearts of all men: It Is that which
makes your Country truly Yours, And thus my Lord, you serve his Majesty both
with your own and their Affections. Such is your generous English way of true
endearment. But I must despair to speak your full worth in the narrow limits of
a few Pages; Should I attempt to blazon your just value, it would extend this
small Epistle to a Volume, and swell this lirtle Volume to a Folio. The
following Papers I submit to your free Censure; And if they prove so bappy to
attain any Degree in your Lordships favor, I shall despise the malice of all
our little Critiques, who never exposing any thing of their own, (and so in no
danger of Retaliation) make it their business to pique at every thing is
published. But how e're this Book Succeeds, the Authors chief happiness is above
their prejudice, which is, to be

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, John Wright.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHether Seneca the Philosopher (to whose Pen some abscribe Three other
Tragedy's) was the Original Author of this also, or some other Seneca, I know
not: nor is it material; since Hensius esteems it Nulli caeterarum inferior.
Let it suffice that the Author, in many places, appears much a Stoic, and such
was the Philosopher. The following Translation was Writ many Years since,
though Corrected, and rendered into something a more Fashionable Garb then its
first Dress, at the Intervals of a more profitable Study last long Vacation.
And to a few such Idle Hours must I attribute the ensuing Farce, which way of
Pass-time was much more agreeable to my Humor, then the continual Glut of Ale
and Tobacco, the ordinary Entertainment of vacant time in the Country. I
confess it is not now very Modish to Translate any thing of this Nature from
the Latin, when there are so many French Play's to be had, and those so well
Accepted. Our Modern Dramatiques present us with greater Idaea's both of Vice
and Virtue: Yet Ben: Johnson thought a considerable part of Seneca's Thyestes
not improper for the English Stage in his time, when he took most of Sylla's
Ghost from hence, and so well approved of this way of Introduction, that he
served himself of it not only in his Tragedy of Cateline, but also in his
Devill's an Ass, a Comedy, where he makes a Pug his Home d' Intrigue I know
also how much the Atreus and Thyestes of Seneca has been outdone by our own
Fletchers, Rollo, and Otto: Yet I am confident the Comparison will not be
ungrateful to them that perceive, in many particulars the Drama of this Age to
excel that of Seneca, as much as his was Improved from the time when Thespis,
who first offered at Tragedy lead his Original of Actors about the Country in
a Cart, which served them both for a Conveyance and a Stage. So homely are all
Foundations, though of the fairest Building. Marginal Notes Explanatory of the
Poetique Fictions, I have purposely omitted, as Impertinent, knowing that most
of those who use this sort of Reading do either sufficiently understand, or
despise those little Mysteries of Obsolete Poetry. For those other few who
still relish such Chapon Bovilli, I only commend 'em to the next Dictionary,
and that will give 'em ample Satisfaction. For a like Reason, I forbear to Pall
the Story with the thing called an Argument, the No-Plot of these old Tragedy's
being sufficiently Intelligible, and so little needing a Clue, that rather
there wants more Labyrinth.

To my Worthy Friend, Mr. Jo. Wright, on his Translation of Thiestes, with the
Travestie.
DId Seneca now live, himself would say
That your Translation has not wronged his Play;
But that in every Page, in every Line,
Your Language does with equal splendour shine.
His Roman Habit, and your English Dress
Themselves with a like Elegance express
Nor from your praise will it at all detract
To say the Tragedy's unfit to Act.
And that those Plays can never please the Age,
That hope for no Acquaintance with the Stage:
For to all those that judges are of Wit,
Fancy it self a Theater will fit.
Each Scene expose to that Interior Eye,
And all the want of Actors too supply.
She can without expenses of Treasure raise
New Structures still to fit our several Plays,
For which but at the charges of a thought,
Nature's and Arts embellishments are bought
Her Scenes, though they exist but in the mind,
Are ever framed to what the Play designed.
Nor is she forced by Scarcity to make
A trifling Buffoon the Regalia take:
Constraining none whom Nature has designed,
Only to Ape a Fool, against his kind,
To manage Scepters; lest he should appear
With his ridiculous Grimaces where
Those loose Impertinences have no share.
Thus every Requisite is fitted so
That no dislike can from the Action grow:
And her Ideal Theater appears
With all the Luster that attends on theirs.
Pleasant Scarron, whose Mock-Aeneas made
Virgil himself smile at the Masquerade;
Too much beyond his power, did justly fear
Would prove the Works of our Tragdian here.
But what he feared may now your Glory prove
Whose Quill runs free where his durst never move:
And like the Sword that cured the wounds it gave,
Makes us such pleasure, so much laughter have,
After the Passions it had made us share!
That it is but Reason to maintain you are
Favored in Verse with Ovid's happy Muse,
Whose Wit did with Success all Subjects use.
O: Salusbury.

The Authors Absence not permitting his Inspection, the Press has suffered
many Errors: of which the most Material are,

Page 5. line 4. deleatur period (.) p. 12. l. 4. read Sun. p. 18. l. 5. r.
fortify. p. 20. l. 10. r. Let. p. 21. l. 17. r. vexed p. 29. l. 6. r. Envoy p.
34. l. 6. r. do p. 38. l. 2. r. with p. 41. l. 5. r. till it I left p. 50. l.
15. r. credit p. 51. l. 1. r. Brother p. 55. l. 15. r. Clotho p. 59. l. 3. r.
yet p. 64. l. 8. r. vexed p. 68. l. 6. r. No p. 69. l. 15. r. can I tell p. 72.
l. 17. r. Dews p. 73. l. 10. read No p. 74. l. 13. r. Belt p. 79. l. 1. r. Ho
there p. 86. l. 9. r. Unequal p. 89. l. ult. r. this p. 91. l. ult. r. gobets p.
93. l. 15. r. does p. 96. l. 3. r. You Are vexed l. 7. r. I Ignorant. p. 99. l.
10. 1. On then p. 110. l. 13. r. Cooks p. 105. l. 14. r. he. p. 110. l. 1. r.
two p. 114. l. 7. r. Cuckoldry p. 126. l. 3. r. Creature p. 133. l. 9. r.
Scribbellers p. 134. l. 1. r. Act 5. In the Epilogue l. 4. r. and as a Jest. l.
10. r. Farce.

Dramatis Personae,
Tantalus's Ghost. Megaera. Atreus, King of Argos. Thyestes, his Brother.
Plisthenes, his Son. Two other Sons of Thyestes, Mutes. A Servant, Attendant to
Atreus. Nuntius. Chorus of Argives.
The Scene.

ARGOS:

PROLOGUE To the Reader.
WIts, and Wit-Triers, who some Critics Name
Writers of Play's, and Dammers of the same,
Advance not farther then this Page; beware,
Since all that follows is Irregular.
For though this thing a Tragedy is styled,
It Is free from Plot as any Sucking Child.
Nor Love, nor Honor here the Author showed:
Nay, what is worse, no Bawd'ry A-la-mode.
No Amorous Song, nor a more Amorous Jigg,
Where Misses Coats twirl like a Whirlegig,
And such who next the Lamps themselves dispose,
Think thus to recompense the stink of those,
While she that Dances jilts the very eyes,
Allowing only these Discoveri's
A neat silk Leg, and pair of Holland Thighs.
Methinks I see some mighty Wit o'th Town
At this Express a most judicious frown,
And huff it thus (cocking his Caudubec)
S -- What a Devil then must we expect?
Have patience, and I Will tell You what you shall
Meet here that is still in use Dramaticall.
High Lines, and Rhyme enough Sirs Ye shall have,
And Sentences most desperately Grave,
Dull Sense, and sometimes Huffs that Nature brave.
And ('cause we cannot easily print a Dance)
A Farce in the end out, A-la-mode-de-France.
THYESTES. A Tragedy, Translated out of SENECA.
ACT. I.
TANTALVS. MEGAERA. WHich of the Infernal Powers does thus compel
The wretched Tantalus to leave his Hell?
And, as a higher Damnation, show again
That World where Bodies yet alive remain?
Is ought found worse than thirsty to abide
In Streams, and Hunger never satisfied?
Must I have Sisyphus his Stone, or feel
The giddy Torments of Ixions Wheel?
Or shall to me Tytius 's pains succeed,
On whose Immortal Liver Vultures feed:
For night repairing what was lost by day,
He a fresh Monster lies, and perfect Prey.
What Plague comes next? O thou who do on those
That suffered have the Old, New Pains impose,
Remorseless Judge of Souls who er'e you be,
Add if thou can, add to my misery.
Invent such horrid Torments that shall make
Hells Porter fear, and the dark Regions quake.
Nay more my self affright. Springing from me
Does now arise a Monstrous Progeny.
Me their Progenitor they shall out-act
In wickedness, and guiltless make my fact
With Crimes unknown, and truly theirs. Each place
That Is void in Hell, I Will furnish with my Race.
While our House stands, Minos shall have no need
Of other Clyents. --
Meg. Cursed Shade, proceed.
Their hated Bosoms with new fury fill.
And make them strive which shall surpass in Ill.
Let an alternate Rage their Souls inflame:
Such a blind Rage that knows nor Mean nor shame.
Let the first Root of wickedness in Thee
Grow to perfection in thy Progeny.
Nor let their Souls find leisure to repent
A past offense; but still new Crimes invent:
Doubling their Guilt under their Punishment.
Unsettled be their Throne, and short their Reign:
While giddy fortune gives them Crowns in vain.
Let her the Banished raise to Sovereign place.
And Kings to the same Banishment debase.
With constant trouble let their Kingdom burn.
And when the guilty Exiles shall return,
Let them afresh to their old mischiefs fall,
As hateful to themselves, as unto All.
Let Rage think naught unlawful to be done.
Let Brother, Brother fear; Mother the Son,
And Son the Mothers wrath. Let Children dye
By wicked hands, others more wickedly
Be born. Let Wife her Husband kill. And may
They over the Seas their Enmity convey.
Let effus'd blood this and all Lands disdain.
Let conquering Lust over great Captains Reign
In their abhorred Courts. Let whoredom be
Counted no crime. Let hence Right, Amity,
And all accord of the same blood be gone.
And may their crimes reach Heaven; for when the Sun
Smiles on the world with an unclouded Ray
Let horrid Night ecclips the face of Day.
Fright hence their Houshold-Gods weak Aid; and fill
Their Place with Hate, death, murder, every Ill.
Be all this house with Garlands now arrayed
And genial fires, to speak thy welcome, made.
Then let the Inhumanity of Thrace
Out-acted be on this more guilty Place.
Does yet the Uncle Innocent remain?
Nor Father yet lament his Children slain?
When shall their Limbs be from the Kitchen served
Up to the Table, and in slices carved?
Let the Uncles hearths blush with his Nephews blood:
Whiles feasts are made; Feasts furnished with such food
As is no Novelty to Thee. Behold
This day is thine, here banquet uncontrould.
Now thy long fasting to the full requite.
Mingled with Baccus gift, this day, in sight
Of thee, shall thine own blood be drunk. I now
Such diet have invented as even thou,
Thou Tantalus woulst fly. Already? stay,
Whether thus headlong do thou force thy way?

Tan. To the Infernal Lakes, and Streams that slip,
When I would drink, from my deluded Lip:
Back to the cheating Fruit I fly again.
Let me return to my old Place and pain.
Why am I stayed? If I too happy seem,
Gladly I Will change my banks: And to thy Stream
O Phlegethon let me be ever bound,
In waves of fire, while I both burn and dround.
Who er'e thou art that do tormented lie
By the decree of severe Destiny:
Who er'e thou art, trembling and terrified
Under a ruinous Cave that do abide,
Or fear a falling Mountains ponderous side.
Who er'e thou art, whether thou fear more
The Fury's Lash, or hungry Lions roar:
Who er'e thou art who do, half burnt defend
Thy self from flying brands, the Voice attend
Of Tantalus returning, credit me
Who am experienced, Love your Misery:
When shall I fly the hated Light?

Meg. Engage
Thou first this house in discord, and wars Rage:
War, so much loved of Kings in every Age.
Thus fire their Salvage breasts. --

Tan. Fates angry doom
I Would suffer not inflict: behold I come
Like a dire-Vapour that has cleft the Ground,
Or a sad Pestilence dispersing round
Infection through the affrighted world. -- Must I
To such black Crimes my Nephews hearts apply?
Great King and Parent of the Deities,
And Ours, although it shames thee, Ours likewise;
My Tongue will not forbear her Office, though
She double Torments for it undergo --
Your hands and Altars with such damned Offense
Profane not: here I Will stand, and guard it hence. --
Why fright'st thou me with threatened blows? what makes
Thee menace thus with thy contorted Snakes?
Why do increase my hunger? Oh my heart
Burns with new Thirst: Fire feeds on every part.
I follow thee.

Meg. Seeds of Revenge and hate
Sow in this house. Let this, this be their fate,
That imitating thee their Sire they, now
May thirst each others blood as water thou.
The house thy presence feels; behold, no less
Then the whole Fabrique shakes at thy access.
It Is acted to the full. Now sink to Hell
Thy proper Place, and Rivers known too well:
Earth's burdened with thy weight. Do not perceive
The Springs shrink inward, and their Fountains leave
The wind, against nature hot, few Clouds does bear
Trees blasted at thy sight, naked appear,
Their fruit and leaves fallen off. Two Neighboring Seas
This Isthmos does divide, see thou how these
At thy sight ebbing do augment their shore,
And at a new unusual distance Roar.
Lerna shrinks back, Inachus in full speed
Sees thee, and stops his Course: nor does proceed
Alphaus sacred wave. Citheron's head
Is white no more, his snowy Peruque fled.
Such Thirst as Argos underwent of old
Is feared again. The Son himself, behold,
Doubts to go on and mend the fainting Light,
Or the world bury in perpetual Night.
Chorus, Of Argives. If any of the Powers Above
Does still Achaian Argo's love,
Pisa's aspiring Turrets, and
The Kingdoms of this neck of Land;
If our Twin-Ports and severed Seas
Do any blessed Immortal please:
Or tall Taygetus (whose Snows
Congeal to Ice when Boreas blows,
But thaw again when milder weather
Brings the rich Eastern Traffic hither.
At whose foot clear Alphaus flows
Renoun'd for the Olympic shows:
Hear us propitious Heaven, and bless
Us from Alternate-wickedness;
Let not the Nephews greater be
Then Grandsire in Impiety:
Nor this succeeding Age invent
Crimes which the former never meant.
May now at length the Progeny
Of thirsty Tantalus agree,
As wearied into Peace again:
Discord has had too long a Reign.
Guilt naught avails, nor Innocence;
Both alike punished as Offense.
Such faith as to his Lord he bare
False Myrtilus Charioteer to Oenomaus King of Argos, was by Pelops corrupted
to betray his Masters Life in a Chariot-Race. By this means Pelops not only won
the Race, but his Mistress, whom Oenomaus her Father had appointed the fair
Prize of such a Conquest: But Pelops, now his Son in Law and Successor, allowed
the Treacherous Myrtilus no other Reward then to be cast into the Neighboring
Sea, from thence called Mart Myrtoum.
Myrtilus found from his Heir,
Waves gave him death, and to the same
He in Exchange did give his Name.
No story better known then this
To the Ionian Sayler is.
Thy Infant-Son met death, while he
Did run to meet a kiss from thee;
Inhumane Parent; Tantalus,
Too immaturely falling thus
A Sacrifice; each part of him
Thy hand cut out, and cooked each Limb;
To make a cursed Feast of these
For the abhorring Deity's.
Hunger they gave for this Repast,
And thirst that shall for ever last:
Nor could a fitter Pain have been
For the Offender or the Sin.
Deluded Tantalus remains
Still vexed with Hungers innate Pains;
Rich laden boughs hang near his sight,
Swifter then Birds of strongest flight;
These stoop to meet his Lips, but then
Mock his stretched Jaws, and rise again.
Often abused with this deceit,
He now neglects the tempting Cheat:
And though impatient of delay,
Turns his sad eye another way,
And shuts his empty mouth again
Confining there fierce hungers pain.
Her Wealth the Tree then lower bends,
And the insulting Fruit descends,
At this his Appetite revives;
But when once more he vainly strives
To reach the boughs, once more they rise,
And all the Autumn upward fly's.
Now Thirst, great as his hunger is,
Succeeds; when his Veins burn with this
He Courts the passing Waves while they
Are by their Current forced away.
Their empty Channel these forsake,
And him that strives to overtake:
Who snatching at the flying Flood
In greedy have drinks sand and Mud.

ACT. II.
Atreus, a Servant. DUll Coward that I am! senceless! (and what
I count in Majesty the greatest Blot)
O unrevenged! Do I, when Crimes so great
Are by a Brother acted, such Deceit,
Such breach of Justice, poorly thus in vain
My Anger speak? and nothing but complain?
All Argos now in Arms should own my side,
And my proud Navy on these Twin-Seas Ride.
Country and Town should with my fireings shine,
And brighter then those flames this sword of mine.
Then let this Land groan with our Cavalry.
Let not our Foe in the Woods sculking lie,
Nor on the Hills securely fottifie.
Empty be Argos walls, in numerous swarms,
While all her People cry to Arms, to Arms.
Who hides his head, thinking it so to save,
May he for ever hide it in the Grave.
Let Renowned Pelops House upon me fall,
So it my Brothers Ruin prove withal.
Courage my Soul! something thou now must act,
All Ages shall report, none praise the fact:
A Crime that so transendant wicked is,
My Brother shall in Envy wish it his.
His Vilany is not revenged unless
Outdone: But what can pass his wickedness?
Does Exile humble him? did ever he
Embrace a Mean when in Prosperity,
Or rest content when low? I him for one
Not to be tamed, sufficiently have known:
Broke he may be, not bent. Assault him then
Before he thee assaults, or leavy's men;
Kill or be killed: this offered is alike
To both, but he is most safe who first shall strike.
Ser. Fear you not, Sir, the Peoples
Tongues?

Air. Not I:
For this I count a Kings chief Royalty,
That his bad Actions, all his Subjects are
By Fear compelled as well to praise, as bear.

Ser. Such who by Fear are Loyal made, even those
Forced by that fear do first become your Foes;
But if you would true Glory, Sir, attain,
You over the heart, and not the Tongue must Reign.

Atr. False Glory have the Great, the Vulgar true.
Let 'em dislike it, so my Will they do.

Ser. Let Kings Command what is honest, and they must.

Atr. Such Kings who only may command what is just
Rule by precarious Power.

Ser. Yet needs must be
That Throne unsettled, where is nor Piety,
Nor shame of VVrong, nor care of Rights nor Faith.

Atr. These private Virtues are. A Crown who has
Should know no Law but his own Royal will.

Ser. Can you be guiltless and a Brother kill.

Atr. What Is on a Brother Villainy to act,
On him but Justice is. What hellish Fact
Has he not tried? what scapes him? he his own
By Whoredom made my Wife, by Theft my Throne.
By such base frauds he gained the Ancient Sign
Of Sovereign Power, and next this house of mine.
A well-known shy-kept Ram, famed Pelops Fold
Did, his rich Flocks far richer Leader, hold,
A fleece he not of Wool but Gold does wear,
Scepters of which our new Kings use to bear;
Who has this has the Crown: with it the fate
Of our house goes along inseperate.
Safe fed this sacred Beast in Meads, which high
Fences of stone enclose and fortify.
This bold attempting Trayter, having made
My Wife a Party, hence that beast conveyed.
From this springs all our mutual strife. Now goes
He through my Kingdoms, and Sedition sowes.
Where Is he not guilty? he corrupted has
My Wife, ruined my house, and broke his faith;
My Issue's doubtful, nothing sure but this,
That my worst Enemy my Brother is.
Why stopst thou Atreus? on at length begin
Thy brave Revenge: Courage; mind what has been
By Tantalus and Pelops done; thine Eye
And hand withal unto their Deeds apply.
Then say what course in my Revenge is best?

Ser. Let your just sword, Sir, pierce his guilty breast.

Atr. Mild Kings do only kill; You of the end
Of torment speak, I torment do intend.
A sued-for favor in my Reign shall be
Bare death esteemed.

Ser. Moves you no piety?

Atr. Hence thou vain shadow, Piety, if thou
VVast ever here? hence, I abjure thee now.
Ye Furies, Hells black Missionaries, let
Me beg your aid to make my Rage complete.
Bring here two brands of your Infernal fire;
And in this breast a doubl^ hate inspire.

Ser. What frenzy drives you thus to unknown Deeds?

Atr. Such as the common mean of Grief exceeds.
I Would use the worst of Cruelties, but fear
They Would all too slight and innocent appear.

Ser. The Sword?

At. A trifle.

Ser. Fire?

At. A trifle still.

Ser. What Instrument shall your Revenge fulfill.

Atr. Thyestes self.

Ser. And wrath it self has less
Of Plague then him.

Atr. Horror, I must confess,
Invades my trembling Soul: I Am forced but know
Not whether yet I Am forced, and on must go. --
Here Tantalus and Megaera are supposed to pass over the Stage. The Center
groans; the Heavens in Thunder speak;
And all my house cracks as the Roof would break:
The Lares turn their looks; be done, be done
This Crime, whose sight the fearful Gods do shun.

Ser. What, Royal Sir, do you at length design?

Atr. I know not what great Act, beyond the Line
Of humane Custom, more then usual swells
My Soul, and forward my slow hand compells:
What it is I know not; something great it is --
[Pauses a while] Thus let it be; my Soul, resolve on this;
A fit Deed for Thyestes, and for me.
Let us both act. -- The * Odrysian house did see
The Story of Tereus King of Thrace. See the Metamorphosis, Lib. 6. Inhumane
feasts. I grant, the Crime, though high,
Yet has been done already; something I
Would have as new, as bad Progne! Inspire,
Thou cruel Parent, in my breast the fire
Of thy Revenge. Our cause is Parrallel.
Assist me; and to act my hands compel.
Let the pleased Father on his Children feed,
And carve their Limbs. I this, I like indeed.
It Is well; exceeding well. But in the mean time
Where Is he? And I, why so long free from Crime?
Methinks I see the Tragic Scene; and how
He eats himself no Father, even now. --
Heart! do thou faint, before thou have begun
The Generous Act? It must, it shall be done.
On then; since he in his own person shall
Commit the highest Villainy of all.

Ser. But by what Wiles can we er'e bring him here,
Whose caution renders him so full of fear?

At. I le bate, then take him, with his own Desires.
He hopes my Crowns; and while he thus aspires
He Would meet a flaming Thunderbolt; for them
The Adriatique Gulf he would contemn;
And pass the Libyck shelves; nay more he will
(Which he esteems of all the greatest Ill)
For them his Brother see.

Ser. Yet who shall give
The pledge of Peace? or who will he believe?

Atr. Vain hope is credulous. My Sons shall bear
From me this envy to their Uncles ear,
And sue in wining terms, that he would leave
His Exile for a Palace, and receive
A Crown with half my Kingdom. Should he prove
Obdurate like himself; yet this would move
His children; who in these affairs untaught
And tired with miseries, are easily caught,
And they will prevail with him. Love of Rule here,
His ancient frenzy; grief and trouble there,
Though never so obstinate will conquer him.

Ser. Time now has made his sorrows light to seem.

Atr. Time does augment our miseries, not cure:
They Are light to suffer, heavy to endure.

Ser. Yet find some other Messengers for this:
Youth to ill counsel prone and docile is.
They may by him to act against you be led.
Mischief often falls on the Contrivers head.

Atr. No other Tutor than Ambition needs,
To teach 'em fraud and such Nefarious, Deeds.
Do doubt they will not be wicked made? they be
So born. And what you think dire Cruelty,
Is now, perhaps, by him designed on me.

Ser. Should your Sons know the Plot, their Childhood may
(Unapt for secrecy) the same betray.

Atr. Silence I Have learnt from sorrows not a few.

Ser. Must they be strangers then to what they do?

Atr. Yes: Be they guiltless still. I see no need
To make my Sons my Partners in the Deed.
We our Revenge will act alone -- My mind
Thou now do shrink from what was first designed:
Spare them, spare him: Let Agamemnon be
And Menelaus of my Privicie
In this Affair. Of their Original,
Doubtful as yet, the truth thus find I shall.
If they to act their parts unwilling seem,
And grieve at our Dissension, calling him
Their Uncle; he their Father is. -- Well go
They shall: but about what they must not know:
Their dubious face will what is within reveal:
Therefore from them, and all else, this conceal.

Ser. Sir, I conceive this needs not; Faith and fear,
But chiefly Faith will closely keep it here.

Chorus. At length the happy time occurs
That reconciles the Successors
Of Royal Inachus. What made
Ye thus each others Life invade,
Unkindly equal Brothers, why
Sought ye a Crown in such Impiety?
Greatness ye do not rightly prize;
Nor know in what a Kingdom lies.
Riches cannot inaugurate
A King, nor Tyrian Robes of State,
Nor Diadems, nor Roofs that may
With Golden frets outshine the day;
He is a King whose mind is free
From every Passions tyranny;
Whom, nor the inconstant Vulgars praise,
Nor impotent Ambition, sways.
Such is the man whose richer breast
Contemns the Treasures of the West;
Tagus bright Sands, he does despise,
And Lybia's wealthy Graneries.
Whose Soul no terror feels when Jove
Discharges Lightning from above.
Or when the Adriatique waves
Swell to the Clouds, and Eurus raves,
His great heart shakes or shrinks no more
Then does the Neighboring Rocks or shore.
Whose Noble soul, nor sword, nor spear
Can subject to unmanly fear.
He placed in a secure Estate,
Looks down on all those sports of Fate,
Grandeur and Triumphs, and sees there,
How much below his thoughts they are.
Nor will he murmur at his End,
But meet pale death and call him friend.
None of those Kings can him infest,
The scattered Dacae who molest;
Or who by that Red Sea abide
With Pearls enriched and beautified;
Him the Armenian cannot harm,
Who so confides in his own Arm,
He slites the advantage of his hills;
Nor German, who when winter chills
Other men's veins, sports on the Ice;
Nor Seres clad in silks of price.
His Kingdom is within: No force
He needs to keep his Crown, of Horse;
No need of Swords, or shafts whereby
The Parthians Conquer when they fly;
No need of the Balista's aid
The walls with Battery to Invade.
Who fears not is a King. And he
That will, may have this Royalty.
While he that loves Ambitions pains,
On the Courts slippery top remains;
Let me sweet Peace enjoy: content
I am to live where none frequent:
There shall I fill my longing breast
With the still blessings of soft Rest,
Free from their Knowledge great who are,
Free from the noise of business, there
I Will taste my Life, and thus shall I
Rich in an humble fortune dye.
But heavy does that death befall
To him, who too much known to all
By fame of his great honors past,
Dies to himself unknown at last.

ACT III.
Enter Thyestes, Plisthenes, and his Two other Sons. My Countries longed for
sight I now possess;
The greatest good that can sad Exiles bless.
My Native Soil, and Country-gods I see;
(If Gods they are who so neglected me;)
I see the towrs the Cyclops work that are,
No Mortal can raise structures half so fair.
Often with applause have I at that famed place
In Pelops Royal Chariot won the Race.
Me the whole Town will meet returning home;
Nay Atreus too, whose sight I hate, will come.
Then let me back again to woods obscure,
And wish the Beasts a life like theirs endure.
A Crowns false splendour shall not me inflame:
Mind not the Gift, but him that gives the same.
Cheerful I was when in a low Estate:
Now I from Exile am recalled, and Fate
Does smile, I Am sad. Something within does cry,
Turn back again: I move unwillingly.
Plisthenes (aside.) What means my Father thus his pace to slack?
He seems much unresolved, and often looks back.
Thy. Why do I waver thus? why do I strain
My wits, and dwell on that which is so plain?
Shall I Two such uncertain things as are
My Brother, and a Kingdom trust? and fear
Those Ills which time does now familiar make?
And my commodious sufferings forsake?
My former Life, though wretched, pleases me:
Then let me back retire, while yet I Am free.

Plist. Dear Sir, why turn you from your Countries sight?
And why such Royal Presents do you slight?
Your Brothers wrath is ended, he to you
Offers a Peace, and half his Kingdom too.
You to your self he will restore.

Thy. A kind
Of strange and unknown Terror chills my mind.
No cause I have, yet fear. I much desire
Forward to go, yet forced am to retire.
So have I seen a raging storm prevail
Against a ship, spite of her Oar and Sail.

Plist, Contemn such idle fears, think how at your
Courted Return you will have a Kings Grandeur.

Thy. That, having power of my own Life, I Have got.

Pl^st. Power's the chief thing.

Thy. Nothing if valued not.

Plist. It may descend to us.

Thy. Two cannot sway
One Scepter --

Plist. -- Who'd not happy be that may?

Thy- Believe me Greatness is an empty Name:
And hard Fate's vainly feared. Since first I came
Unto a Throne, till it left, I never
Was free, but even mine own Guards did fear.
How sweet it is, to live from strife secure,
To feed on Dishes wholesome though but poor!
The humble Cottage knows not villainy,
And slender diet is from Poison free:
That Is drunk in Plate. With good experience I
Approve the low estate above the high.
Here Seneca by a kind of Antecronism, taxes the Romans in his Age, in their
Buildings, Feasts, Baths, etc. of which particulars see at large, Seneca's
Epistles 122.
I own no Castles that on hills do stand,
And from that height the neigbouring Towns command:
No Ivory frets adorn my roof: and when
I sleep I Am guarded by no Halbert-men;
With no whole fleet I fish: No Rampires I
Build to prescribe the Sea: Nor banquet by
The Lands Oppression: Nor beyond the Get
Or Parthian have I Lands as rich as great:
I Am not adord stead of neglected Jove:
Nor does my Palace roof support a Grove:
I have no Baths like Seas: nor do I choose
The day for sleep, the night for drinking use.
Yet in my abject fortune am secure
Without a guard, and fearless being poor;
In it I meet content, and to have this
Without a Kingdom, the best Kingdom is.

Plist. But when the gods to us a Crown commit
We should not slight the Gift --

Thy. -- Nor covet it.

Plist. That you would Reign your Brorher does desire.

Thy. Does he? that raises my suspicion higher.

Plist. True Piety from whence she fled does use
Back to return, and her lost strength renews.

Th. Atreus his Brother love? first Arctos will
Set in the waves; Sicilian Seas be still;
In the Ionian Ocean Corn will grow;
Darkness will shine, before he will do so:
First fire with water, wind with waves, and Life
With death, will enter League, and end their strife.

Plist. What fraud suspect you?

Thy. All.
Nor can I see
What not to doubt from such an Enemy.

Plist. How can his Power hurt you?

Thy. Me? I despise
His Rage: Ye only cause my jealousies.

Plist. Fear you deceit when in the Trap? we are
Cautious too late when taken in the snare
Then let us on. --

Thy. -- Witness ye gods to this;
I follow them, I lead 'em not amiss.

Plist. Fearless let us proceed. Prosper the event
Kind Heaven, let it be good as is the Intent.

Enter Atreus, Attended. Atr. At length the Game which I so long have saught,
(aside)
With all his Breed, in my spread Toils is caught.
I have him now; and with him my desire.
Behold Thyestes comes, he comes entire.
My or'e-joyd soul will temper scarce admit,
Nor my unbroke fierce Passion know the Bit;
So when the Vmbrian Lime-hound through the field
Hunts on a Trayl; and in a Leash is held;
Whilst he perceives the Game far off to be
Silent and stanch on the dead Scent runs he:
But when the Quarry's nigh, his gesture speaks
The welcome News; stiff does he draw, and breaks
From his slow Master's hand. Rage never could
Take a Disguize when once her aim was blood;
Yet mine shall. -- Look: do but observe him there
How his wild superstuities of Hair
Hang rudely over his sad dejected Eyes:
His Beard too, how undecently it lies.
goes to Thyestes. Brother, i have past my Faith: doubt me no more.
Your dearest sight does my lost joys restore.
Bless me with your so coveted Embrace.
Henceforth, all Enmity let us displace
From our abused breasts; and entertain
The Piety of Brothers once again.

Thy. Your Goodness, Sir, is of such force,
I cannot
Frame an Excuse; but all my fault must grant.
Your Goodness makes me worse appear one who
Have wronged a Brother, and a Brother too
So eminent for generous Love as you.
Kneels. I who never did, do weeping, you implore?
And with these hands that never begged before
Thus humbly supplicate that you would please
to pardon all; and for my faith take these,
These Infant Hostages: --

Atr. -- Rise from my feet,
And as a Brother my Embraces meet.
To the Children. Kiss me sweet Innocents, esteemed aright
Both a support to Parents, and Delight
to Thyestes. Off with these Rags, wound not my pitying Eye
With the sad object of your Poverty,
And Robes assume like mine. More praise I gain
To give you half, then a sole Monarch Reign;
Therefore take half my Realm. A Crown to find
Speaks Chance, but to bestow the bravest Mind.

Thy. Dear Brother, may the bounteous gods above
Return a blessing great as is your Love.
But my deformed head no Crown will wear;
Nor this unhappy hand a Scepter bear.
A poor Plebeian let me still remain. --

Atr. Not so: this Land may well two Kings contein.

Thy. What Is yours I mine esteem.
Brother, take all.

Atr. VVho'd flight the savours that from Fortune fall?

Thy. VVho'd not that knows how slippery they are?

Atr. Of so great Glory will ye me debar?

Thy. Your Glory Sir, you have already won,
But mine remains, which is such Gifts to shun.

Atr. No more Excuse, I beg. Unless you own
Part of the Government, I will have none.

Thy. Well, I accept. Henceforth the Name be mine;
But I my self with all the Power thine.

Atr. VVear then your Crown: while I, without delay
The intended Sacrifice to Heaven pay.
Chorus. Who'ld Credit this? Atreus, of late
So cruel, and so obstinate,
When he his suppliant brother spyed,
Conscious of Gilt, stood stupify'd.
Oh Love; what Power can thine excel?
Discord with strangers long may dwell,
But where the Ties of blood and thee
Conjoyn, short is that Enmity.
Private Affronts, though urged too far,
Raised a Revenge in Public war.
While new-raised Troops the Country fright,
And Swords impatient for a fight:
Now finding what so long they would sought,
Look bright and cheerful with the thought.
Fraternal Piety takes place,
Forcing the Brothers to embrace,
Which of your Powers, kind Heaven, to cease
Has caused such war in such a Peace?
When Civil, the worst sort of Foes,
Did all Mycene discompose;
The Mother feared her Infants Life;
Her armed Husbands loss, the Wife.
The conquering Sword, when first they drew,
Overcome with peaceful Rust they view.
Some dress their Arms: some busy were
The Forts half ruined, to repair:
Some had Commission to survey
The Wall, and make up the Decay.
By some the Gates were strongly barred;
Others by Night maintain the Guard.
The empty Name of War does bring
More real terror then the thing.
But now the happy hour appears,
That sheaths the Sword, and cures our fears,
Now is the Martial Trumpet dumb:
Sweet peace, sweet peace again is come!
So when the Brutian Sea does rise,
By Corus driven to the Skys;
When from her Caverns Scylla raves,
Cuft by the fury of the waves,
And ships, though in their Haven, fear
Dreadful Caribdis even there.
The sweating Cyclops when they spy
Waves over their furnace Aetna fly,
Fear angry Neptune though their Sire,
Will quench the never dying fire.
And poor Laertes trembling thinks
His little Ithara now sinks.
If the winds fall, the Sea appears
Smooth as the standing Pools, or Meers.
The trifling Boat now puts from shore;
Ships that like Islands seemed, before
Were not so bold. Why name I these
Frail Barks? the floating Cyclades
Islands like ships, for motion thought,
Feared in the storm to be over wrought.
Yet now that Boat becalmed, a sail
Puts up to catch the wanton Gale.
They the past storms effects descry,
And see where drounded fishes lie.
Fortunes still alter, none can last:
Yet is the best the soonest past.
The swift vicissitudes of Fate
Can in a moment change our state.
He who does Crowns dispose, before
Whose Throne all Nations do adore;
Intending, by a former Antecronisme, the RoMan Emperor. At whose bare Nod the
Medes disband:
Nor dare the Indians him withstand:
Nor Dacae with their Cavalrie:
How full of anxious thoughts lives he?
What Changes do his fears, the while,
Presage from Fates inconstant smile?
Then swell no more; Great Souls of those
Where Heaven does Sovereign Rule dispose:
Since that due Homage which we show
To you, ye to another owe.
The greatest Kings but Subjects be
To a Superior Majesty.
Some with that Sun have set, whose Ray
Shined at his Rise less bright then they.
Ah fading Joys! In such who dare
Confide, or wanting them, despair?
Clotho with smiles does Tears commix,
And lets no Chance of Fortune fix.
Heavens greatest Favorite cannot say
I Will live and laugh another Day.
All our Affairs Fate troubles, and
Disorders as whirlwind sand.

ACT. IV.
Nuncius. Chorus. Some Whirlwind snatch me hence: by whose fierce aid
I to the obscurest Clowd may be conveyed,
Whence I no more this cursed House may see:
By Tantalus himself, abhorred to be.
Cho. Ha! what means this? --

Nun. -- What Country's this I tread?
Argos, and Sparta is it, that has bred
Such bloody Brothers? Live Corinthians here
'Twixt these two Seas, or what I rather fear,
Barbarous Alani? No Hycanian Breed
Of Tigers sure, nor Scythians these exceed.

Cho. What Salvage Crime blots our unhappy Land
With such a Guilt? Give us to understand.

Nun. Can I my Senses recollect, I will;
When this cold Sweat shall leave my Limbs. For still
The horror follows me. -- Come storms as strong
As my Desires, and bear me hence, along
Whether the Sun flys from this sight away.

Cho. You aggravate our fears by this delay.
Quickly the Deed relate, and Author too.
Which of the Brothers is it? I ask not who.

Nun. In Pelops his chief Palace Southward lies
A Part, that does like some tall Mountain rise
To pierce the Clouds, and over the Town does stand,
Which should the same Rebel, it can Command:
There stands the Public Hall, whose Roof of Gold
Rich spotted Marble-pillars do uphold.
Besides this, where the Vulgar do repair,
Several as rich as spacious Rooms there are.
The privy Court in the uttermost Recess
Does lie, by a Descent from the no less
Sacred, then secret Grove divided there
Nor pleasant Trees nor profitable are,
But mournful Yew, Cypress, and Holm; ye higher
Then all the rest the tall Oak does aspire,
And like a Prince over looks the common Trees.
Our Kings do here consult their Auguries:
Here they seek Council when affairs appear
Doubtful or bad, Their Votive Gifts hang here:
Trumpets of War, and Trophys of the same,
With what by Land or Sea we overcame;
The vanquished wheels, and treacherous Axel-Tree,
And all our Nations Deeds, here fixed be.
Here Is the Tiara Phrygian Pelops wore:
Here Is what in War we took, or triumph bore.
Under this shade a Fountain stands, a Wave
So black and sad Dire Styx is said to have,
Dire Styx that binds the gods. The Fame's well-known
How here the Infernal gods all Night do groan.
Clinking of Chains, howling of Ghosts, make here
A horrid noise; while what affrights the Ear
May there be seen: there haunt a Company
Of wandering souls which far more dreadful be
Then common Specter; sudden flames often dart
Through all the Grove, and fix in the highest part.
Often has from thence three Barks at once been heard,
And often the House with monstrous Visions scared.
Nor can the Day expel such fears; for there
Is ever Night, and these at Noon appear.
Oraculous Resolves have here been found
By them that seek, which with a frightfull sound
That fills the Place, arise from underground.
When Atreus mad with Rage, was entered here,
Dragging his Nephews, decked the Altars were.
(Who with fit words can such black Deeds relate?)
Their Princely hands behind were pinnion'd straight,
Their Heads with purple fillets bound: there lies
Ready both Incense for the Sacrifice,
And Wine, and Knife: ready prepared for it
Lies Salt and Meal. No Rite he does omit,
Least not well done should be such wickedness!

Chorus. Who to their Execution dares address?

Nun. He is the Priest himself: himself does Pray;
The Versicles of Death himself does say.
The Victims he in order places, and
Standing at the Altar, takes the Sword in hand;
Himself attends, and does omit no Rite:
This the Grove sees, and trembles at the sight.
So does the Ground, which shakes the House withal,
Whose Turrets doubtful on which side to fall
Nod every way; Also a Comet streams
From Heavens left side, which darts forth dismal beams.
The Wine as soon as cast into the flame,
Was Transubstantiated, and blood became.
Often his Crown fell: the Ivory Statues wept.
This all affrights; he still his temper kept;
And stands withal as if he would terrify
The threatening gods. -- But all delays laid by,
He now ascends the Altar, with Oblique
Looks and Malevolent; Some Tiger like
In Ganges Forest, whom fierce hunger fires,
Between two Steers that stands, and both desires;
Yet unresolved which first to seize; her eyes
That threaten Death, to this, then that applys;
With doubt as much as hunger next; And thus
On the Devoted looks Dire Atreus.
Revolving in his mind which should be he
That first must fall; and which should Second be.
It matters not; yet takes he much delight
So high a Villainy to Marshal right.

Chor. Which strikes he then?

Nun. -- Parental Piety
Least he should want, first Tantalus must dye.
TO his Grandsire dedicate.

Cho. -- Oh say, how took
The young Prince such a Death, and with what look?

Nun. Careless of Life he stands, and does refuse
In vain to supplicate, or words to loose.
But Atreus by the throat, him having tan'e,
Sheaths in his Breast the sword; which out again
Being redrawn, awhile the body thinks
How best to fall, then on his Uncle sinks.
Next Plisthenes he to the Altar brings,
And decollated, on his Brother flings:
Down prostrate falls the Trunk; and (with a sound
Uncertain) the complaining head to the ground.

Chor. What after this Twin-death does he begin?
Spares he the child, or adds he sin to sin?

Nun. As a main'd Lion equally repleat
With rage and hunger, sees a Heard of Neat
In the Armenian woods, pursues and takes
Many, whose blood his frowns more frightful makes:
Bulls do his hunger, not his Rage allay,
And after them he on the Calves does prey,
With wearied Jaws: nor otherwise then so
Is Atreus cruel, such his Rage; who though
His sword's distaind with double slaughter, yet
He seeks another murder to commit,
Careless on whom: In the child's breast he then
Strikes it, which out ats back appears again.
He falls, his blood quenches the Altars fires;
Death enters at both wounds, and he at both expires.

Chor. O barbarous act!

Nun. -- Does this your horror breed?
There Is more behind, he stops not at this deed.

Cho. Is there in Nature greater cruelty?

Nun. Think you this all: it is but the first degree.

Cho. What more? did he to beasts their bodies throw,
And fire deny?

Nun. -- Would he had only so*
Their Sepulture, and funeral Pile denied,
And cast them out to birds of prey beside,
Or with their flesh fed Wolves; what does appear
The greatest curse, had been a blessing here;
Their ^i^e to see them unenterr'd. -- O crime
Nor age will credit! the ensuing time
Will think this fabulous! their inward parts
He opens, their veins breathing still, and hearts
Still panting: thence the fates to recollect
He the warm veins, and Atterys does dissect.
The Victims pleasing, now he time can spare
His brothers entertainment to prepare.
He cuts them out in joints; close to their sides
The shoulders from the body he divides.
Their tender flesh he from the bones does pare:
Yet saves entire the heads, and hands which were
So lately sacred pledges. The Inwards they
Some spitted fore a slow fire drip away:
Some in the injured caldron boil: while these
So horrid meats the very fire displease,
Often from the hearth it fell, and when returned
Back to its place, it murmured as it burned.
The Livers screek upon the spit, nor well
Which most, the flesh or flames, groaned, I tell.
The mournful fire in clouds of smoke consumes:
And even those heavy clouds and ominous fumes
Directly not ascend, as wont, but fly
About the household gods, and there they lie.
O patient Phoebus! though day backward flys,
And though thy luster at the Zenith dies,
Thou set'st too late. -- His Sons the Father eats,
And his own Limbs are his Inhumane treats:
While with rich Unguents his hair shines, and he
Sits full of mighty Wine, unwillingly
Discends the barbarous diet. Only this
Of good, Thyestes amongst thy Evils is,
You know 'em not: yet even this will sade.
Though Titan turns his Chariot, which is made
To measure batk the way it came; though Night
With shades unusual hides this deed from sight,
Which from the East does rise, and out of time;
Yet will at last be seen each horrid crime,

Chorus. Father of gods and men, at whose
Uprise Night does her beauty loose,
Whether, O whether do thou stray,
And at thy Noon benight the day?
What frights thee, Sun? not yet appears
Vesper the harbinger of stars:
Nor Hesper shining in the west
Bids thy diurnal Chariot rest:
Nor the third Trumpets sound yet made
A welcome to the approaching shade.
Amazed the Plowman stands to see
Day end, untited his Team and he.
What stops thy Race? what is it does make
Thy Steeds their beaten Road forsake?
Do now from bed the Giants rise
Again to fight the Deitys?
His old Attempts does Tytius strive,
With his first fury, to revive?
Has now Typhaeus freed his breast,
Long with the Mountains weight oppressed?
Or do the gods Phlegraean foes
Ossa on Pelion now impose? --
Al! the known course of time is done!
No more will set or rise the Sun.
Days Mother with Nocturnal dew's
Still wet, while now she Phoebus views
As to her East he back retires,
Whence he so lately went, admires.
How ignorant is she to lave
His steeds in the refreshing wave!
He stands surpised too, since to this
New Inn himself a stranger is.
The morning Sun now sets, whose light
Yields to a darkness, yet no night;
On his Recess no stars appear:
Nor fire shines in our Hemisphere.
No Moon adorns these shades. What e're
This is, Night would it only were.
Each heart with sudden fear possessed
Does tremble, tremble in each breast,
Least all should ruined be; least men
And even the gods themselves, again
To their old Chaos fall: lest fire
And sea, Earth and Heavens gay attire
Of sparkling stars, should now return
To their first nothing. -- No more burn
Shall thy bright flames, nor Phoebus, thou
Be longer chief of Plannets, now,
Summer and winter, nor shall we
Distinguish by the Course of thee.
No more shall the pale Queen of shades
Expel that fear which Night invades,
While she in a less Circle runs,
And ends her Race before the Suns.
Into but one deformed lump shall
The Elements and Plannets fall.
Heavens bless the Zodiac, whose bright way
Shines with the Lights of night and day,
Whose Circle parts the Zones, and we
Measure the Year by its Degree,
Shall fall from Heaven, and with it then
These stars set, never to rise again:
First shall the Ram, who used to bring
Soft western Gales with the kind spring,
Plunge in those waves over which he bore
The trembling Hell heretofore.
Next shall the Bull descend, between
Whose bright horns are the Hyads seen;
And draw the Twins and Crab along
With him from the Caelestial throng.
The Lion then shall down again
Return, and no more scorch the Grain.
Down from her heaven the Virgin shall
Along with her the balance fall:
With them shall the fierce Scorpion go,
And he armed with the Aemonian bow:
Old Chiron, in his fall who will
His Quiver break, and arrows spill.
The winter-leading Goat must be
The next, and falling break shall he
Thy water-pot, who er'e thou art:
With thee the F^shes shall depart
Last of the Twelve. The Bears that never
Set in the waves, shall now drowned there.
The Snake that those two Bears divides,
And like a crooked River glides,
Shall as all other Rivers, roll
Into the sea. While from the Pole
Cold Cynosure the lesser Bear
Placed by the greater Dragon there,
With whom Boots, slow-paced swain
Shall fall, and drive from Heaven his Wain.
Selected from Mankind, do we
This fatal period live to see?
Must the world fall on us? O Fate
Wretched and most unfortunate!
Whether we loose without offense
The Sun, or guilty, drive him hence:
Yet cease to mourn: there is no need.
He Is covetous of Life indeed
Who longer to survive desires,
When the whole Universe expires.

ACT. V.
Atreus. Now equal to the stars I walk, now I
Look down, methinks, on others from the sky.
My Fathers Throne, and Ram, I Have now regained,
I Have done with Heaven: and my last wish attained.
It Is very well; exceeding well; and this
Revenge even for me sufficient is. --
But why sufficient? I Will proceed, and fill
With his own blood Thyestes fuller still.
Lest I should see, and blush at this black deed
The day retires: While Heaven invites, proceed.
Would the fled gods might be forced back by me,
That they this banquet of Revenge might see!
Yet shall the Father: and let that suffice.
This darkness that now hides his miseries
I will dissolve, though day refuse. Guest mine,
Thou have too long careless and cheerful line
You Have eat and drunk enough. Thyestes needs
Be sober rightly to resent such deeds:
Wine drounds his sense. -- So there within, who waits:
Display the Feast, open the Temple gates.
I long to see, when his Sons heads he views,
How he will look, or what expressions use
To speak his grief; or how (his spirit's lost
At this) he will stand as if congealed with frost.
This is my deed: To see him wretched, no
Delight take I, but in his making so.
The Scene opens, and Thyestes is Discovered. Behold the Room with many Lights
arrayed:
On Gold and Purple he supinely laid;
On his left hand, his head oppressed with Wine
He leans, and belches. Now methinks I shine
Chief of the Gods, and King of Kings! In this
I have s^^past my wish. -- See, see, he is
Already full; from a large Goblet he
Drinks unmixt Wine: Drink on; I Have still for thee
One Cup, the blood of the late sacrifice:
The color of Red wine shall this disguize.
And let this Cup conclude this Feast. He mine
Did thirst, who now shall drink commixt with Wine
His Childrens blood. -- Hark; he to sing prepares,
Unable to contain his Joy, light Ayrs.

Thyestes. Thou that so dulled with sufferings art,
Cast off thy busy Cares, my heart.
Hence grief, hence fear, and thou er'e while
My old Companion in Exile
Sad Poverty; hence thou that late
Did vex my soul, of my low state
A conscious shame; of that no more
I Will think, but what I was before.
It Is brave when fallen from high Command,
Firm and unmoved below to stand.
Oppressed with mighty Ills, it is rare
And brave, with neck unbow'd to bear,
Of a lost Kingdom the sad weight;
Nor conquered, nor degenerate,
But to stand upright under those
Unwelcome pressures Fates impose.
These clouds that now thy soul over cast,
And all the marks of misery past
Cast off, and to thy face once more
The smiles of soft content restore:
From thy grieved memory let pass
The old Thyestes. But alas!
It Is proper to the unfortunate
Never to trust the smiles of fate.
Though happiness return again,
Joy is to them a kind of pain. --
What grief is this obstructs my mirth
From no known cause that takes its birth?
This day of Festival to keep
What hinders me, and bids me weep?
With odorous flowr's my head t'array
What is it does thus, does thus gainsay?
The Roses from my brows descend,
And my perfumed hair stands on end
With sudden horror; while apace
Sad streams over flow a cheerful face.
My mirth with groans is often checked;
And my late tears I still affect:
So fond the wretched ever be
To dote on their old misery.
Mournful complaints fain would I vent,
And tear this purple ornament
Oft-times our souls prophetic be,
And droop with sorrows they foresee.
So when the Sea to swell does use,
And no wind breaths, a storm insues. --
Mad man! thy mind why thus do thou
Disturb, and discompose thy brow?
Thy Brother trust: now what er'e fate
Befalls, fears causeless, or too late.
Thus timorous I would not be
But a strange terror troubles me
Within, which through my eyes does pour
A causeless, and surprising showr'.
Sorrows effect is this or fears?
Or has great Joy its proper tears?

Atreus (going to him) Brother, with joint consent let us celebrate
This day; that will confirm my Regal state
And 'twixt us two settle a lasting peace.

Thy. I Am cloyd with wine and feasting; 'twould increase
My pleasure, and no small addition be
To my full Joy, could I my Children see.

Atreus (ambiguously.) Be confident they are in your arms, for here
They are, and shall be; do not fear.
Nothing of thine shall be withheld: You shall
Their desired presence now enjoy, I all
Of thee with thy so loved Issue will,
Doubt not, most fully satisfy and fill.
At present with my Sons they celebrate
This day of Joy: but I will call 'em straight
First taste our Families cup filled with choice wine.

Thy. Brother, I kindly take this gift 'cause thine.
First offer to our Fathers deities;
And then we I drink -- How Is this? my hand denies
Her office: still the wines weight heavier grows,
And loads my arm; while from my Lips it flows:
About my mouth it rouls, nor down will go,
See the ground shakes; the Table too does so.
The fire it self scarce shines: on the Suns flight,
The Sky stands Neutral betwixt day and night. --
How Is this? Heavens connex sinks still lower and lower:
To darkness joins a darkness that is more
Condenst, and night it self to this is day.
Each star is fled. What e're this means, I pray
That from my Brother, and my Sons it be
Averted, and the Omen threaten me.
Restore me now my Sons.

Atr. -- I will restore,
And they from thee shall never be parted more.

Thy. What tumult shakes me thus within? My breast
Is with a sad impatient weight oppressed:
Sad groans I with a voice not mine respire.
Appear my Sons, your most unhappy sire
Bids you appear: your sight alone will cure
This grief. -- Whence answer they?

Atr. -- Make ready your
(Shows the Heads) Embraces: they are come, -- Now Sir, do ye know
Your Sons? --

Atr. I know my Brother. -- Can thou undergo,
Dull earth, such wickedness, and bear it thus?
And not to Styx sink both thy self and us?
Will thou not open that these Kingdoms may
And King, through thee to Chaos find a way?
Will thou not all the structures of this Land
Level with their foundations? We to stand
Both well deserve in hell with Tantalus,
And other the Progenitors of us,
If any there. Open now, open wide
Thy dislocated Joints on every side,
Down let us sink through some vast cleft of thee
To Acheron, and there for ever be.
While over our heads the Infernal shapes appear,
Flow hither Phlegethon, and settling here,
Us wretches in thy flaming waters drowned
Lie thou unmoved still, dull senceless ground?

Atr. Here, take thy Sons, so much desired by thee:
Enjoy them now, there is no delay in me:
Each of these three alike embrace and kiss.

Thy. Is this thy League? thy amity? is this
A Brothers faith? Thus do thou love? To have
Safe or alive, my Sons, I do not crave:
This I thy brother beg, which no ways your
Revenge impleads, allow them sepulture.
I ask but what I Will burn: it is nothing I
Beg to enjoy, but part with by and by.

Atr. All of thy Sons I Will give, that I did save:
What not remains, that you already have.

Thy. Lie they a Feast for Birds of Prey? or are
They for wild beasts reserved inhumane fare?

Atr. Thou of thy Sons have made that impious feast.

Thy. 'Twas this that shamed the gods! his to the East
Forced back the Sun wretch that I am what cries,
What sad complaints, what words will me suffice?
Their heads and hands chopped off too plain I see,
And from their Legs how their feet severed be.
'Twas the presage of this unheard of meat,
Though pinched with hunger, would not let me eat.
My bowels roll about, and seek with pain
A passage for the horrid food, in vain.
Lend me thy sword dyed in my blood, and I
Will to my Sons with it give liberty.
Is this denied? yet shall with frequent blows
This breast resound; ah, no! forbear from those
Unhappy man, and spare the dead within --
Has over such a cursed deed acted been
By barbarous Heniochan that is bred
On Caucasus? or the Cecropian dred
Procrustes? oh! my Sons do me oppress,
And I my Sons. -- No mean in wickedness*

Atr. A mean should be observed when first we act
A wrong, but not when we revenge a fact.
This is but small for me. I should have shed
Goar in thy mouth as from the wound it bled:
That of thy living Sons, the warm blood thou
Might drink: I Have trifled with my anger now.
In have I gave the wounds. Of them I made
A sacrifice, I the vowed slaughter paid
To my wronged household gods: and jointing all
Their liveless bodies into goblets small,
I rent each Limb: and some of them I cast
Into the boiling Cauldron, some I placed
By a slow fire to roast. They not yet dead
I cut their Nerves, and members quartered:
I heard the Inwards groan upon the spit:
I my self made the fire and looked to it.
All this their Father better might have done!
My Rage is spent in vain. It Is true each Son
Of his, his cursed mouth did tear and eat,
But both the Eater ignorant, and mear.

Thy. Ye Seas with wandering shores encompassed,
Hear this! Here this you gods, wherever fled!
Hear this hell! Earth hear this! and thou Night made
More black and horrid by a hellish shade,
Attend to what I Will say, and what is said:
Darkness I Am left to thee, and only thou
Sad as my self, can view my sorrows now:
No suppliant vows for my concern I Will make.
Ah! what is that? Nature it is for thy sake.
Great King of Gods, who the Worlds Sovereign art,
Bury the Earth in Clouds from every part
Bid the winds fight, and thou thy Thunder dart.
Use not that hand which lesser bolts do throw
To batter guiltless buildings here below:
But with that hand that levelled Mountains reared
Three stories high, and Giants that appeared
Like other Mountains upon them: on us
Discharge thy Lightning and thy thunder thus.
Make good the perish't day. Let thy fires fly:
The light that is lost with lightning now supply.
Doubt not of us whose cause does call, they be
Both bad: if not, yet mine is; aim at me,
Transfix this breast with thy Artillery.
To their last fire would I my Sons bestow;
My self into those Funeral flames must go.
If nothing moves the Gods, if sinners they
Neglect to punish: Night, for ever stay
And hide our Crime; Titan I Will nere complain
So thy bright flames no more return again.

Atr. Now I applaud my hands? the Palm I Have won.
I had lost my glory thus had I not done.
Now my bed chaste I think, and Children mine.

Thy. Why should the Infants dye?

Atr. For being thine.

Vhy. With his own Sons do thou the Father feast?

Atr. Ay, the undoubted Sons, which pleases best.

Thy. Witness ye Gods. --

Atr. -- The Nuptial Powers well may.

Thy. With a worse Deed who would a Crime repay?

Atr. I know what grieves you. To prevented be
Your next; not what thou have devoured moves thee,
But not to have dressed the same. Thou did design,
Ignorant, such Viands should be mine:
Their Mother helping, thou did mean to seize
My Sons, and butcher them as I did these:
You Would don't, but that you fancied them your own.

Thy. Be present ye just Gods: to them alone
I give thee up for Punishment. --

Atr. -- For it
I to thy Childrens Manes thee commit.

FINIS.
MOCK-THYESTES.
ACT. I.
TANTALVS. MEGAERA. TAnt. What Witch of Endor does thus fret me.
And when I Would stay in hell will not let me?
Cannot a man be damned in quiet,
But Haggs must thus commit a Riot?
You Will whip me out of Hell-doors we' ye?
And firk me up, with a Pox te' ye?
I must to earth: but pray let us know
What I must do there er'e I go.
I cannot teach 'em damning there,
Nor more debauch 'em then they are,
To Wench, drink, rook, or be uncivil,
They scorn to learn of a poor Devil.
It Is ten to one the Sons of Whores
Will either kick me out of doors,
Or think'me a tame harmless Cully,
And then I Am gone to Nicker-Bully.
But should I take a Wenches shape,
It Is six to four I get a Clap.
And then how shamefully 'twill urge one,
That comes from Hell to use a Surgeon?
All that I say I can make good
In mine own proper flesh and blood.
Two Imps I have as very Rakells
As er'e did cling in Newgate shackles:
Men call one Atreus, and the other
Thyestes, Atreus's own Brother.
Rake Hell, and skim the Devil, if er'e
You match 'em, I Will be hanged; that is fair.

Meg. Allons; and stand not thus hum drum:
Or Faith I Will run this Pin in your bum.
De'e think I Will suffer you, conclude
Whether the thing be bad or good?
Yet if you wonder at your Mission,
And why it is with such expedition;
To give your Nephews a kind Visit,
If you would know the true cause, is it.
Oh then, and do just as I tell ye:
First put two live Eels in their belly,
Which may so operate, and frisk it,
As if old Nick were in their Brisket.
Where Nature's dull, we thus must force her:
(For Devils may learn of a Horse-Courser)
Then make 'em hector, huff, and swear,
Curse, damn, and sink, spit, fire, and stare;
Snatch Spits and tilt at one another,
And Brother bite off Nose of Brother.

Tan. I, say you so? but if you get me
To do it, I Will give you leave to eat me.
Perhaps on earth what you have moved,
Is often done, and well approved;
And to debauch ones own Relation
Counted a Genteil Recreation.
But soft, you never shall get me to it;
An honest Devil will not do it.
Do you my Grandchildren suppose
Bull-Doggs to run full at the Nose?
Or think you them Cocks, grown so sullen
To spit themselves instead of Pullen?
In fine, I tell you once again,
Tempt me no more, for it is in vain.

Meg. Well, since I cannot this way prevail,
I le try now to persuade your Tail.
Your Toby I Will so feaze with this
Rod that has lain three weeks in piss,
That you shall beg the thing to do,
Before we part, and thank me too.
Come, come, untruss; or must I force ye,
And call Tysiphone to horse ye?

Tant. Oh lay that frightfull Engine by.
Kneels. Dred Queen, for if it shakes I dye.
And I will your Commands obey
Like your most humble -- as they say.
But spare my buttocks, let me beg ye;
For they are tender, dearest Megge.

Meg. Enough; I pardon: do not doubt it,
But let us shake hands, and so about it.

Tan. Like a dire Vapor, which some call
A Blast Hypocondriacal:
Or like the steem of Candle snuff
I come, but peacably enough;
Then fear not Mortals, I will do
No harm, but stink, and so adieu.
Madam, when you confer the Grace
Next, your Command on me to place,
Henceforth I Will do it without grudging:
And like a plain well-meaning Gudgin.
What er'e you offer me I Will swallow.
Go on sweet Lady, for I follow.
Exeunt. Chorus. If any of the Starry Powers
Value one pin, or us, or ours:
If Jupiter or Mars ere saw
A Miss among us worth a straw,
If we have ought that is worth their care
Twixt wind and water, or else where
I wish with all my heart and Soul
That they our Quarrels would control.
For this same Atreus and Thyestes
Are both stark naught who er'e the best is.
Cat after kind exact: It Is plain
That neither of them cross the strain.
Pelops their Father was, and he
Killed his own Wives Dad a dadde.
He loved the Sport so well that rather
Then want a Wench he would kill a Father.
Nay more, the most ungrateful Woer
Hanged the poor Pimp that helped him to her.
Now if the Heralds books don't fail us,
Pelops was Son of one Tantalus;
He was, as is reported common,
Of London Town a Sergeants Yeoman;
Who to arrest a Cook, once came
In place Ram Ally called by name:
Some Clerks and Bullies of the Cloisters
Were there by chance then opening Oysters:
These seeing their Cook in woeful danger,
On whom they lay at Rack and manger:
Or as some say, 'twas chiefly 'cause
They saw a Rupture in the Laws,
And sacred Franchise of the Ally;
They never stand ye shally shally,
But take poor Tant and hurl him in
To Temple Bog-house up to the Chin.
But here the Mischief ends not yet
(To see a Cooks malicious wit!)
When Tant had stood there half a day,
He thought him hungry, as we say,
His Knife unto the Spit he puts ye,
And pen'worth six of Roast Beef cuts ye;
In order then to what his heart meant,
He runs me strait to Tants appartment.
There holding it down in the Hole,
He cry's you cursed Dog Catchpole,
Look what is here, does your Maw crave it?
Yes, when y' are hanged then you shall have it.
This said, in an heroic strain,
His hand he snatches up again.
Then brings the flagon full of Ale,
Or as some Authors have it, Stale.
For Flagons often have used been
Both to fill out, and empty in.
Or as the plain expression is,
Either to drink in, or to piss.
Now (as all Cooks do often try)
Hot stinks do make men develish dry.
The cunning Spit-man therefore, thus
Brings a full Pot to Tantulus:
Which whch the poor Fool reaches at,
He empties it upon his Pate.
And this is briefly the first rising
Of that which we call Tantalizing.

ACT. II.
Enter Atreus, and a Servant. ATreus. It Is true, my Brother did seduce
My Spouse, but that is not all the abuse.
For Jack as I was saying, if he
Had done this out of Amity
And pure good will unto my Wife,
It had never grieved me, but, used life!
To Cuckold me out of mere scorn,
By flesh and blood cannot be born.

Sei. That Is very true. But still I say Sir,
How if it were in a fair way Sir?

Atr. Lord Jack, thou art just such another: --
When the thing's clear to make a puther?
For look ye, Jenny, had she been
As beauteous as is any Queen,
Then it might well have been as you say;
But she is as ugly as Medusa.
'Twas therefore done you plainly see,
In spite, and disrespect to me.
And now, dear Rogue, let think upon it:
For I Will not put up the affront.

Ser. Must my Dame too be guilty made?
For she was in the Musquerade --
Couchant, and did, as I may say,
Act her own part in the foul Play.
Must she then share in the Purgation,
As well as in the Recreation?

Atr. No Jack; my Wife's my Wife, and she
Must be indulged as part of me.
Besides all Women, if you mind,
Have weaker Vessels then Mankind,
More frail, and therefore not a little
Apt to be cracked, and very brittle.
On this account your pretty Lasses
Have been compared to Venice Glasses.
And should we Husbands fume and fret
For every Rap our Spouses get;
'Twould be most redicule, and he
That does it, not at all jentee.
Then lastly know, we both dispense
With one another, in this sense.
And both have Conscience-Liberty
By Joint-consent of her and me,
To solace in a Modish manner,
And she not Curse me, nor I ban her.
But though my Wife goes Scotfree here,
I Will make it cost my Brother dear.
Now honest Jack, I pray you kindly,
Advise how I may do it finely.

Ser. Ah, Master, I Am but simply learned
To be in things of Weight concerned.
But since ye 'are pleased to have my answer,
To this I Will do the best I can Sirs.
What if we too, and a third Man
Should catch him Napping when we can;
And then e'ne geld him for a warning?
This sure will spoil his Trade of Horning.

Atr. But should I mayhem him in this sort,
And then be bring his Action for 't.
What Damage Juries may impose
For such a Carving, Heaven knows.

Ser. Then let him; since the offense was done
In blankets, be well tossed in one.
And so the business shall be ended
In the same manner he offended.

Atr. Well, should I like your way; but this
Too violent and open is.
I would some private trick invent
To give him a sound punishment,
And yet he never the wiser for it.
As for the Triumph, I abhor it.

Ser. Why then, Sir thus: you need but stay
Till he too Marry's, and you may
By amorous Retaliation,
Debauch his Wife in the same fashion.
Thus you shall have Sir, (when you do it)
Revenge, and a fresh Girl to boot.

Atr. I like this better then all yet:
But, Jonney, here is the Devil of it,
Delay in these things is so hellish,
It dulls the Sport, and palls the Relish.
Revenge and Love should both advance
Sa, Sa, in the brisk air of France. --
I feel a rumbling in my belly
To do a thing which I will not tell ye.
Sure it is some Spirit that thus puts
Me on, and agitates my Guts.
Well I will on, and never fear it,
Since it is a motion of the Spirit.
And Spirits less Fanatique are
In belly then in brain, by far.
Jack, run; and send some idle Boy
To you know who with this Envoy:
That howsoer'e my Carriage past
May give him cause of some distaste,
I humbly beg now to be Friends;
And for those honest Golden Ends
Beseech him that he would not fail
To come and taste of my Wives Ale;
And when he comes it shall go hard
But something else shall be prepared.
You understand me Jack?

Ser. Yes Master.

Atr. I prithee run a little faster --
Yet stay. A loose Boy may betray us;
I Will send my own Sons Menelaus,
And Agamemnon with a Letter:
And that will do a great deal better.

Exeunt. Chorus. Methinks these are but odd Caprices
To make two Brothers fall a pieces,
And quarrel for so poor a thing
As is a little Cuckolding.
And what de'e think Sirs, all this while,
Is that which makes so great a Coil?
But a mere empty Name! For the thing
Was never seen by any breathing,
Nor felt, nor heard; and why then should
This word dare to be understood?
It Is but an Embryo miscarriage:
It is the Maidenhead of Marriage;
And Maiden-heads for ought I can see,
Only consist in a strong Fancy.
Then Cuckoldy and Pusillage
Are but two shaddows of the Age.
Twixt which the difference is not great:
A single and a double Cheat.
And yet for this men take the pains
To beat out one another brains.
Nor do they spare the other Sex,
But often break their Spouses necks.
Then happy she, whose Husband's wary,
And keeps her caged like Bird-Canary,
Giving her once a day, with care,
Linseed and water, fresh and fair.
Unknown to Town-wits, and unknowing
Coaches, she spends her time in sewing.
Or else in spinning, or in knitting:
And has her belly full of sitting.
But she that is for Beauty famous,
And knows a man, abroad, from a Mouse.
Whose fine French carriage never wants
Variety of fresh Gallants.
Much Love without doors while she gets,
Causing within more jealous heats,
May dye of Husbands bangs perhaps:
If not, yet of her Servants Claps.

ACT. III.
Enter Thyestes, with a Bagg in his Hand. It Is good before I further go,
To think if it were best or no.
Or (as I read once in a Book)
Before I take my leap to look.
The scruples then which in my brain lie
I Will open legally, and plainly.
The Case is thus. A. lies with B.
I. S. 's Wife: I: S. sends C
To A with formal Invitation
To come and taste of a Collation.
A. doubts I. S. is double hearted,
Or (if you will have it word-of-arted)
A mere Trapanner, and demurring,
Is not over hasty to be stirring.
The Points are two. First whether A.
Should go: or, Secondly, should stay.
The Case being thus stated, hark ye
How all the Parts about me argue.
In the first place, my head cries tarry;
For should he break me you would be sorry:
It Is more then likely he forgets not
How you used his head: though he frets not,
Nor shows resentment by much huffing
Yet he may pay all off with cuffing.
My back and sides have the same fears
For bangs: so have for lugs my ears.
Now on the other side, my belly
Says go, or else the Devil quel ye;
There will be Viands choice and dainty;
And of good Bub no doubt great plenty.
My Guts will swim in lushious Seas
Of Ale as strong as Hercules.
My Eyes cry, on; and leave your fears:
Or else we will drow'nd our selves in Tears:
But if you go, we hope once more
To see his Wife, that honest Whore.
And there is another part of mine
That Is mad with the self-same design.
My members being thus divided,
Now hang me if I can decide it. --
But look: while here I stand and ponder,
Some body comes to meet me yonder.
It Is he himself with a clean Band on.
This is an honor, and a Grand one!
Enter Atreus. Atr. My dear Thyestes!

Thy. Dearest Dear! Embrace.

Atr. How glad am I to see you here?

Thy. And how does all at home Boy?
Cranky?

Atr. All reasonably well, I thank ye --

Thy. But how, but how, does your good Wife?

Atr. Oh, lusty (as they say) for life:
As brisk, as jolly, and as ayrie
As a young Kitlin, or a Fary.

Thy. And how does all your Children, lastly:
And honest Towser the old Masty?

Atr. All at your Service, my dear Sweeting.

Thy. Lord, how yo' are altered since last meeting
Methinks you're grown more tall and bony.
But for those Breeches, I Would not known ye.

Atr. Brother, once more I Am glad to see ye:
And if ye' ad brought 'your Puss-Cats wiye
My happiness had been complete.

Thy. Sweet Sir, if that will do the Feat;
They Are in this bagg, and at your service.

Atr. More welcome then Sunshine in Harvest;
Then nine a clock to Prentice boys
In winter nights; or Marriage-Joyes
To crooked Virgins, is each Puss
To, Sir, your Servant Atreus.
But wherefore are they thus conveyed,
Like Pig in Pocket -- Masquerade?

Thy. To let 'em beat upon the hoof
Thus far, had merited reproof.
For surely Brother, it is fitting
They ride when they go a Visiting.
Therefore to save their feet a labor,
I stole this Cock-bagg of a Neighbor:
And it as well serves their turn, for ought
I see, as a guilt Coach or Chariot.

Atr. It Is very true -- But see, we are come
To the Frontier that is, even at home.
Repose a while, pray, in the inner
Parler; and I Will go hasten Dinner.
Exeunt. Chorus. How suddenly these Brothers twain
Fell out? how soon they are Friends again?
Could any man alive imagine
Peace after such a huff and raging?
Well: though I say it that should not say it,
True Love cannot be long in hate.
So have I seen (as Poets say)
Domestic Dudgeon in a Fray.
When Cobblers Wife against Cobbler, for
Prerogative, denounces War.
Cob calls Tib Bitch, and takes his stirrup
With which he vows he will firk her up.
But Tib as valerous as a Lass
As er'e Penthesilea was,
Scorns to turn Tail on any man,
But bids him do the worst he can:
Then snatches up a basting Ladle.
With which she vows to break his Nodle.
And to defend her self from him,
Takes for a buckler her Wheel Rim.
Thus armed, they both begin the fight
With all the Conduct requisite.
Fury had but a while run loose,
When Cob was glad to beg a Truce:
And Tib, who was no Jew nor Heathen,
Cranted a time we call a breathing.
Now Cob takes up his Awle and Pinser,
As the best Weapon to convince her.
Tib changes hers too, and thinks fit
To play it out at single Spit.
So skillfully she Fenced and Parry'd,
That the poor Cuckold she soon weari'd.
At length when Female Rage wat spent,
Tib to a Treaty does consent.
Then over half a dozen of stale --
Beer, or perhaps Beer and Ale,
Which Cob had sacrificed to Peace,
All Is well again; and Discords cease.
Thus 'twixt the Brothers it has been:
First they fall out, and then fall in.
O what a Jilt is Gammer Fortune?
No VVeather-cock is more uncertain.
A Spinster of so rough a hand,
That when her work seems at a stand,
She gives her Wheel a whisk of the sudden,
And stirs all round like Hasty Pudden.

ACT. IV.
Nuncius. Chorus. CHo, Pray Master Nuncius, what does vex ye?
If one may be so bold to ax' ye.

Nun. Oh! heavy News as happened ere yet!
So heavy I can scarcely bear it.

Cho. Ah well away, this does so quell me
I could even cry, before you tell me.
But let us hear it, with your favor,
How bad so er'e the Tale does favor.

Nun. For Loves sake tarry but a little,
And you shall know it every tittle.
I Am one that need but little dunning:
Only I Am out of breath with running.
Aye me. Alas, alas, Highoe. --
Sirs, in the first place you must know,
There were three dainty Tabby Cats
Thyestes loved as well as Brats.
Nay sure no Chuck nor Child could be
So dear to him as were these three.
I, and they were such pretty Creatures,
No Miss could match dear Puss for Features.
Sweetly they would pur, and briskly they
Would lie upon their backs, and play.
But if by chance they caught a Mouse
Lord! how they would dance about the house?
And having found the little Ceeature,
They allwaies course her er'e they eat her.
While Noble sport Thyestes found
'Twixt Muss the Hare, and Puss Grayhound,
Now when our Neighbor Gaffer Atreus
Seemed to his Brother very gracious:
Late sending to Thyestes Greeting,
He bid him to a merry Meeting;
To which his welcome should be such,
That even his Dog should have as much:
His love to him was so sincere,
That any thing of his was dear.
This was his Message; and in the end on it --
Pray bring along the Cur appendant.
At this Thyestes heart was truly,
Soft as May-Butter is in July:
And melted down into his breeches,
To hear his Brothers kind beseeches.
But being well Educated, he
Did in this manner Repartee.
He tells him first that he will come;
But fears to be too troublesome.
Next, with due thanks, he does confess
He keeps no Dog, nor great nor less.
A Leash of Cats, indeed, he never wants;
And they are his most humble Servants.
The Messenger a man of Honor,
Replied in this obliging manner.
He loves a Puss as well as any:
Bring all your Cats though never so many.
And when you are at Dinner set,
They shall be into the Dayry let;
Where they new Milk and Cream shall lap:
I, and some Firmity perhap.

Chor. This was all done en Chevalier.

Nun. True, but the sad Tale ends not here.
Thyestes comes, as he was prayed,
With his Retinue abovesaid.
Atreus in very civil fashion
Gives him a kind Accommodation,
Pray take a seat, quoth he, I Will wait
Upon you, dearest Brother, strait.
When out; the door he opening wide,
Beckons the Kittins a to side.
Suspecting naught, they follow; whom
He leads into a Drawing Room,
Which was a neat convenient place
Contrived just under the staircase.
When seeing his advantage pat,
He snickles up the Eldest Cat.
While the rest wonder what the man meant,
Esteeming this coarse Entertainment,
He hits me one full on the Sconce
With a Battoon made for the nonce.
So well the blow he re-inforc'd
That Puss must needs give up the Ghost;
Had her Nine Lives been twenty one
Her Lease was now not worth a bone.
In fine, he killed the other lastly,
Though the poor Creature looked most Ghastly.

Cho. O Ruthful Act! -- Nun. 'Twas sad indeed:
Put sadder that which did succeed.

Cho. Can there be worse then this is still?

Nun. Yes, this is but a Peccadill.

Cho. Did he for Hawks-meat keep the Carren?
Or hang 'em up in the next Warren.

Nun. Would it had been as you have said.
No: he insulted over the dead.
And in a strain most furious,
Spoke thus to each deceased Puss.
Butchers are scarce, and dear their Meat:
You Will make a most obleiging Treat.
Delitious Diet, oh how rare!
Then reckons up his Bill of Fare.
This shall a roasted Cony be.
And this shall make a Fricasee.
And thou, quoth he, that there do lie,
Shall make an excellent Hare-Pye.
Briefly, he cooked 'em: laid the Cloth:
Then served them in; but first some broth,
And now Thyestes (oh sad thought!)
Eats his own Cats, suspecting naught.
Methinks it is very dark; I think
I Would best go in and light a Link.

Exit. Chorus. Noble Don John of Aries,
What is it does you thus displease.
What makes you hide behind a Cloud
That pretty Face, as if grown proud?
Has some Star-Gazer wronged your Fame,
Using, to Vouch a Lie, your Name?
And we who hate their Impudence
Are punished thus for their Offense?
It Is a sad thing, and to be pitty'd,
That where a Felony's committed,
A Jury of Albumazars
Find Billa vera of the Stars;
As Accessarys, scilicet
By knowing and concealing it.
Nay some there are who in their writing
Pronounce 'em guilty by inciting.
If any miss a Ring or Spoon
Strait these examine Mistress Moon,
As Queen of Nimmers, or what is worse,
Executrix of Moll Cutpurse.
Never was Bull so bated as is
Taurus by these well-willing Asses.
The Twins cannot embrace in quiet,
Nor do that thing which they don't pry at.
Cancer has been so teased, and took up,
That he starts back if they but look up.
Virgo they have so abused, they force her
To loose her Name, and take a Coarser.
For who can think her Chaste, with whom
Men so familiar are become?
And in the like abusive fashion
They vex each Star, and Constellation.
Leo cannot fright 'em from it, no
Nor Saggitare, nor Scorpio:
But still with their Impertinency's
They fret the Stars out of their senses.
Yet must these Almanac Scriblers
Be to the Planets thought Well-willers.
So Pedagogues that fle the Bum,
In that do the Boy's Friends become.

ACT. I.
Atreus S^^us. SO: Now I ve taken a Revenge
Will be as Famous as Stone-Henge.
Succeeding Ages will scarce credit
What I have done, when they shall read it:
How kindly I did circumvent,
And treat him in a Punishment;
Yet gin't him too as home and fully
As ever Whore gave Clap to Bully.
To feast my Guest with his own Cat,
Is Paramount Revenge, that is flat.
But still to mak't more Tragical,
Thyestes at my feet shall fall;
Dead drunk with double lanted Ale,
In which I Will scrape my left Thumb nail.
Right: that will make a charming potion.
See where he comes to meet the motion,
Singing Old Rose, and Jovial Catches.
But I Will retire a while; and watch his
Leisure, without like a poor body,
Least I disturb the sweet Melody.
Exit. Enter Thyestes, Singing.
Thyes. Come lay by your Care, and -- No, no,
That Is not the Key, I am too low.
Try once more -- Come lay by your Care
And hang up your sorrow -- I there!
What follows? oh -- Drink on, he is a Sot
That er'e thinks of to morrow -- What,
Is forecast bad? and is it naught
To drink a health to one's good Thought?
Me thinks this Song is too too Frolic;
I Will try one that is more Melancholic.
Beneath a Myrtle shade -- But mum;
For now my Tears begin to come.
And whosoever dares engage her,
I Will weep with Maudlin for a Wager.

Enter Atreus. Atr. Brother, how is it?

Thy. Thank ye, good Brother.
Pray how comes all this smoke and smother?

Atr. Smoke? where?

Thy. Why all about the Room.
Ten Chimny's cannot make such a Fume.
Look where it rises at your Feet:
It makes my Eyes run over to see it.

Atr. (aside.) See, see, how the poor Baby cry's.
Sure it is the Ale works through his Eyes.
It Is even so, the sottish Drinker
Is got as Fudled as a Tinker.
But that shall not serve: I Will make him er'e
I Have done, as drunk as any Bear. --
Brother, my Wife desires to be
Remembered to you, and de'e see;
Has sent you here a merry Wasail,
Which is as good as she, or as Ale
Could make. A taste of Love she meant it,
And therefore Kissed the Cup, and sent it;
You understand me?

Thy. Very well.
Thy Wife's an honest Doxy-Dell. --
Without all doubt, this cunning Gipfy.
aside Longs for once more, or I am tipsy --
Give me the Bowl -- (drinks) -- Now tell the Queen
All Is off; and she will know what I mean.
And hark ye. Tell her that I greet her
Kindly, and will not fail to meet her.

Atr. Good. --

Thy. Hark ye, Brother, does your Room
Here, learn to dance? So I presume:
It turns upon the Toe so smoothly,
And quick withal, I tell you soothly,
It makes me giddy with its wheeling!
Motion, and sets me to a Reeling --

Atr. Reeling, that is my Cue. Now I may
Discover the Intrigue of the Play.
Since in that door the Wind is got,
It Is time to reconcile the Plot. --
How do you like your Cats my Friend?

Thy. Well; but I dare not much commend
For fear you steal em; nor is this same
Fear vain and Pannique, for I miss 'em.

Atr. Alas they have miscarri'd all to day,
Some hanged, some drowned, as one may say
And 'cause they should not basely fall,
'Twas I, dear heart, that killed 'em all.

Thy. Was this done like a loving Brother?
Or like a Friend? Sure neither another.
But let that pass. I Will spare my Curses --
Their skins will make me three good purses
I Will go and flea 'em.

Atr. But the Jest is
You 'ave dined upon 'em, dear Thyestes.
And I both Butcher was, and Cook
To serve you Sir.

Thy. Now I could puke*
O Cuckold Cook to Treat me thus!
O hated Hang-dog to hang Puss!
O Son of an old rotten Whore!
In fine -- I Will sleep and tell you more.

Lies down. Atr. Io, Victoria! now at last
By me, and Fortune thou art cast.
Lie there. Such Victories as these are
Will swell me up as big as Caesar.
When the High Germans he bumbasted.
Less Triumph and content he tasted.
Even now, since thus my Brother fell,
I seem as tall as a High Constable.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
THus, Readers, have ye seen Thyestes Feast,
Both as a History, and a Jest:
The substance and the shadow of the Play.
No doubt you are great Judges now -- Faith say
Which Diet likes ye best, as it is before ye?
Or which of these you think the truest Story?
Whether Heroique Fustian dressed in Meeter,
Or Mimmick Fare in Jingling Rhyme sounds sweeter?
Which raises most Concern, which most surprise,
No Plot, no Characters, or no Disguise?
Say what you please of Seneca, it is
All one to him whether you Clap or Hiss.
But know, the applause which Stationers desire
Is not so much to praise a Muse as buy her.
What e're your Authors, or your Actors think,
Your Man of Trade admires not Claps, but Chink.

