HENRICUS Dom CARRY; Baro de Leppingto^; Com de MONMOUTH
effigy Prae nob Ord Baln EQVES.

W. Marshall fecit.



Man become Guilty, OR THE CORRUPTION OF NATVRE BY SIN, According to St.
AUGUSTINES sense.

Written originally in French, By Iohn-Francis Senault.

And put into ENGLISH By the Right Honble HENRY Earl of Monmouth.



LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Crown in Fleetstreet, betwixt the two Temple Gates, 1650.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FRANCES, Countess of Rutland, wife to JOHN Earl of
RUTLAND.
Madam,
GIve me leave, I beseech you, to present you with this Copy of a Masterpiece,
drawn in its Original by as rare a hand as I have met withal; the which I am
the rather encouraged to do, for that I have experienced your Goodness to be
such, as may make me presume upon your Pardoning such Faults as your Judicious
eye shall observe therein, especially since they are committed by so Professed
and so Obliged a Servant of your Ladyships: and further, for that All that have
the Honor to know you, know you to have Piety enough to practice what is
therein prescribed as allowed of, and to shun the Contrary (both which you will
find Rarely drawn to the life by the Author, though perhaps but Slubberd over
by the Copyer, in almost every Chapter of this book) Loyalty enough not to
transgress the boundaries therein praescribed to due Allegiance, and to detest
the several Revolts you shall find mentioned therein; Judgment enough to
discern, and I hope to approve of the Eloquence, Philosophy, History, and
Divinity, which you shall see therein Handsomely and Methodically interwoven:
to which if you will add Charity enough (a virtue so Eminent in your Ladyship,
as it is not to be Doubted of) to pardon the faults escaped in the Press, I
shall thread it to the rest of my Obligations; since though they cannot in a
Direct line be imputed to Me, yet by Reflection (as not having had a sufficient
Care to peruse the Proofs) they may seem to have an Influence upon Me; to
which I must plead, my not being in Town whilst the Press went, and that I
have made an Amends by printing an Errata, which I shall desire whosoever buys
this book, to see bound up with it for his better satisfaction.

Madam,

When to this Goodness, Piety, Loyalty, Judgment and Charity, the Honor shall
be added which you derive from that Noble Stock whence you are Immediately
descended, and that which you atcheive from that Ancient Stock of Honor into
which you are so happily Engrafted, I hope that my Choice of Dedication will by
all men be approved of: and I shall think my Labor very well Bestowed and
Highly Recompensed, if your Ladyship shall please to peruse this Rough-hewn
Copy at such Leasure-houres as I pend it; and if you shall find anything
therein which may make you think your Time that mean while not Misspent; or
which may sometimes bring the Humblest of your Servants into your Thoughts, He
shall have obtained the Height of his Ambition, who is,

Madam Whatsoever your Ladyship shall please to Create him, MONMOUTH.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
PRide has made so powerful an impression in the soul of man, as that all
the pains he suffers are not able to efface it. He is proud amidst his
Misfortunes; and though he have lost all those Advantages which caused
Vainglory in him, yet cease he not to be vainglorious amidst his
Miseries. He is still flattered in his Exile with those promises which the
Devil made him in Paradise: though he be slave to as many Masters as he has
Passions, yet he aspires to the Worlds Sovereignty; though his Doubts do
sufficiently prove his Ignorance, yet does he pretend Vult homo imitari Deum
sed perverse, non esse sub illius potestate, sed habere contra illum
potestatem. Aug. in Psalm. 60.
to the Knowledge of Good and Evil; and though all the Sicknesses which
assail him, teach him that he is Mortal, yet does he promise to himself
Immortality. But, that which is more insupportable, and which renders his fault
more insolent, is; that he hopes to arrive at all this happiness by his Own
Strength: he thinks nothing impossible to a creaure that is Free and Rational,
that his Good depends upon his Will; and that without any other help then what
he draws from Nature, he may acquit himself of his Losses, and Recover his
Innocence.

This Error being the Outmost of all our evils, Religion labors only how to
dis-abuse us therein, and all her Commandments and Advices tend only to make
us Sensible of our misfortune. The Sacrifices teach us that we have deserved
Death; the Law teaches us that we are Blind, and the Difficulty we find in
Keeping it does prove our Want of Power. Grace does yet more strongly insinuate
this truth unto us; sh: u^dertakes not to cure us, till she has persuaded us
that we are Sick; and the First thing which she makes us acknowledge, is our
Ignorance and Weakness. Nature, as proud as she is, agrees in this point with
Grace: her Disorders are so many Instructions, which will not suffer us to
doubt of our Miseries; the Neque enim sub Deo justo ^iser esse (...) potest,
(...) mer^tur. ^g. L. oper. (...).
Unfaithfulness of our Senses, our Passions revolt, and the Fighting of those
Elements which environ us, and whereof we are Composed, are Proofs which will
convince the most Opinionated.

It must also be confessed, that the Wisest Philosophers have acknowledged that
there was a Hidden Cause of all these Disorders; and being pressed by their
Consciences, they have confessed, that since Nature deals more hardly with Us
than with her Other Children, some secret fault must of necessity have been,
which has incensed her against us. The Platonists imagined, that our souls
were infused Poenam i^am esse quis dubitet? omnis autem poena si justa est
peccati poena est, and supplicium nominatur. D Aug. lib. 3. de Arbitr. cap. 18.
in o our Bodies, only to Expiate those sins on Earth, which they had committed
in Heaven; the Academicks did not differ much from their opinion, and though in
their complaints they did sometime lose that Respect which they ought to God
yet did they confess, that our Faults did precede our Miseries, and that the
Heavens were too Just to pun^h the Innocent.

Only the Stoics, whose whole Philosophy is enlivened with Vainglory, did
believe that if man were irregular, 'twas only because he Would be so; and that
as his Liberty had been the sole Cause of his Mischief, it might also be the
sole Remedy thereof: they imagined, that if he would take Nature and Reason for
his Bonum hominis, animus and ratio in animo perfecta: quid autem ab illo
exigis? rem facillimum, secundum Naturam vivere. Senec. Epist. 41.
guides, he might get again into the path of Virtue, from whence he had
Strayed, and that in so good a School, he might easily reform his Disorders
and recover his Innocence. Peligianisme may be said to have had its Original
ris^ with this proud Sect, and that diverse ages before Pelagius his birth,
Zeno and ^eneca had taken upon them the Defense of Corrupted Nature; for they
allotted all her disorders to man's Constitution and Education; no^ knowing any
other sins save such as be merely Voluntary, they were ignorant of that sin
which we inhe^ from our Ancestors, and which preceding our Birth, makes us
Crimin^ll ere we be Rational: they taught precepts to shun Sin, h^y framed a
method to acquire Virtue, and proposing no other helps to their Disciples then
Reason and Liberty, they upheld them in their Vain glory, and did not assist
them in their Weakness. These two Idols seemed powerful enough to overcome
all their Enemies, and not knowing that Reason was Blind, and Liberty a
Captive, they impudently affirmed that there were no Inclinations so Bad, nor
Habits so Obstinate, as might not be overcome by this weak assistance; they
boasted that their felicity depended upon their Own proper Power, that they
might be happy in Despite of Heaven, and that though their happiness were not
of so long Durance, yet was it of the same Tranquillity as that of God. Est
aliqu id quo sapiens antecedat Deum: ecce res magna habere imbecillitatem
hominis securitatem Dei. Senec. Epist. 44.


Amongst so many Impieties and Blasphemies which Pride extorted from out their
mouths, they (...) not sometime to betray their own cause, and publquely to
acknowledge their own Misery: For Nature, which cannot lie long, made them
find her disorders, and forced them to confess, that Faults were learnt
without Teachers, that we are Borne out of Order, and that we have much
Stronger inclinations to Vice then to Virtue.

Their Sect was borne down when the Pelagians raised up their Oblivione^ and
(...) non ^bjacere pec^ato quo^am ^on secun^um ^oluntatem sed secundum
necessitatem eveniunt Dogma suit. Pelagij.
heresy upon its ruins, and when undertaking to defend Corrupted Nature they
declared war against the Grace of Jesus Christ; they made all our Disorders
to pass for Natural Effects, they laughed at Original Sin and maintained that
Man had no Other off^nces then what he committed by his Own proper Will: they
thought all our Bad inclinat^ons sufficiently recompensed by Liberty, and
confiding strangely in their Own Strength, they would not be beholden to
Grace, to withstand Vice, nor to defend Virtue. Though Item victoriam nostram
non esse ex Dei adjutorio sed ex libero arbitrio.
St. Austin by his Learning and Humility has triumphed over this proud and
learned heresy, yet has it outlived that defeat, and found partakers after
his Death: we run into the errors thereof at unawares, we speak the Language
of the Pelagians, not having their Belief; and attributing more to Liberty, or
Free Will, then to Grace, we will be Our Selves, the Authors of our Salvation.

To remedy this evil, which appears, much more in our Actions then in our
Words, I thought it became me to represent the deplorable Condition whereinto
Sin had reduced Nature; and to make it evident in this work, that there is
no faculty of our Souls, nor part of our Bodies, which is not out of order.
The profit will not be small, if we can tell how to husband it well: for to
b^ot that our Misery will cause confusion in us by reason of our Sin, and
make us abborre it, 'twill lessen the haughty Confidence which we have in our
Free Will, and make us acknowledge the Need we have to be assisted by Crace:
the being sensible of our Malady, will be a Disposition to our Cure, and the
weight of our Irons may serve to heighten our Saviors Merits. The high opinion
we have of our Own strength, is injurious to His Glory, and those Vicinior est
^mmortalitati sanitas d^lentis quam stupor non sentientis A^g. in Psalm. 55.
good inclinations of Nature, which we call Seeds of Virtue, do not seem to
lessen Adams sin, save so far as to set a greater value upon the Grace of
Jesus Christ: but the perfect knowledge of our Misery, cannot but produce good
eff^cts: and when we shall be fully persuaded that we can do nothing that is
pleasing to God; without his Son's help, we will endeavor to obtain that
assistance by our Prayers, and to procure it by our Tears.

Following this design, I shall then make it appear, that there Lacrymae non
(...) sed merentur. Greg. Mag.
is an Original sin, which is the fruitful Springhead of all our
Misfortunes, and penetrating to within the Soul of Man, I will show that her
principal faculties retain no longer their first Purity, nor their anc^ent
Vigor, and that all the Virtues which are the Workmanship thereof, are
accompanied with so many Def^cts, as that they do not deserve the glorious
Name which they bear. From thence I shall descend to man's Body, the
Constitution and Miseries whereof I will examine. Then, quitting Man, I shall
consider all the Objects which do environ him, and which may cause Love or
Hatred in him. And concluding finally by the Disorders which are in the World,
I will show that the Parts whereof it is Composed, have been out of Order, only
since Sin: I Will prove that Deluges and Devastations by Fire, are punishments
which Divine Justice has invented to punish Guilty man withal; and will make
it clearly appear, as I hope, that there were no Monsters nor Poisons in the
State of Innocence.

I have in all this my work endeavored to mingle Eloquence with Doctrine; and
knowing that I was to be accountable t^ All the World, I have sometimes
suffered my thoughts to fly a Lower pitch, that they might be the more
intelligible: I have been of Est enim proprium Orato (...) and (...) q^. (...)
Lib. (...). de Officiis.
opinion that Descriptions did not injure Argumentations, and in writing like a
Christian Philosopher, I might b^ permitt^ed to play the Orator. If any man
shall think me too Copious, I am of His opinion; but to boot that this fault
wants neither Example nor Excuse; I have striven to use no manner of
Enlargement, but what would bring with it some New Light to the Understanding,
and which might serve for Ornament to the Truth, if not for her Defense.

A Table of the several Treaties and Discourses handled in this Book.
The first Treatise. Of Original Sin, and the effects thereof.
Discourse. 1 THat Faith acknowledges Original sin: That Nature has a
feeling thereof, and that Philosophy suspects it. Page 1 2 What the state of
Man was before sin. p 8 3 Of what kind the first sin which Adam committed was.
p. 12 4 How Adam sin did communicate it self to those that are descended from
him. p. 16 5 Of the nature of Concupiscence. p. 20 6 The pursuit of the same
subject, and diverse descriptions of Concupiscence. p. 26 7 That Self-love is
nothing else but Concupiscence. p. 28 8 That Concupiscence, or Self-love,
divides it self into the love of Pleasure, of Honor, and of Knowledge. p. 33
9 Wherefore Concupiscence remains i^ Man after Baptism. p. 38 10 That Gods
Justice has permitted that man should be divided within himself, for the
pun^shment of his sin. p. 42
The second Treatise. Of the corruption of the Soul by Sin.
Discourse. 1 OF the Souls Excellenc^, and of the miseries which she has
contracted by sin. p. 47 2 That the sonle is become a slave unto the body by
reason of sin. p. 55 3 Of the weakness which humane understanding has
contracted by sin. p. 61 4 That there is no error into which human
understanding has not plunged it self since the state of sin. p. 68 5 That
Reason in Man is become blind, and a slave since sin p. 77 6 That Memory has
lost her vigor by the means of sin, and that she agrees not very well with
Judgment. p. 80 7 That Concupiscence is neither a good Judge nor faithful
witness since sin. p. 86 8 Of the unrulinesse of the will and of its
inclination to Evil. p. 91 9 That the will, to be able to do good, must be
set free from the servitude of sin by the grace of Jesus Christ. p. 97 10 That
evil habits bereave the will of her liberty, by engaging her in Evil. p. 103
The third Treatise. Of the corruption of the Virtues.
Discourse. 1 APaneggrick of Moral Virtue. p. 109 2 That Moral Virtue has
her faults. p. 115 3 That vain glory is the soul of the Virtue of Infidels. p
122 4 That the Virtue of Infidels cannot be true. p 128 5 That Wisdom without
Grace, is blind, weak, and malignant. p. 134 6 That there is no true
Temperance nor Justice amongst the Pagans. p. 140 7 That the Fortitude of the
Pagans is but weakness or vanity. p. 149 8 That friendship without grace is
always interested. p. 156 9 That the uncertainty and obscurity of Knowledge
derives from si^ne. p. ^65 10 That Eloquence is an enemy to Reason, Truth, and
Religion. p, ^73
The fourth Treatise. Of the corruption of Man's Body by sin.
Discourse. 1 OF the Excellencies of Man's Body. p. 182 2 Of the Miseries of the
Body in general. p. 190 3 Of the Infidelity of the Senses p. 195 4 That the
Passions are fickle, or wild. p. 201 5 That the health of Man is prejudiced by
sickness. p. 207 6 (...) the Bodies beauty is become perishable and criminal.
p. 214 7 That the life of man is short and miserable. p. 225 8 That Death is
the punishment of sin. p. 231 9 What advantages we may draw from Death by
means of Grace. p. 237 10 That Sleep is a punishment of sin, as well as the
Image of Death; and that it bereaves us of Reason, as Dreams do of Rest. p.
243
The fifth Treatise. Of the corruption of all exterior Goods, called by the
name of FORTUNE
Discourse. 1 THat we must fear what we desire, and desire what we fear, p.
249 2 That Honor is no longer the rec^mpence of Virtue. p. 255 3 That
Greatness i^ attended by Slave^y and Vanity. p. 261 4 That the Birth and
Cruelty of Wa^re derives from sin. p. 270 5 That Riches render m^n poor and
sinful. p. 278 6 That since the loss of Innocence poverty is glorious. p. 284
7 That aparrell is a mark of sin. p. 290 8 That the shame which (...)
Nakedness, is a punishment for our offense. p. 296 9 That Build^ngs are the
work of necessity, pleasure, or vain. glory. 302 10 That the greatest part of
our pas^mes are occasions of sin. p. 3^
The sixth and last Treatise. Of the Corruption of all Creatures.
Discourse. 1 OF the beauty, greatness, and duration of the world. p. 319 2
That all creatures have lost some of their perfections. p. 328 3 That the Sun
has lost much of his light and virtue through sin. p. 335 4 That there is no
creature which men have not adored. p. 341 5 That all creatures do either tempt
or persecute man. p. 348 6 That it is more secure to sequester a man's self from
the creatures, than to make use of them. p. 355 7 That Deluges and Earthquakes
are the punishments of the world become corrupted. p. 361 8 That Thunder,
Plagues and Tempests, are the effects of sin. p. 368 9 That Monsters and
poisons are the workmanship of sin p. 377 10 That God will consume the world
corrupted by sin, that he may make a new world. p.
Of the Corruption of Nature by SIN: The First Treatise: Of Original Sin,
and the Effects thereof.
The First Discourse.
That Faith acknowledges Original Sin: That Nature has a feeling thereof:
and That Phylosophie suspects it.

THough man's misery witness his sin, and that to believe he is guilty,
suffices to prove his misery; yet is there no one Truth in Christian Religion,
more strongly withstood by prophanePhylosophers then is this; she cannot allow
of a chastisement which punishes the father in his children, neither can she
conceive a sin which precedes our reason as well as our birth; She appeals
from so rigorous a decree, and thinks to defend Gods cause in pleading ours:
She attributes all our disorders to our constitution, she imputes our errors
to our education, and the greatest part of our irregularities to the bad
employing of our time: She Errasti, si existimas nobiscum vitianasci
supervenerunt ingesta sunt. Sen. Epist. 94.
opposes experience by arguing, and what ever misery she makes trial of she
will not acknowledge the cause; she thinks a man may herein defend himself by
reason, and that there being no sin which is natural, neither is there any
which may not be amended by will alone: she makes use of the examples of
Socrates, Aristides, and Cato: she opposes these Sages to our Saints, and
pretends that the works of Nature yield not to those of Grace: Briefly, she
corrupts the purity of our belief by the subtilty of her reasoning; and
whereas Christians ought to convert all Philosophers, some Christians are
perverted by Philosophers. We confess Original sin because we dare not deny
it; We avow that it has bereft us of Grace, but assure our selves that it has
left us an entire Liberty; We confess it has robbed us of our innocence, but
maintain that we may recover our innocence by the means of reason, and that if
we cannot merit heaven, we may at least secure our selves from hell: We admire
the famous Actions of Infidels; our eyes are dazzled with the luster they
receive from the writings of Philosophers; we side, at unawares, with Nature
against Grace, and through an inconsiderate zeal: We will have their delusive
virtues rewarded with a true happiness.

Yet notwithstanding to believe original sin, is one of the prime Articles of
our Faith; if Adam were not guilty; Jesus Christ was not necessary; and if
Humane nature be yet in her first purity, it is in vain that we seek a Savior:
Hence In causa duorum hominum quorum per unuro venum detisumus sub peccato, per
^lterum redimimur a peccatis proprie fides Christiana Consistit. Aug. lib de
peccato. Origin. cap. 24
it is that the great Apostle of the Gentiles does so often in his Epistles
oppose sin to grace; servitude to freedom; and Adam to Jesus Christ; he is
pleased to represent unto us the disorders of Nature, to make us admire the
effects of Grace, and he glories in his Infirmities, the more to heighthen the
advantages of Redemption, He teaches us that we are conceived in sin, and that
at our first entrance into the world we are the objects of Gods wrath. He
shows us that Adams sin is shed abroad throughout mankind, That his Malady is
become a contagion, and that all the Children that do descend from this
unfortunate Father are Criminal, and Miserable. The Prophets agree with the
Apostles, and this truth is not much less Evident in the Old Testament then in
the New. The most patient and most afflicted of al men co^plaines of the
misfortunes of his birth, and makes such just imprecations against the moment
wherein he was conceived, as we may easily conceive, he thought it not void of
fault. David Pereat dies in qua natu^ sum, and nox in qua dictum est conceptus
est homo. Job 3.
confesses he was conceived in sin, and that though he were born in lawful
Matrimony, his birth cease not to be shamefully sinful.

The Church confirms this truth unto us, by as many Paradoxes, as the
instructions are, which she gives us. And knowing that her words serves for
laws unto her Children, she is pleased to tell us, that Adam's sin is ours,
That the miseries which we undergo, are the punishments of his disobedience,
That Divine Justice has condemned us in Him: That our misfortune and His sin
did precede our Birth, And that contrary to all the Laws of Morality, we be
guilty before we are reasonable. Faith persuades us to these Truths, and
without troubling our selves to seek Proofs to strengthen them, we in all
humility believe what we cannot evidently know; But because Philosophy is a
Rebel to Faith, and that she is more swayd by reason, then by the Authority of
the Church, I will convince her by reason, and make her confess, that we could
not be irregular, if we were not guilty.

All Philosophers confess, Princeps and Domina carnis naturaliter anima est
quae domare carnem debet and regere. August. contra Julian, lib. 2. cap. 8.
That man is Composed of a body and soul, And that when Divine Providence did
first form him, she mingled Beast with Angel, and that she gathered Heaven
and Earth together to finish her Noblest piece of workmanship. If Passion have
not prevailed over reason in these great men, they must confess that when God
did this his Chiefest work, he did so well accord the two Parts which went to
the Composition thereof, as that the body obeyed the soul, and the Angel
commanded over the Beast. They must acknowledge that God observed the same Order
in the Composing of man, as he did in the making of the world, and that as he
submitted the Earth to the Influences of the Heavens, he did likewise assubject
Passion to reason, and the Appetite to the will. And since they observe this
decent order to be no longer kept, they ought necessarily to infer, that sin is
the cause thereof, And that man has lost these advantages only because he has
not preserved his Innocence. For what likelihood is there, that two Parts
joined together, should not endure one another, that they should mutually love
and hate each other, that the flesh should wage war with the soul, which gives
it life, and that the soul should complain of the others insolency, which
serves her as an Officer or Abetter, Etiam sine magistro vi^ia disc^. Seneca
lib. 3. quaest. c. 30.
whence is it that our inclinations are out of Order, before we have acquired
any bad Habits, that our faults precede evil examples, that we know what evil
is, not having learned it, and that the soul follows the inclinations of her
body, before she has tasted the delights thereof: whence is it, that sin is
natural to us, that in us it preceeds the use of reason, that notwithstanding
all its deformities, it becomes pleasing, and that virtue with all her
comeliness seem austere unto us. Certainly, he who shall conceive aright, the
reason thereof, will be obliged either to blame Divine Providence, or else to
condemn the sinfulness of the first man, who losing original Justice,
deprived all his Children thereof, And who making us inherit his disorders,
made us criminal, before rational.

The Moral Virtues, which Philosophers boast so much off, do authorize the
belief of original sin. For though they persuade themselves, that man by the
assistance thereof may overcome sin; and that God did not Compose him of two
rebellious Parts, save only to increase his merit, and to leave unto him the
glory of finishing it; yet the use of virtue does sufficiently prove his
irregularity, and it is sufficient to acknowledge that he was born guilty,
since we know he is obliged to become virtuous. For virtue is not a production
of Nature, but an invention of Art, she is not infused, but acquired, and the
Pains she causes, fully equal the Pleasures which she promises. She
presupposes that man is out of order, since she has a design to reform him,
and that he is sick since she endeavors to cure him. All her exercises are so
many Combats, all her enemies are born in the very Place where she sets upon
them, and the industry she is forced to make use off to drive them thence, does
sufficiently witness that they govern there before her; in effect man is weak,
before he has acquired fortitude, he is foolish before wise, and ere
temperate, unchaste, his virtues are proofs of his vices, his last victories are
signs of his former defeats, and the succor which he is enforced to seek for,
from without himself, is a witness of his disorder and weakness. This it was
that made Conit^ntia tam concupiscentiae testis est quam host is. August.
St: Augustine say, that continency is as well a witness as an enemy of
concupiscence, and that althose glorious habits which fight against our sins do
manifest them.

If virtue make us suspect our misery, the Creatures revolt makes us know our
sinfulness; and he who shall consider that man is in the world, as in an
enemies Country, will have no great difficulty to judge that he is Criminal.
Reason unasisted by Faith is sufficient to make us Comprehend that man is the
Image of God; (...) That he is g Itaque foeliciter homo natus jacet manibus
pedibusque devinctis, flens animal caeteris imperaturum and a suppliciis vitam
vispicatur unam tantum ob culpam quia natum est. Plin. lib. 6. proem.
his Lieutenant upon Earth, That all Creatures owe him homage, and that he
ought to Reign in the World: either as a visible Angel, or as a Mortal God.
The Place he bears in the Universe challenges this Advantage; and reason
which raises him above Beasts, gives him the Sovereignty over them, since all
things are made for his use, all must be submitted to his will. And since he
must Reign with God in Heaven, he must begin to Reign for him upon the Earth;
This notwithstanding all Creatures make war upon him, they deal with him,
rather as with a Tyrant, then Lawful Sovereign: They obey him not, but by
Force, And it is easy to be seen, That having lost the right that he had over
them, he co^ands them, now, only by violence, if he draw any service from
beasts, its after having been either their Slave, or their Tyrant. If Omnis
creatura pugnabit contra insensatos.
the earth be fruitful, its after having been watered with his sweat, and rent
in pieces by the Plough; If the Sea bear his vessels it is not without threatening
them with shipwreck. If Air contribute to his respiration, it suffers also
corruptions, whereby to form contagions, and sicknesses; If the wind fills his
sails, it also raises Tempests, and drownes his vessels, If fire serve him in
all his Arts, it mingles it self with Thunder, and takes revenge for all the
Injuries it has received from him.

This general insurrection is a token and punishment of his offense, had he
preserved his integrity he had never lost his Authority, and had he not fallen
from his innocence he had never forgon his Throne. Philosophy as haughty as she
is, cannot deny but that man is the prey of wild beasts, and the victime of
their fury, that he is exposed to the rigor of the Air, and to the
unseasonableness of the weather, she must confess that he has no subject which
is not rebellious, that there is no place within his Territories which is not
his enemy, and there is no part of his body which is not either disobedient or
unfaithful to him, whence proceeds this disorder, if not from his sin whence
proceeds so universal a rebellion, if not from his disobedience, and why
should he have lost his authority in the world, if he had not lost his
innocence, which was the foundation thereof, I very well know that Philosophers
who knew not the state of sin, endeavor to excuse this insurrection, alleging
it is natural, but who sees not the excusing of man, is to blame God, and that
to leave innocence, to the Creature, is to bereave God of his Providence: The
Elements began not to prosecute man, till he became criminal, and God is so
good and just as he would not have made him subject (...) poena, (...) ^sta est
pe^ poena est and supplicium nominatur. Porro quia de omnipotentia Dei and
justitia dubitare dementis est justa haec poena est, and pro peccato aliqup
ponditur. Aug lib 2. de lib. arbit. c. 18.
to these sufferings, had he not found him guilty. His Sovereignty never gives
against his justice, he makes such moderate use of his power as he never
injures his Providence, what ever power he may justly challenge over the
Creature, he condemns it not till it has offended, who will not then term this
unruliness of the seasons a punishment, who will not esteem the earths
sterility, the like, who will not believe but that the Pestilences and
Earthquakes, Deluges and Punishments by fire, are the just rewards of sin,
more ancient then all these disorders; we must also avow that the wisest
Philosophers have acknowledged that there was one cause of all these disorders,
and though they neither knew the wickedness nor the name thereof, they have
known it by its effects. Aristotle Exhum (...) v^tae erroribus and aerumnis
fit, ut verum sit illud quod est apud Aristotelem, sic nostros animos cum
corporibus copulatos ut vivos cum mortuis esse conjunctos. Cicer. in Hor^s.
who may be termed the Genius of Nature, who loved her so passionately, took
such pains to study her and so carefully considered her, has guest at the
cause of all the disorders which he observed in her workmanship; He wonders
that man cannot tame his passions; that being victorious every where else he is
conquered by himself, and that the soul has not strength nor dexterity to
triumph over her body, he cannot comprehend how the noblest workmanship of
Nature should be a Monster, that the senses should be unfaithful, and passions
disobedient, and that reason, which is her light should be obfuscated with so
many darknesses, he cannot conceive that man being free, should be a slave to
so many masters that being furnished with knowledge, he should be engaged in
errors, and that being assisted by so many virtues, he should be withstood by
so many vices, had he durst have condemned the Diety, he would have found fault
with the workmanship thereof, wavering between Religion and impiety, he admires
what he knows not, he suspects what he cannot discover, he guesses at what he
cannot find, and amidst these doubts he confesses that there is some hidden
cause which has produced these disorders; what could a Philosopher say more,
who had only been instructed ^n the School of Nature? what could a man imagine
who never having been enlighted by the beams of Faith, was equally ignorant of
Adams innocence and guilt; if he be ignorant of the name of concupiscence? does
not he acknowledge the nature thereof: and if he know not the cause of
original sin, has he not observed the effects thereof?

Cicero, Hominem ^on ut a matre sed ut a noverea natura editum in vitam corpore
nudo, fragili infirmo* animo antem anxio ad molestiam humili ad timo^es molli
ad labores* prono ad libidies: Rem vidit Cicero causam nescivit. lib. 4. contra
Jul. c. 12
who is no less a Philosopher in his Academick discourses, then Orator in his
Orations, complains that Nature is man's Stepdame; that she has bin negligent
in the Masterpiece of her workmanship, and that as envying his happiness, she
has given him a body exposed to the injury of the Air, to the malice of
Maladies, and to the Insolences of Fortune, that she has lodged an unhappy
soul, overborn with pains, abashed by fear, faint in labor, and unruly in
her delights, in so frail a body: which has made Saint Augustine confess, that
this great Philosopher had the Cognizance of sin, though he knew not its name,
and that he acknowledged the effects of a Cause which he could not discover.
Thus reason without faith seems to have found out original sin; And Philosophy
which makes Nature a Diety has been enforced to accuse the disorderliness
thereof, and to impute unto her the faults, whereof the first man was Author.

Seneca in whose person was united the pride of a Stoic, and vainglory of a
Spaniard, and who confesses no weakness, save such, as he can neither excuse
nor conceal, after having pleaded in the behalf of Nature, is obliged to
forsake her, he acknowledges in a thousand parts of his Writings, that sin is
natural unto us, and that Philosophy is not sufficient to save us from a
Monster, which constitutes a part of ourselves. I Nulli r^s vitio natura
conciliat, nos illa integros, ac liberos genuit. Sen. Epist. 94.
know that he varies in his opinions, that Pride makes him revoke such
Confessions as truth has extorted from out of his mouth and pen, that he
complains that we live not as we were born, that we do not preserve those
advantages that Nature has given us, and that seduced by error, or corrupted
by example. Cito nequitia subrepit: virtus diffi ili^ inventus est Lib. 3.
quaest. natural. cap. 3.
We commmit errors which she detests, but he quickly alters his mind, and
being pressed by his own conscience, he avows that virtue is a stranger, vice
natural to us: he confesses that the first men were not more innocent then
we, save only in that they were more ignorant; that they had not as yet opened
the bowels of the earth, to enrich themselves with her spoils, nor killed
beasts to satisfy their appetites, but that they even then had the principles
of all these crimes in their souls, and that there is great difference between
a man who has not the knowledge of evil, and him who has not a desire
thereunto. Had Quid ergo ign^atia re^ innocenntes erant. Multum autem interest
utrum peccare aliquis nolit an nesciat. S^n. Epist 90. sub finem.
this Philosopher read our Histories, and had he learnt from Moses what past
in the beginning of the World; he had plainly seen that vice comes not by
degrees, as does virtue, and that corrupted Nature is a Mistress good enough to
teach us, what is ill in giving us life. Murder was Cain's Aprentisage, and
the Impieties which we detest have dishonored the first ages as well as they
do ours, since man was irregular, he became capable of all vice, and since he
lost Original Justice, he is fallen into all sort of disorders. We polish sins,
we invent them not; we commit them with more pomp, not with more wickedness,
we only add ornament thereunto. And in a word, we are not more faulty then our
forefathers, but more industrious.

In fine, if it be lawful to make use of Fables to strengthen Truth, and to
beat down lies by Poets who are the Authors thereof, I see not a better draught
of a man born in sin then that which is represented to us by the Tragoedian in
his Thebais. For Infanti quoque decreta mors est, fata quis tam tristia
sortitus unquam, videram nondum diem and jam tenebar. Mors me antecessit,
aliquis intra viscera materna lethum precocis sati ^lit, sed numquid and
peccavit? Thebaid. Senec.
Oedipus recounting the Story of his Misfortunes complains that his death
preceded his birth, that his sin preceded his reason, that nature feared him,
before she had brought him into the world, that by a strange prodigy he had
committed sins before he knew what sin was, that the Heavens whose decrees are
so just had declared him criminal, before he was endued with reason, and that
his father being a servant to divine justice, had punished him as soon as his
mother had brought him into the world. After this crowd of reasons and
authorities, I know not what can be said against the belief of original sin,
who can deny an evil, of whose effects all men have a fellow-feeling; Since
all Philosophers before they knew what name to give it, knew the nature
thereof, and all the complaints they have made of our miseries, in their
Writings, are so many testimonies born by them to the truth of our Religion.

The second Discourse.
What the state of man was before Sin.

THough there be nothing more opposite to the state of sin, then the state of
innocence, there is not any thing notwithstanding, which better discovers unto
us the disorders thereof, and it seems to be a true looking glass, wherein we
may see all the other deformities. To know the greatness of man's misery, we
must know the height of his happiness; and to know with what weight he fell we
must know the height of his dignity. Man was created with original
righteousness; his Divine^ Quality made a part q Adam sactus est homo, potuit
esse aliud quam factus est. ^ctus est enim justus and potuit esse injust us.
Aug. in Se^m. contra dictnm Maxim. in append.
of his being, and seemed to be the last of his differences. Reason and Grace
were not as yet divided, and man finding his perfection in their good
Intelligence, was at once both Innocent and rational: Since sin has bere^t
him of this privilege, he seems to be but half himself, though he has not
changed Nature, he has changed condition, though he be yet free, he has less
power in his own person then in the world; And when he compares himself with
himself, hardly can he know himself. In the state of innocence nothing was
wanting to his perfection, nor felicity; and whilst he preserved original
righteousness, he might boast to have possessed the springhead of all that was
good. It Was this that united him to God; and which submitting him to his Creator
submitted all Creatures unto him; it was this that accorded the soul with the
body, and which pacifying the differences which Nature has placed between two
such contrary parties, made them find their happiness in agreement, this it
Adam Deo suo a quo erat conditus rectus, nullo prorsu^ virio depravatus
ads^abat, Lib. 1. imperf. contra Jul. number. 46.
was in fine which displaying certain beams of light about his Countenance,
kept wild beasts in obedience and respect. In this happy condition man was only
for God, he found his happiness in his duty, he obeyed with delight, and as
Grace made up the perfection of his being, it was not much less natural for
him to love God, then to love himself, he did both these Actions by one and the
same Principle. The love of himself differed not from the love of God, and the
operations of Nature and of Grace, were so happily intermingled, that in
satisfying his Necessities, he acquitted himself of his duty, and did as many
holy Actions, as natural and rational ones. He Hac pralia numquam and numquam
ess^nt si Natura nostra sicut recta creata est permaneret. Aug. lib. 22. de
Civit. cap. 23.
sought God and found him in all things; much more happy then we, he was not
bound to separate himself from himself, that he might unite himself to his
Creator. Godliness was practiced without pain, Virtue was exercised without
violence: and that which costs us now so much trouble, cost him nothing but
desires: there needed no combats to carry away victory, nor was there any need
to call in virtue, to keep passions within their limits. Obedience was easy
to them, nor is Rebellion so natural unto them now, as was then submission.
This Grace Hae igitur parts ira atque libido in paradiso ante peccatum
vitiosae non eran^, non (...) ^ (...) ad ^ (...), ^de ne^ esse* (...) ^as ra^
t^mquam ^renis re^ (...). (...) quod nun^ (...), (...) e^t u^que (...) ^x natu^
sed (...) ^x (...). A^g. (...). 14 (...) cap. ^9.
which bound the soul unto the body with bonds as strong as pleasing, united
the senses to the Spirit, and assubjected the passions to reason. Morality was
a Natural science; or if it were infused, it was togetther with the soul, and
every one would have been eased of the Pain of acquiring it, all men were born
wise, Nature would have served them for a Mistress, and they would have been so
knowing even from their births, as they would not have needed either Counsel
or Instruction. Original righteousness governed their understanding, guided
their wills, enriched their memories, and after having done such wonders in
their souls, it wrought as many Ille vero pri^ Adam nulla ^li (...) a^ ^sus s^
s^m tentatus illo be^udmis l^o su^ secum ^ace ^uebatur. August. lib. de co^
upt. and gratia cap 11.
Prodigies in their bodies; for it accorded the elements whereof they were
Composed, it hindered the waters from undertaking any thing against the fire:
tempered their qualities, appeased their differences, and did so firmly unite
them, as nothing could sever them. Man knew only the name of death; and he had
this of comfort, that he knew it was the Punishment of a fault, from which if
he would, he might defend himself. All nourishments were to pure that there was
nothing superfluous in them, Natural heat was so vigorous, as it converted all
into the substance of the body, and was in all other respects so temperate as
it was not prejudicial to the radical moisture. Man felt nothing
incommodious; and Prudence Sicut in paradiso nullus aestus aut ^rigus, sic in
^jus habitatore null la ex ^piditate vel ti^e bonae voluntatis of^nsio. Aug.
lib. 14* de Civit. cap. 16.
was so familiar to him, as he prevented hunger and Thirst before they could
cause him any trouble; in his person and in his State, he enjoyed a peaceful
quiet, and he was upon good Terms with himself, and with his subjects, because
he was the like with his Sovereign, he waited for his reward without anxiety,
and grounding himself upon the truth of his Creators promises, he hoped for
happiness without disquiet. Death was not the way to life: there needed no
descending to the earth, to mount up to the heavens; the soul fore-went not the
body to enjoy her God, and these two parts never having had any variance, were
jointly to taste the same felicity. But when the Devil had cozened the woman,
and that the woman had seduced the man he fell from this happy condition, and
losing Grace, which caused all his good, he fell into the depth ofall evils.
He received a wound which hecould never yet be cured of, he saw himself bereft
of his best part, and De^rat me Adam and in^e (...) s^, and (...) qu^a ^il pot^
sin^ (...). Aug. (...). 11. d^ v^ro. (...)
could not conceive how being no longer righteous, he continued to be
rational, and left us in doubt whether he was yet man, being no longer
Innocent. His Illuminations forsook him together with Grace, self-love came in
the place of Charity, He who before sought nothing but God, began now to seek
himself; And he who grounded his happiness upon his obedience, would build his
felicity upon Rebellion, as soon as his soul rebelled against God, his body
rebelled against his soul; these two parts changed their love to hatred, and
those who lived in so tranquil a peace declared open war one against another,
the senses which were guided by the understanding favored the bodies revolt,
and the passions which were subject to reason, contemned her Empire, to inslave
themselves to the Tyranny of Opinion.

If man were divided in his person, he was not more fortunate in his condition,
wherein he underwent a General Rebellion, the Beasts lost their respects, they
all became Savage, and violence, or Art is required to the taming of some of
them, the Elements began to mutiny H^ autem bellum nomquam ullum esset si
Natura humana ^er liberum arbitrium in rectitudine in qua facta est
persti^isset. Aug lib. 21. de Civit. cap. 15.
and following their own inclinations they broke the peace which they had sworn
unto, in behalf of man whilst Innocent, the Seasons grew unseasonable to hasten
the death of man grown guilty, the very heavens altered their Influences, and
losing their purity suffered some change, thereby to revenge the outrages done
to God amidst somany disorders, nothing so much afflicted man as his domestic
evils, he defended himself from wild beasts by force* he gained the rest by
wiles, he saved himself from the Injuries of the Air, by Clothes and houses.
He by his labor overcame the sterility of the earth, he opposed dikes to the
fury of the sea, and if he could not calm the waves thereof, he found means to
overcome her storms, and to triumph over her tempests, he invented Arts to
allay the miseries of his life, after having fenced himself from necessity, he
sought out pleasure; he would occasion his happiness, from his loss as it
were thereby to upbraid Gods Justice, he changed one part of his pains into
pleasures, but he could not reform the disorders, neither of soul, nor body;
for all he could do, he could find no salve for the sickness of his soul, and
though his haughtines made him hope for help from Philosophy, he could never
reconcile himself, either to God, or himself. After having lost the knowledge
of the true God, he framed Idols to himself, weary of having adored the
workmanship of his hands, he adored the workmanship of his fancy, after having
offered Incense to all Creatures, he became his own Idolater; and forgetting
the shame of his birth, the miseries of his life, and the rigor of death, he
would have Temples and Altars. When his madness would allow of any
intermissions, he acknowledged the the danger of his disease, and forct
thereunto by pain and shame, he sought for remedies, but selflove wherewith he
was blinded, rendered all his cares useless through a capricheousnesse which
cannot be conceived, he cherished the evils which afflicted him, and preserving
the desires which he had in his Innocence, he would find the accomplishment
thereof, in his guiltiness, he was persuaded that he should find in himself
what he had lost in God, and that assisted by a vain Philosophy, he should make
himself fortunate in the midst of his misfortunes. Nothing did more cross his
Cure, then this insolent belief, and nothing did more offend the Grace of Jesus
Christ, then his confiding in his own reason and Liberty. God permitted him to
lament a long time, to the end that he might be sensible at leisure of his
malady, and Divine goodness deferred his deliverance, only to make him
confess his faultiness, he in vain labored all that he could, before he would
be brought to co^fess his misery, and he sought for help from Nature, before he
would implore aid from Grace, he sought out all the means he thought fitting to
Cure himself of so vexatious a Malady, and had it not been for despair, he had
never found out the way to health, but when he saw that Conquerors for all
their power could not deliver him; that Philosophers could not by all their
reasons Comfort him, and that Orators could not lessen his evils by their
words; he betook himself to God, and the misery he endured made him know that
nothing but the hand that had hurt him, could heal him.

The third Discourse.
Of what kind the first Sin which ADAM committed was.

THe two first sins of the World are the most unknown, and Divines which agree
in so many differing subjects have not as yet been able to agree in this. They
know that the Angels and man, are become Criminal, but they know not what the
nature of their fault is. They know that both of them have violated the laws of
God, and that over-weaning their own perfections they have not sufficiently
prized the perfections of their Creator they very well know that neither of
them have preserved their Innocence; and that weakness (which is inseparable
from the Creature) has been the cause of their Fall, but they know not what
name to give to this sin, nor under what degree to rank this crime, which
has caused so much Mischeife, Some think that the offense Committed by the
Angel was so General, as in the extent thereof it includes all other offenses,
that he flew from God by all the ways it was possible for him to estrange
himself from him, that using the utmost ofhis power he grew guilty ofall the
wickedness; which so enlightened a spirit was capable of: whence it is that the
holy Scriptures; to teach us the truth thereof, terms his fault sometimes
Murder, sometimes Adultery, sometimes Rebellion, though man be not so Active
as the Angel, and that his soul confined within his body, be slower in her
operations, yet there have been some Divines, who has given the same Judgment
of both their sins, and who have persuaded themselves that Adam by one only
offense, became guilty of all sins, that the law which was proposed unto him,
containing in it an Abridgment of all Laws, he could not violate it without
violating all the rest; that his disobedience, under one only name Comprehended
all sins, and that by one only attempt he Nam and superbia illio est quia
homini in sua potius esse quam in Dei potestate dil^xit, and sacrilegium qu^
Deo non credidit, homicidium quia se praecipitavit in mortem, sornicatio
spiritualis quia integritas mentis human^ serpenti^ persuasione corrupt^est
surtum quia cibus prohibitus usurpat^ est, and avaritia quia plusquam sufficere
sibi debuit appetiit. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 45.
Committed Adultery by failing in his fidelity to God; Theft by taking a fruit
which did not belong unto him: Sacrilege by abusing his will which was consecrated
to God: and Paracide, by occasioning death unto his soul, and unto the souls of
all his Children. Though this be a strange opinion, yet the worthiness of the
Author, makes me put a valuation upon it, for it is S. Augustine; yet in the
rigor of reason, it is hard to conceive, that manssoul had so much of sight,
as that in one sole action it committed so many sins. These sins which are
imputed to man, are rather the effects then parts of his disobedience; and if I
may be permitted to speak my sense after the Chief of all Divines, I should
conceive that S Augustines design was, rather to satisfy his eloquence then
the truth; and that making use of a figure which is so frequent amongst
Orators, he would aggravate Adams sin to make us detest it.

Some others have been of opinion that Pride was the sin of the Angel, and of
man that these two Noble Creatures puffed up with their own perfections, aspired
after Divinity, and that vain glory, which is always accompanied by blindness,
had persuaded them that being already Ipsi primi homines per serp^tem decepti
and dejecti (...) fuissent nisi plus quam acceper^t habere, and plusquam facti
^rant esse voluissent: hic qui^ promis^rat dicens eritis sicut Dii. Plus au^em
volentes habere quam acceperant and quod acc^unt amiserunt. Aug. in Psalm. 118.
immortal, they might easily make themselves Gods. But I cannot think that
such a thought could fall into the mind either of the Angel, or of man, they
were induced with too much knowledge, not to know that the Creature cannot
equal the Creator in Majesty, that the degrees of their separation are
infinite, and that wishes are never made for things absolutely impossible, how
could that desire of making himself God, ever enter into the imagination of an
Angel; Since Theology confesses that they could never suspect the Mystery of
the Incarnation, and that without being enlightened by Glory or by Faith, they
never could have thought that God could make himself man, or man become God;
other Divines have therefore rather chosen to believe, that the Mystery of the
Incarnation, was the occasion of the Angels sin, and that having learnt by
Revelation, that God was to allye himself to humane Nature, he could not
tolerate that the Angelical Nature should be deprived of this honor;
imagining that the Angels did very well deserve whatsoever dignity God would
confer upon man.

Others have thought that self-love was the sin both of the Angel and of man;
that seeing themselves so perfect, they grew in love with themselves; that
forgetting the greatness of God, they considered only their own beauty, that
they made an Idol of their own understandings; c Prim^ hominis perditio a^or
sui. Sermon. 47. de diversis; c^p 2.
that not envying Gods perfections, they sought for all their happiness within
themselves, and that rather by an Amorous, then Proud blindness, they
endeavored to find out their contentment in the Possession of their own
advantages. If it be not rashness to go about to discover what our leaders
have been ignorant of, and if a man may divide that which has neither parts
nor moments, I would say that the sin of man, and of the Angel is neither
single, nor yet Composed of all sins: as S. Augustine affirms, weakness
which is so natural to the Creature, was, as it were, the disposition
thereunto, negligence the beginning, self-love the ensuing, or progress, and
Pride the accomplishment thereof; weakness is so natural to the Creature, as
to free it thereof, it must suffer change and be raised above itself; Grace,
(whose effects are so many miracles) dares not undertake to free the Creature
from it: there is nothing but Glory which can fix the fancy of the Creature,
and take from it that Inconstancy which is the cause of all it is offenses. We
acknowledge none but Jesus Christ to be void of sin; The Angel, and man, not
being raised to this height of happiness, we must not wonder if they be
fallen, and if those which proceeded ex nihilo, did not defend themselves from
sin, every perishable Creature may become Criminal, that which may lose its
being may lose Grace, and what cannot preserve it self in Nature, will have
much a do to preserve it self in innocence. Weakness then prepared that
Angel and man to sin, and these two noble Creatures became faulty, only because
they were not unchangeable, negligence begun the fault which weakness had
prepared, they made not use of all the grace which they had received, they left
a vacuum in their being which made place for sin, they did not employ all the
advantages which they had received from God, and deserved to lose them, for
having neglected them, as this fault was yet but an omission, it might have
been expiated by humility, and by abasing themselves before God, it may be they
might have obtained pardon, they became Idolaters at unawares, and framed vain
Idols to themselves out of the workmanship of God. This fault was already well
grown, and the Angel and men were guilty of having turned their eyes from
Divine perfections, to settle them upon their own advantages, yet did they only
love those beauties which God had placed in them, they might have adored his
Image in these Looking-glasses, and have returned to the Springhead by these
Rivolets, and by these beams have raised themselves up to the Sun: but Pride
finished their fault, they grew proud of Gods favors, their vainglory
proceeded from his grace; that which should have submitted them to their
Creator, was cause of their Rebellion, and the more they were beholding unto
him, the less were they acknowledging from the times they thought themselves
able to reign without him, they would reign in despite of him, and as soon as
they had raised up a Throne unto themselves, they would have Subjects, the
Angel got a party in heaven, he debauched some of his companions, he made
slaves of his equals, and these excellent Spirits were not ashamed to adore a
creature; which though it were more elevated, was not less dependent upon God
then were the rest: Rebellion did not, not withstanding, disperse it self
throughout all their Orders, the number of the faithful exceeded that of the
revolters: Michael courageously opposed himself to Lucifer, and be it that he
made good use of his graces, or that he received addition thereunto, he kept
the greater part of the Angels in their obedience, and drove the Rebels from
the Empyerean Heaven. Man was more absolute in his unjust design, for his sin
became the sin of all his offspring, not any one opposed himself to his
blind fury, those who lived in him, and descended from him, were guilty of his
Rebellion, they lost themselves together with their unfortunate Father; they
suffered for a sin which they could not hinder; they found themselves engaged
in death, before they knew life, and wondered that not being reasonable, they
were already criminal. This sin which shed it self like a contagion became the
Springhead of error in the World. The greatest part of Heretics have
withstood it, and the pride of Philosophy, wherewith they were puffed up, would
not permit them to confess a disorder, which would have forced them to be
humble; Catholics believe it, though they conceive it not; Faith teaches them
what reason cannot persuade them unto, and they care not though they be
esteemed ignorant, so long as they may be esteemed faithful: They find by
experience that man is become guilty, but they know not how he has contracted
this crime, they dispute not the malady, but cannot comprehend by what secret
ways the Father has communicated it to his children, and the children have
received it from their father: This is that which we will examine in the
pursuit of this Treatise.

The fourth Discourse.
How ADAM'S sin did communicate it self to those that are descended from him.

IT must be acknowledged that there is nothing more hidden, nor any thing more
known, then Quo nihil est ad praedicandum notius, nihil ad intelligendum
secretius. Aug. de morib. ^les. cap. 22.
Original Sin, unruly nature is an evident proof thereof, men's wicked
inclinations do sufficiently witness it, and it is easily to be conjectured,
that so unfortunate a creature cannot be innocent. But, certainly, the way how
this sin sheds it self through mankind, and passes from the father into the
children, is extremely unknown; all that is said of it does but weakly prove
it, and after having listened to reason we must betake our selves to the light
of Faith: Doubtless, Saint Augustine is he who has written the worthiest
thereupon, his proofs are efficacious, his discourses solid, if he had as well
established the belief of Original Sin as that of concupisence, all men would
be convinced; and we might as easily make Philosophers believe Adam's fault, as
the irregularity of Nature; for all men see that Fathers communicate their
diseases, to such as do descend from them; that the Quemadmodum Aethiopes quia
nigri sunt nigros gignunt, non tam^ in filio parents colorem suum velut ^icam
(...) anserunt, sed su^ co^is qua li^ate corpus quod de illis propagatur of
ficiunt. (...) ib. 5. contra jul. cap 24.
Aethiopians Complexion appears in their childrens visages, that there are
maladies which are more hereditary in Families then are possessions, and that
there are men which suffer for their fathers debaucheries; we must not wonder
if we partake of their diseases since we are composed of their substance, and
since our bodies are a part of theirs; it is easily conceived that their
maladies may become ours: but being bound by faith to believe that the soul is
the workmanship of God, that she is not drawn from forth the matter of the
body, though she be enclosed therein, and that she is a pure spirit, though she
does inanimate her body; It is almost impossible to make us discern how she
becomes criminal when she is thereinto infused, she is altogether pure whilst
in her Authors hands, and she becomes not guilty till she becomes the bodies
form. I very well know that she is infused as soon as created, and that the
same hand which has extracted her out of nothing, has bound and fastened her
to the body: but I know not why the father, who contributes nothing to her
production, should contribute to her pollution, and wherefore since he gives
not life unto her, he should make her inherit his sin. Divines are much
perplexed with this difficulty, and touching the resolution thereof, Saint
Austin has oft-times doubted, whether the soul were not produced by
generation, as well as the body, all his reasons seem to be grounded upon this
belief, he will have it that the body does infect the soul, and generation is as
it were the channel of sin, which has corrupted us. He grounds three
principles which do produce three several effects in man; God which has Qui
nascitur and ex Deo quia creat, and ex homine quia generat, and ex peccato
quiavitiat. August. lib. 2. cont. Jul. cap. 4
created him, his father who has begot him, and sin which has sullyed him.
The soul was from God, the body proceeds from the begetting Father, and the
impurity derives from sin: he admirably describes the Nature of concupiscence,
and he is never more learned, nor more eloquent, then when he sets forth what
havoc she has made in our souls, he Est libido ulciscendi quae i^a appelatur,
amor habendi ^cuniam quae avaritia, libido quomodo^ (...) ^ndi qu^ pe^cacia,
libido gloriandi quae jactar tia. Aug lib. 14. de Civit. cap. 15.
teaches us that every sin is a particular concupiscence, and that instructed
by our own Misery, we call Avarice the concupiscence of riches, Pride the
concupiscence of glory, and unchastity the concupiscence of voluptuousness, he
concludes by convincing reasons, and which receive no reply, that it was
necessary that man being guilty should beget sinful Children, and Hom^
vitiatus homines vitiatos genuit, ^ores gigne^ quam ipse esset, non ^t
^quitatis. Aug. lib. arbit. ca. 20.
that it was not just that the Children should be more innocent then their
Fathers; he persuades us effectually, that Christians not being regenerate but
by the spirit, cannot communicate grace to those that descend from them by the
way of generation which rests yet in Impurity: but truly he does not
sufficiently prove that the soul should become guilty for being engaged in the
body, nor that to make up one Composition with it, she should contract a sin,
whereof she her self is not capable, for though concupiscence reign in the
body, (to speak properly it is not a sin till it pass into the soul;
Irregularity is the matter thereof, but her aversion from God, is her Form,
and it is impossible to Comprehend, that the soul, for being infused into a
wretched body, should become Criminal, whence then proceeds this Original
sin? by what ways does it slide into our souls? by what Channels does it shed
it self into the handy work of God? and how comes it that the Chief workmanship
of his hands becomes guilty, as soon it is engaged in the body.

Theology has been forced to Imagine a secret Treaty between God, and Adam,
by the which, God having made Adam head of all men, he had given him grace for
all his Posterity, and that by the same law that all his Children should share
in his sin, that this Treaty (whereby Gods Justice is not injured) discovers
unto us the greatness of his Sovereignty, that it is not strange a Prince
should put into the hands of his Subjects the fate of all them that should
descend from them; that in all the best regulated States, the Children share in
their Parents evils, that receiving the glory of all their best Actions, they
should likewise partake of the Pain and Infamy of their offenses; that so the
privation of Grace in men, is the punishment of Adams fault, that by a
necessary consequence the aversion of our will, derives from the loss of
Innocence. Some building upon some Quamois pos^ nondum agerent vitas proprias,
tamen quicquid erat in sutura propagine vita unius homi^s conti^bat. Aug. lib
6. con^ Jul. cap. 12.
Passages in S. Paul, would persuade us that all men were included in Adam,
that there will was united to his, that his fault was their sin, and that
therefore there was no inconvenience that those that lived in him should share
in his guilt, some others (differing but a little from the former) have
represented us with two universal men, whereof one is the (...) of sin, the
other of Grace. We are united to the former by Generation, and become Primus
homo Ada^, secun* dus homo Christus, and ide^ manifestum est ad illum perti^re
omnem hominem qui ex illa successione propaginis nascitur, ficut ad ist^m
pertinet omnis qui in illo gratiae largitate renascitur. Unde fit (...) totum
genus humanum (...) homines duo primus and secundus, Beda in 1 Ep. st. Corinth.
cap. 15.
sinners like him; by regeneration we are fastened to the other, and become just
as he is; Thus sin disperseth it self as well as Grace, unrighteousness is
communicated as well as Innocence, and we contract sin without a will thereunto,
as we receive grace in Baptism without deserving it.

All these opinions, which I embrace and honor, does sufficiently explain how
Adams sin is ours, but they do not clearly enough declare how we do contract
it, they teach us that we are sinners, but do not discover unto us by what
means we become so; wherefore, re-assuming Saint Augustines Principles, me
thinks, a man may say, that Adams sin is the sin of all men, that, that which
was voluntary Habent parvuli originale peccatum non per animam, sed per carnem
utique contractum animaeque refusu^ carninam que ita unitur* anima ut cum carne
fit un^ persona. Aug. lib. 6. cont. Jul. cap. 4.
in him is natural in them, that it passes from the father to those that
descend from him, as Maladies do which are hereditary in Families, or as the
Ethiopians, which is seen in his Childrens faces. To Comprehend this truth, it
is not necessary to Imagine a Treaty between God, and Adam, whereby the fathers
fault, and Punishment, becomes the sons; but it suffices to know that being
fallen from the State of Innocence, and having lost original righteousness, he
cannot longer transmit it into his Progeny, that by necessary consequence he
makes them share in a Malady which he could not cure himself of, and that he
communicates his sin unto them, in communicating his concupiscence. It Is enough
for them to be guilty, that they are descended from him, and without seeking
for causes further off, it suffices to prove their guilt, that they are a part
of him: twould be a Prodigy, if a sinful Father should beget Children void of
sin, and we were to wonder, if nature not being re-establisht in her former
Purity, her productions should not be Corrupt.

The difficulty is to know how the soul which issues pure and spotless from
out the hands of God, contracts sin when she is infused into the body. To this
I answer, that her straight union with the body Cum rationalis anima sic lit
getur corpori u^ ex ea and corpor unum animal componatur, merito a materia mox
inficitur, adeo ut and passionibus sit obnoxia and motus immoderatos more
corporis subeat in exc^sum atque defectum. Marcil* Fiscin. in Plau.
is one cause of her fin, that she sullyes her self by Informing it, that she
receives death by giving it life, and that wanting original righteousness,
whereby to preserve her self from the contagion, occasioned by the first man's
sin, she is no sooner made companion to the body but she becomes Criminal.
Thus is she unpleasing to God, because she is not in Grace with him; she is not
in Grace with him, because Adam has lost Gods grace both for himself, and his
Children, and she is sinful because the father which unites her to the flesh,
as a secondary cause, Communicates unto her his disorder not giving her a
remedy, for it powers his poison into her, and does not present her with an Ita
omnis anima ^Word* in Adam censetur donec in Christ^ recenseatur, tamdiuimmunda
quamdiu re^tur. Peccatrix aut^m quia immunda recipiens ignominiam suam ex
carnis societate. Tertul. de anima.
Antidote, makes her Inherit Adams sin, and does Communicate unto her, the
Grace of Jesus Christ. This it is which Saint Augustine insinuates unto us in
other Terms, when he says, that the Contagion of the body passes into the
soul, that the close Co^merce that is between them, makes their miseries common
between them; and that without extraordinary helps, an Innocent soul cannot be
lodged in a guilty body, the purest Liquours are tainted in musty vessels;
corrupted Air poisons those who breath therein, and infected houses give the
Plague to those that live in them, Thus does concupiscence glide from the body
into the soul, and this wicked Host gives death to her that gives him life. If
these reasons do not content the reader, let him know that I glory to be
ignorant of what Saint Augustine understood not, that I should show my self too
rash, if I should think to give an entire light to the obscurest part of
Divinity, and that I should be unfaithful, if I should pretend to make a truth
evident by reason, which is only known by Faith.

The fifth Discourse.
Of the Nature of Concupiscence.

CHristian Religion may truly boast, that all her Maxims are Paradoxes, which
agreeing with truth, give against humane reason* for she proposes nothing
which is not as strange as true; and which causes not as much astonishment as
light in the soul, he who would prove this truth must make an Induction of all
our Mysteries, and represent all the wonders which she comprehends, but without
straying from my subject, it will suffice to say, that Original sin is one of
her strangest Paradoxes, and that if much of reason be required to prove it, no
less of faith is requisite to believe it: for what more prodigious is there
then that the sin of one man should be the sin of all men? that a Fathers
Rebellion should engage all his Children in disobedience, that his malody
should be Contagious? that he should be the murderer of all men before he be
Sicut onmium (...) and omnium (...), and qu^ infoelicius (...) prius (...) quam
(...). (...).
their Father? and that unfortunately he be the cause of their death, many ages
before they be born. Thus is this misfortune more general then the deluge
which drowned the world; more universal then the fire which shall consume it,
and War and Pestilence which does so easily enlarge themselves are not so
Contagious Evils as is this sin.

If it be wonderful by reason of it is Effusion, it is no less miraculous
through it is other qualities; for we are taught by Divinity that it is
voluntary in the Father, and natural in the Children; that that which was only
a fault in Adam, is both a sin and a punishment in those that descend from him,
that we contract by birth what he willingly committed: and that that which was
free in it is beginning should become necessary in the progress thereof; He
might have kept from disobedience: And we can neither shun the punishment nor
the fault: we are surprised by this misfortune in our Conception we are slaves
before we have the use of Liberty, and we have already offended God before we
knew him; we are rather, the objects of his anger, then of his mercy; but that
which is more deplorable, we are so corrupted from the moment of our Birth, as
that we oppose our selves to his will. If he favor us in our Baptism, the
first use we make of Reason is for the most part engaged in Error: we follow
the Inclinations of our first father, and his sin makes such powerful
Impressions upon our souls, as we sin in our first thoughts, we for the most
part make use of our liberty only to estrange our selves from God; we have a
secret opposition to his ordinance, we are so enclosed within our selves, as we
can love nothing but for our own interests, which is the Rule of our actions,
and we neither love nor desire any thing save what is either useful or
pleasing to us. Such is the corruption of our nature, as there is almost
nothing in it, which is not repugnant to the laws of God. It is so misled by
sin as all the Inclinations Concupiscentia seu libido nihil est aliud quam rei
creatae desiderium cujus impetus mortiseros anima antegratiam libens patitur,
post gratiam pati etiam invita compellitur. August.
thereof are perverted. In this unfortunate Condition, man can neither know nor
do good, he is inslaved, not having so much as the desire of Liberty: though
he groan under the weight of his Irons, he is afraid of being freed from them:
and though his Imprisonment be painful, yet is not he weary thereof; he
delights in doing evil, and finds difficulty to do what is good; the great
inclination he has to sin does not excuse his offense: And he cease not to
be guilty though he cannot shun sin, in general to fill up the measure of so
many Evils, he is blind and insensible, he sees not the Evils that environ and
threaten him, he is full of wounds, and has no feeling of them; believing
himself to be whole, he seeks not for help* and through proud blindness, he
despises the Physician that would restore him to health. Every man that comes
Inest in membris sed reum te non facit* liberatus es ab illo, liber pugna sed
vide ne vincaris and itorum fias servus, laboras pugnando sed laetaberis
triumphando. Beda in Romans cap. 8.
into this world is in this miserable q condition, and we are guilty of all
these Crimes. And charged with all these punishments before we be regenerated
in Baptism; after this Sacrament, we become Innocent, but cease not to be
miserable: sin forsakes us, but punishment waits upon us; and though we be no
more guilty, we are notwithstanding out of order, our Fathers sin forgoes us,
but Concupiscence remains.

This monster is not much less savage then is the Nato quidem and inest and
obest, Reaato autem inest quidem, sed obesse non potest. Aug. lib. 2 de gratia
and peccato, c. 38.
Cause which produced it: It follows the Inclinations thereof, and if it be not
altogether so wicked, it is at least full out as irregular, it is much more
opinionated then the father that begot it; our life is to short to cut it off:
it is an enemy not to be overcome: wounds give it new life, it gathers strength
by skars, and it must cost us our life to be the death thereof. Our first
Divines (which were the Apostles) have given it the very Peccatum vocatur quod
and peccato facta est, and quod peccatum si vicerit facit, Aug. lib. 1. ad
Bonifac. cap. 23.
name of sin, and as if twere more fatal then it is Father, they term it the
strength, and law thereof; it is not content to persuade us to the Crime, but
endeavors to enforce us thereunto, it mingles force with persuasion, and when
it thinks the way by solicitation to be to mild, it has Recourse to violence
and Tyranny; it grows the more furious by opposition, it is stomach is set on
edge by Inhibition, and it never becomes more insolent, then when Laws are
prescribed unto it. To Express the Nature thereof to the life we must
represent a Tyrant, who being born of sin will enlarge his Fathers Empire, and
make al mankind his slaves; it establishes it is throne in our souls, darkens
our understanding, infuseth wickedness into our wills, and fills our memories
with the remembrance of all unjust acts: It abuses all the parts of our
bodies; and works with our hands, Looks through our Eyes, Listens by our Ears,
and Imployes all our senses to Execute it is designs; it busieth it self so
dexterously in all our desires as thinking to satisfy our Necessities, we obey
the Tyranny thereof; and Believing to do a Reasonable Act, we commit a sinful
one: if we Eat, it is in too much Excess, or with too much delight; If we
sleep, it is rather out of too much nicety then of necessity; if we speak, it is
rather to slander then to edify; and what we think we do for our preservation,
we do for the most part for our satisfaction.

In fine, it is a bad Cum aliquibus nati sumus, aliquas consuetudines and
fecimus. Aug. Ser. 45. de temp.
Habit which produces but bad acts; it is both the Daughter and Mother of sin.
It gives life to that from which it received life, all the motions thereof are
Irregular; and whosoever operates by it is orders is sure enough to sin; it is not
like other customs which insinuate themselves by degrees, and which preserves
themselves with some appearance of Justice: it is violent from it is very Birth,
undertakes all Enterprises as soon as formed; submits the understanding to
Tyranny, and is never more dangerous, then when becomes Reasonable. Time
augments it is force, Age increases Fury, and whatsoever ruins all other
Customs, serves only to maintain this: but that which passes all belief is
that though this Habit be so violent, yet it is natural; the others are easily
destroyed because they contest against Nature; though they weaken her, yet they
never destroy her; and let them do what they can, it is but a little Courage that
is required to Conquer them: but this passes into Nature, precedes our birth,
and out-lives our death: Grace may well lessen it, but never extinguish it:
Saints Quis me liberavit a corpore mortis hujus. Paul.
groan under the rigor of it is Law, and Calls for Aid from death against so
Puissant an Enemy; and knowing that the soul cannot be set at Liberty, whilst
enclosed within her body, they beg the parting thereof from the body as a
favor. In Fine; all sins are in the seed of this pernicious Habit, and as the
branches, and roots, flowers, and fruit, bark, and pith of a tree, are hid in
the kernel thereof, so Murders and Parricides, Slanders, and blasphemies;
adulteries and Incest are Circumscribed in Concupiscence. Who ever carries
about this monster in his Bosom bears with him all sins; though they be not
already disclosed, they are already begun; and though they render us not as yet
guilty, they make us always miserable: the Devil may undertake any thing by
the Assistance of this his faithful Assistant in all his Impieties; and he
very well knows that wheresoever it is, it always holds Intelligence with him.
No man is assured of souls health, whilst he gives harbor to this Domestic
Enemy, and our hopes ought always to be mingled with Fear, till such time as
Grace has totally Extinguished Concupiscence.

The sixth Discourse.
The pursuit of the same Subject, and diverse descriptions of Concupiscence.

MEn esteem those punishments the most severe which are most sensible, they
believe not that God punishes sinners unless the Earth quake under their
feet, unless the Thunder roares over their heads, unless the Devil sieze on
their bodies, and hurries them visibly into Hell. But as Physic thinks hidden
Maladies the most dangerous, and that there is no cure for the decays of the
lungs or brains: so does Divinity think secret punishments, the worst, and
that such Chastizements as make most noise are least to be dreaded. She fears
not so much the destroyings of the Plague nor the disorders of war, as she does
apprehend bad habits, or Iregular inclinations; she much more patiently bears
with the violence of diseases and the unseasonablenesse of the seasons, then
with the motions of concupiscnce: for it is indeed the cruellest punishments
which Divine Justice has permitted for the Chastizement of man's offense: and
it is the ancientest and cruellest of all the evils that do assail us: for
it is a rebellion against all those things to which we owe obedience and a base
submitting of our selves to whatsoever we ought to have any authority over. The
soul ought naturally to submit her self to God, and the Deserte creatore bono
vivere secundum creatum bo^um, non est bonum, sive q^sque s^cundum ^nem, sive
s^cundum (...), sive secundum totum homin^ qui constat ex (...) and corp^re
eligat vivere. Aug. lib. 14 de C^vit. (...). (...)
body to the soul: there is no more natural nor rational obedience: it is
grounded on our being, and our perfection seems to depend thereon. God gives
the law unto our soul, and the soul the like unto her body, these duties are as
ancient as we be, and though we fail in the payment thereof, yet weacknowledge
the Obligation yet Concupiscence disorders all; this comely regularity, she by
an Qui (...) ^ritati necesse est (...) miquitati. Aug. in Psalm. 18.
high insolency opposes the soul to God: and by an extreme piece of injustice
raises the body against the soul, she sowes division between the two parts
whereof we are composed, and we find by an admirable effect of Divine justice
that as our fault is disobedience: our punishment is also rebellion; for the
soul rejects the laws of God: and the body despises the laws of the soul; our
punishment is the picture of our sin and the pain which we endure bears the
Character of the fault which we have committed, or to express my self better
in Saint Augustine words; our very offense is become our punshment Admodum
legitime sactum est ut homo qui noluit obedire Domino suo non ei serviret caro
ejus. Supra (...) Dominus tuus, infra te caro tua, servi meliori ut serviat
tibi inserior. Contempsisti superiorem torqueris ab inseriore. Beda in Romans
cap. 8.
and as we were Rebels to God by our own choice, we become the like now by
necessity. The greatest part of our thoughts are so many undertakings against
his Authority: our actions are attempts against his graciousnesse: and not
withstanding any Inclination that we have to love him it is almost impossible for
us without his grace, to keep from offending him, the body punishes the soul
for her offense, it revengeth God for the outrages the soul has done him; and
taking example from the souls rebellion dispenses with its obedience
thereunto: nay, it does oft-times change its rebellion into tyranny, the Slave
becomes his Sovereigns Master, and either by fair means or by foul, forces him
to serve his disorders, then does the soul descend from her greatness, Labors
only for the pleasures of the body, and imployes all her anvantages to procure
new delight, unto her slave. All these Irregularities derive from
Concupiscence, which is nothing else but a general Rebellion of Nature against
it is Author; the different effects thereof makes it bear differing names, and
the evil qualities thereof makes Divines seek out new terms to Express her
Vestigium peccati passim appellatur Concupiscen^a ab Aug.
ancient disorders: Saint Augusttine calls her the foot-step of sin, for as the
Creature is an Image of God, as it expresses his divine perfections. And makes
them visible to the Eyes of who shall consider them, so is Concupiscence the
Image of sin and by the disorders thereof, represents Hoc peccati nomine
appellas unde oriuntur cuncta peccata id est ex carnali concupiscentia.
Quicquid enim est peccatorum in dict is in cogitatibus, in factis non exoricur
nisi exmal^ cupidit^te. Beda in Romans 8.
unto us the bad inclinations of her father, but she has this advantage, that
she is a better finished picture of her father (sin,) then the Creature is of
God. For let the Latter be never so excellent, it is always but a weak expression
of it is creat^, it is but a shadow of his Light, a mean expression of his truth,
and but a false beam of his beauty: To know him perfectly, we must raise our
selves above his workmanship, and to conceive his greatness, we must rather
oppose it to the creature, then compare it there with all, but concupiscence is
the Lively Image of sin: we see all the Linaments of the father in the
Daughters face, and she does nothing wherein a man may not discern the motions
of the father. I know that all our punishments are the pictures of our sins,
and God would have our Chastizement to be the Image of our offenses, but to
take it aright, every punishment expresses but one only quality of sin, the
Heat which accompanies fears represents only it is immoderate heat to us,
blindness discovers only it is Ignorance, The palsy, which takes from us the
use of our members, figures only out unto us it is incapabilty of doing good,
deafness declares only it is obstinacy unto us, and death it self which is sins
most rigorous punishment, represents to us only the death of the soul, and the
loss of Grace; But Concupiscence is a finished picture which has all the
Colors and Linaments of sin, she has all its wicked Inclinations, is Capable
of all its Impressions, accomplisheth, all it is Designs, and this
unfortutunate Father can undertake nothing which his daughter is not ready to
Execute.

But one only name not being sufficient to express all the wickedness
thereof, the Fathers have been fain to invent diverse names to decypher out unto
us the different effects of a Cause, which is as fruitful as fatal.

Saint Augustine Lex peccati dicitur Concupiscentia quiae suadet peccata, atque
ut ita di^erim jubet. Aug. l. 1. operis imperf.
according to Saint Paul terms her the Law and Counselor of sin: Reason was
man's Counselor and, in the state of innocence, he undertook nothing but by
her advice: when sin had weakened Reason, and that the darkness thereof had
Clouded the the luster of it is Eternal light, God gave him the written Law for
a Counselor, and Ingraved those truths in Marble which he had formerly
engraven in his heart: Great men formed no design before they had Consulted
with this visible Law; and David with all his illuminations protests that the
law of God was the Consilium meum justificationes tu^. Psalm. 118.
best part of his Council; it was the moral Philosophers wherein the learned
virtue, it was his Politics, and were he either to Conduct his subjects or to
fight his enemies, he learnt the knowledge both of peace and war in the
mysteries of the Law; but the sinner has no other law then Concupiscence, he
is advised by one that is blind and unfaithful, he executes nothing without
her Prudentia carnis inimica Deo. Romans 8.
orders, and he is brought to this extremity. That his Counselor is Pensioner
to his Enemies. Reasons self is a slave to this perfidious Officer, she sees
only through her Pruentia ista vitium est non natura, vis nossequid est sapere
secundum carnem, (...) est. Beda in Romans 3.
eyes, and after having well debated a business she forsakes better advice, to
follow the pernicious Counsel of one that is blind, who is absolutely the
Devils Purchase, and who holds Continual Intelligence with sin.

When he is weary of persuading us, he Chides us, when we have received his
advice, he signifies his Commands unto us, and having deceived us as a
perfidious Counselor, he torments us as a merciless Tyrant. Counselors never
work upon us but by their Reasons, they never make use of violence to oblige us
to receive their advice, and they oftentimes foregoe their own opinions to
receive ours, if they think them better; but Concupiscence is a furious Officer
who makes use of Force when Persuasion will not prevail.

This Tyrant is more insuportable then those who formerly commanded in Greece,
who^ the Orators of that Country have charged with so many just opprobries. For
these Enemies to mankind exercised their cruelty only upon the body, and
assubjected to their power only the leastpart of man. Whosoever valued not
theirown lives, might make himself Master of theirs, and who feared not death,
might deride their violence, but this Tyrant Video aliam legem in membris meis
repugnantem legi mentis meae and captivantem me in lege peccati quae est i^
membris meis. Romans 7.
whereof I speak exercises his fury upon the spirits, he blots out the
remembrance of all virtue from out his memory, he darkens the understandingwith
his mysts, oppresses the will by his violence, and leaves only a languishing
liberty in the souls which he possesses. This Monster which had only the faces
of men, were not always in the Company of their subjects, their absence was a
truce of servitude, some private Closets were to be found where one might taste
the sweet of liberty, A man might meet with a friend before whom he might lay
his heart open, and though freindship had been banished from off the heart,
Compassion would have made it revive, for his Consolation. It Was in these
private Conferences that the death of Tyrants was Conspired, the parties safety
joined to the desire of liberty, caused the Conception of the designs, and the
desires of glory put it in execution. But Concupiscence never parts from
sinners; this Tyrant keeps his Court in the midst of their wills, he has
raised a throne in their hearts.

He finds so much of obedience and weakness in his slaves, as he knows they
cannot shake of the yoke of his Tyranny without foreign Aid, these public
plagues could not make themselves be beloved in their states; though they left
some shadows of Liberty, they could not win their subjects Hearts, there faults
were always repaid with public Hatred, and the Necessity they had to make
themselves feared was not the least punishment of their Injustice; they grew
weary of being the Horror of their people, and if they could have made
themselves be beloved, they would have ceased making themselves feared; but
their subjects were so Incenst against them, as to keep them in respect, it was
necessary to keep them in awe, and since they could not purchase their love to
resolve to merit their Hatred: but though Concupiscence be the cruellest of all
Tyrants, yet has she found the secret of making her selfbe beloved, all her
subjects reserues their Loyalty, even in persecution, they are pleased with the
pains Nonne hinc apparet in quod velut pondere suoproclivis and proua sit
vitiosa natura. Aug. lib. 22. deCivit. cap. 22.
they undergo. Torments are not able to make them wish for liberty, let them
be never so ill dealt with all by their unjust Sovereign, they never blame his
cruelty. And though they be the most unfortunate slaves of all the world, they
cease not to be the faithfullest lovers, In fine, to put an end to this
discourse.

These Tyrants do not allways vex their subjects with angersome Commands, all
there decrees are not unjust, their polluted mouths have sometimes pronounced
Oracles: and the Grecian Philosophers have registered their words who had
bereft them of their liberty, the Dionsii made laws which the Politicians
reverenced, their Ordinances were able to instruct legitimate Princes, and they
have uttered maxims which may serve us for instructions. But all the commands
made by Concupiscence are unjust, all her orders are sin, one cannot obey her
without blame, and to speak in Saint Augustines language, a man cannot follow
the motions of Concupiscence without contesting against the motions of grace*
nor can a man live at full liberty, unless he be freed from the Tyranny
thereof.

The seventh Discourse.
That self-love is nothing else but Concupiscence.

Though Divines have given as many names to Concupiscence as she has committed
sins, and that every one paints her out as he finds her in another, or
according to his own experience; yet they all agree that her most celebrated
name, and that which best expresses her nature is self-love; For as Charity
comprehends all virtues, self-love comprehends all vices, as Hi duo amores
disti^xerunt duas civitates, quorum alter sanct^ est, alter immundus, alter
socialis alter privatus, alter communi vtilitati consulens propter societatem,
alter etiam rem communem in potestatem propriam redigens propter arrogantem
dominationem. Aug. in lib. de Genesis ad litteram cap. 11.
Charity unites us to God and loses us from our selves, her Enemy self-love
severs us from God, and fasteneth us to our selves; As Charity has no greater
a passion for any thing then to love God, and make him be beloved by all
others: self-love produces no more violent desire in man; then to love
himself, and to obliege all other men to love him; To comprehend these truths
you must know; that Charity according to S. Paul's words, and S. Augustines
Comment composeth all virtues to be perfect; It suffices to be charitable and
one virtue is sufficient in Christ's school to acquire all others; she believes
all things (says that great Charitas patiens est, b^nigna est, omnia suffert,
omnia credit, omnia sperat, omnia sustinet. 1 Cor. cap. 13.
Apostle) and so has the merit of Faith: she waits for the acco^plishment of
Gods promises, and so possesses the certainty of hope: she suffers all
injuries as well as Patience does, she withstands sorrow with as much courage
as does fortitude: and this Famous Doctor of the Gentiles who perfectly knew
the Inclinations of charity gives her all the Advantage which belongs to all
the virtues; so as according to his principles the love of God is only
Requisite to become highly virtuous, Saint Augustine who learnt nothing but in
S. Paul's school mixeth all virtues with Charity, and as if he would reduce al
things to an unity, he teaches us that the only virtue on earth is to love him
who is perfectly lovely. For love has several names according to his several
employments, he changes qualities though not Nature; and continuing still the
same presents himself unto us, under diverse Temperantia est amor integrum se
praebens ei quod amatur, fortitudo amor facile tolerans omnia propter quod
amatur, justitia amor soli amato serviens and propterea recte dominans,
prudentia amor ex quibus adjuvatur ab e^ quitus i^ podtur sagaciter eligens.
Aug. lib. de morib. Eccles. cap. 15.
forms and shapes, Temperance is a faithful love, which wholly gives herself
over to what she loves, not permitting Voluptuousness to divide them:
Fortitude is a generous love which with delight overcomes all the difficulties
which can be met withal, for her well beloved sake; Justice is an incorrupt
love which instructs how to reign in obedience, and which submitting herself
to God, as to her sovereign commands over all creatures as over her slaves: In
fine, wisdom is an illuminated love, which happily discerning between the
ways which may estrange her from God, and those which may fasten her to him,
chooses the former, and rejects the other, or to express the same truth in
other terms; Love is termed wisdom when he keeps himself from straying and
has right to what he loves, he is called fortitude when he fights against such
sorrows as would astonish him; Temperance, when he despises such pleasures as
would corrupt him; and In hac vita virtus non est nisi diligere quod diligendum
est. Id eligere prudentia est, null is inde molestiis averti fortit^do est:
nullis illecebris temperantia est: nulla superbia justitia est. Quid
autem^gamus quod prae cipue diligamus nisi quo nihil melius invenimus. Hoc Deus
est cui si diligendo aliquid vel praponimus vel aequamus nos ipsos diligere
nescimus. Aug. Epistola 2 ad Maced.
Justice, when to consecrate his liberty to God, he disdains to serve the
Creature; so may we say that self-love, which is Charities mortal Enemy
comprehends all vices, and that it only changes countenance, when it appears
under the form either of Pride, Color, or Envy, it is unjust in it is Ambition,
prepares for Combat when irritated; for vengeance when offended; when unjust it
bereaves it is Neighbor of his goods, and good name; and when Intemperate it
engages it self in unlawful delights. The great Apostle, when he numbers up
all faults puts it in the first Erunt homines seipsos ainantes cupidi, clati,
superbi, parentibus non obedientes, ingrati, proditores, voluptatum amatores
magis quam Dei. 2 Timothy cap. 3.
rank and teaches us that there is no sin which is not a sort of self-love
disguised. And Saint Augustine who has drawn all his Doctrine from Saint Paul's
words, instructs the whole Church that the faults which we detest are not so
much the effects as the proprieties of self love. In effect, is not Avarice, an
unjust love of riches, is not Pride an unjust love of Honors, is not
opiniatrecie a furious love to be always victorious, is not color a detestable
love of revenge? And to conclude all in a few words; are not all sins as many
different loves which changing rather countenance then humor: agree all in a
design of fastening themselves to objects which they like, and of keeping a
loofe off, from such as they like not. There is also the second opposition of
the love of God, and the love of our selves, for charity has no nobler
employment then to free us from all things to unite us to God, she endeavors
to persuade us that to love our selves well we must hate our selves; that to
have a care of our selves we must forget our selves; and if we would find out
our happiness we must seek for it from without our selves, men wonder that the
law of God which commands us to love our Neighbor, does not command us to love
our selves, and that it only mentions the love we owe unto our selves when it
recommends unto us the love which we owe unto, our Neighbors, but to boot that
this love was imprinted in the foundation of our wills by the hands of Natures
self, and that it was more then needed to command us a thing to which we had
so great an inclination; man loved himself sufficiently in loving Videtur de
homine ipso nibil actum, sed parum dilucide qui hoc arbitratur intelligit. Non
enim fieri potest ut seipsum, qui Deum diligit, non diligat: imo vero solus se
novit diligere qui Deum diligit: siquidem ille satis se diligit qui sedulo agit
ut summo and vero persruatur bono. Aug. lib. de morib. Eccle. cap. 26.
of God, and God had sufficiently provided for man's happiness in ordaining man
to love him above all things; The love of God is man's true happiness, we are
rich when we possess it; and poor when we lose it; let our designs be waited
upon by whatsoever good success let the world promise us what ever good event;
what ever favor Fortune affords us, all riches which consists not in the
possessions of the Summum bonum, is but a mere real poverty, for as Augustine
says; God is so good as all men that leave him are miserable, and man is so
noble as whatsoever is not God cannot render him happy, it is charities chiefest
design to fasten man to God so straightly. As that nothing may separate him
from God, and to in lighten his soul with so much love as that she may
exstinguish self love, or turn it into a holy hatred of himself.

This Divine Sc^ernant civitates duas amores duo, terrenam scilicet amor sui
usque ad contemptum Dei, coelestem vero amor Dei vsque ad contemptum sui. Aug.
lib. 14. de Civit. cap. 28.
virtue can mount no higher, so glorious a Metamorphosis is the utmost of her
power, and God can demand nothing more of those that love him, when that they
may love him perfectly they arrive at the height of hating themselves. Self
love takes a clean opposite way, from that of charity, and by direct contrary
traces, endeavors to estrange man from God, and to fasten him to himself, or
to the Creature: it effaceth as much as it is able, the inclination which his
soul has for the Summum Bonum: if it cannot stifle it, it diverts it; and
seeing that the heart of man cannot be without employment it lays before him
the beauty of the Creatures, to divert him from those of the Creator; being
accompanied with blindness and pride, it easily abuses the soul which it
possesses, and figuring out the perfections thereof more glorious then they
are; it makes her, her own Idolater; it raises her incensibly up to the height
of impiety, and by different steps mounts it even to the hatred of God, for as
the faithful man is perfect when he loves God, even to the pitch of hating
himself, the sinner even has the measure of his sin filled up when he loves
himself, even to the degree of hating God. This passion reigns not much, save
in the souls of the damned: one must be wholly possessed by sin to conceive this
design, and I know not whether there be any so sinful soul on Earth, as can
have so damnable a recentment, Hell is the abode of these wicked ones, and I
firmly believe, that as their hatred of God is the sow lest of there sins, so
is it the cruellest of their punishments, yet can they not hate this Summum
Bonum with there whole heart, the foundation of their being is possessed by the
love of God, they love him naturally whom they hate willingly, they are divided
between love, and hatred; there will is Deus noster is est quem id omneamat
quod amare potest, Origin.
parted by these two contrary motions and for all they can do to stifle this
natural Inclination, they cannot hinder their best part from languishing, and
sighing, after God: they afflict themselves that nature fights against there
will, and that her unalterable laws forces them to love the author of their
everlasting punishment.

But to reassume the thread of our discourse; the last opposition of self love
and charity is, that the latter has no more violent desire then to purchase
lovers to God almighty to enlarge the bounds of his Empire and to disperce the
holy flames of his Divine love into all hearts, for a heart that is inflamed
with this sacred fire knowing very well that it cannot love God according to
his loveliness, wishes that all the parts of its body were changed into
hearts and tongues to praise and love the only object of its love. But as she
sees her wishes are useless, she endeavors to increase the number of Divine
lovers, to the end that making amends for her indigency, they may love him with
all their might whom she cannot sufficiently love. Self love in opposition to
this, which obliges man to make a god of himself, inspires him with a desire
to make himself be beloved of all the world. Instructed by so good a master,
he imployeth all his cunning to rob himself of his liberties, he discovers all
his perfections to purchase lovers, he proposes himself unto himself as an
Idol to be adored, and believes that the truest, and most legitimate
happiness on earth, is to have slaves who are fairly forced to love him. When
Kings are arrived at this height of of injustice and Impiety, men think them
happy and the Politics, which labors to decypher a good Sovereigne, is never
better content, then when she has raised in them this violent desire of
enjoining their Subjects good will. It Is herein that she distinguishes Kings
from Tyrants, and that she opposes unjust Sovereignes to Legitimate
Monarchies; but we are taught by Christian Religion that blame may be incurred
as well by making ones self Dilectionem sui in illam dilectionem Dei resert
quae nullum a se rivulum extra se duci patitur cujus derivatione minuatur. Aug.
1 de doct. Chri. cap. 22.
be beloved as in making him be feared. For though she honors Kings, and
condemns Tyrants, though she approve of Moderate Government, and detests
ruling by rigor, yet does she equally blame those who entrench upon Gods
rights, and who proposing themselves to their Subjects: as their final end,
will possess all their affections, love appertains as well to God only as
glory, of all offerings he is best pleased with that of the heart, and he loves
much better to rule over men, by the way of mildness, then of rigor, insomuch
as Kings who would make themselves be beloved as Gods, are not much less
faulty then those who would make themselves be dreaded as Tyrants, they are
both of them guilty of Treason against the Diety, and pretend to honors which
are only reserved for God, Lucifer never purposed to establish his greatness
by violence, he made more use of his beauty then of his power, to Corrupt the
inferior Angels; and if his Empire be terminated in rigor it began in
clemency. A legitimate Sovereigne, straies as well from his duty in seeking
after the love, as after the fear of his Subjects, and though one of these two
ways be more innocent then the other in the sight of men, it is not much less
faulty in the sight of God, it is not permitted in our Religion for a man to
make himself be beloved: it is a presumption to endeavor those liberties which
pertain only to God, to deboysh his subjects is to divide his Empire, he will
have all his slaves to love him, and according to Saint Austines maxims, we
owe all our love to God: the Prince is bound to fasten his subjects to their
Creator to make him reign in his kingdom, and to receive no homage from his
people save only for that he is the Image of God: it is therefore the most
dangerous impression that self-love can make in men, when it persuades them
that they deserve the love of the whole world, and that they ought to employ
all their might to augment the number of their Lovers: yet every one is possessed
with this passion, and I see none who do not by several ways aspire to this
tyranny. Men discover the perfection of their minds to make themselves admired,
women make the most they can of their bodily beauty to make them be adored, but
the one and the other of them will have their malady turn contagious, and
spread abroad the poison of self-love which has infected them, into the souls
of all those that come near them.

The eighth Discourse.
That Concupiscence, or Self-love divides it self into the love of Pleasure, of
Honor, and of Knowledge.

Man's loss does so suit with his greatness, that to understand the one well,
the other must necessarily be comprised, and we must know what advantages he
did possess in his Innocence, that we may not be ignorant of such miseries as
he undergoes by sin. Original righteousness which united him to God, made him
find innocent delights, pure and certain knowledge, and elevated honors, (of
which ours are but the shadows) in the Possession of the Summum Bonum when he
lost Grace, he therewith all lost all these glorious Privileges, which were the
dependances thereof, his Pleasures were turned into Punishments, his light into
darkness, and his glory into infamy, the misery into which he saw himself fallen
did irritate his desire, and the remembrance of his past felicity made him seek
for that in the Creature, which he had lost in his Creator. Self-love, which
succeeded the love to God, spread it self abroad into three as impure rivolets,
as was the spring head from whence they did derive: the first was called the
love of Pleasure, In omnibus illecebris mundi hujus tria sant aut voluptas aut
curiositas aut superbia. Aug. in append. Sermon. 1.
the second the love of light or novelty, and the third the love of greatness,
or of glory, these three general causes of all our disorders, are the fatal
effects of Concupiscence, they divide man (now become guilty,) and though they
agree in the bereaving him of his liberty, yet they share in the division of
his person. Voluptuousness or the love of pleasure, resides in the senses, and
reigns in all the parts of the body which are capable of delight, the soul
engages her self in the eyes and ears, to taste the contentments which these
two senses can wish for, she renounceth spiritual delights, to seek out such
as are sensual, and as if she were now no longer a pure spirit, she longs
after nothing but bodily delights. Necessity is no longer the rule of her
desires, she betakes her self no more to objects, for that they are necessary,
but for that they are pleasing. Temperance uses her utmost endeavor to
withstand this irregularity; she endeavors to pass by all voluptuousness,
without any stay, and to make use of such remedies as Nature has ordained for
the cure of our maladies, without the engagement of her affections; but
Concupiscence overthrows all her designs, and by the absolute power whereby
she governs in the soul, she solicits her to taste all the pleasures of our
senses. The soul being fallen from her first greatness, seems then to cease
being spiritual, that she may become Corporal; that she partake no longer in
the felicity of Angels, and that she no longer pleased with any delights, save
such as are sensual, and impure. This is the first contestation which those
faithful ones resent, who will overcome Concupiscentia ad sentiendum nos five
consentientes mente sive repagnantes, appetitu carnalis voluptatis impell^t.
Aug. lib. 4. cont. Julia. cap. 14.
Concupiscence, and it is the frequentest piece of Art which the Concupiscentia
ad sentiendum nos five consentientes mente sive repagnantes, appetitu carnalis
voluptatis impell^t. Aug. lib. 4. cont. Julia. cap. 14.
Devil makes use of to destroy men; the souls alliance with the body favors
his design, and makes his on-sets more dangerous; men's weakness facilitates
their undoing, and there are very few who are able to overcome an enemy which
is pleasing to them. If they were to choose the Combat, they would rather charge
grief then pleasure, and by their sighing under the burden of their Irons, one
may easily judge, that they are only slaves to pleasures, because they want
courage to despise it. This Temptation is so much more dangerous then others as
it is more natural. To vanquish it a man must have no more a body, and
changing condition with Angels, he must become a pure spirit; but to boot with
our loving this part of our selves, the occasions of Combats are so frequent,
as we are often in one and the same day both Conquerours and conquered: the
subjects of vain glory are not so common, if we be blinded by our imaginary
greatness, we are humbled by our real miseries, and we must have forgotten
the shame of our birth if we glory in any thing during our life: Though the
desire of knowledge awakens our curiosity, and that the very ignorance
whereinto we are plunged, obliges us to seek out a diversion, in the knowledge
of worldly things, yet the difficulties which accompanies. Science, makes us
lose our longing after it. We love rather to be kept in ignorance, then to be
freed thereof by study, we cannot resolve upon the getting of a fleece, where
the Pains exceeds the Glory, and where the Reward equals not the Labor: but
Voluptuousness is as easy as delightful, it presents it self unsought for,
and is received without difficulty, if we must fight for it, it is when Jealousy
or Ambition makes themselves of the Party; and that they Corrupt the
sweetness of our delights by the Vainglory of their designs, and moreover,
Nature having mingled delight with all her remedies, we must always stand upon
our guard, that we build not our felicity one things which she gives us only
for our Consolation. It is hard to discern whether we eat more out of Pleasure,
or necessity; a man must be very moderate, to seek for nothing more in sleep,
then the refreshing of the body, and the repairing of our forces; we must have
already made many a Combat, to effect nothing more in Marriage then the
preservation of our Families, thus do great Saints confess it is easier to
bereave ones self of Pleasures, then to regulate them, and that there goes more
of worth to moderate these pleasing Enemies, then to stifle them; it is easier to
fast, then to feed sparingly of dainty viands, and the good use of riches is
more rare then voluntary Poverty. Man's mind is busied with Curiosity, or the
love of Novelty, which is so much the more dangerous by how much it appears
more lawful: knowledge, which is not the least part of our Advantages, takes
the freedom to persuade us that there is nothing more Noble then Cognizance of
Nature, she thinks to offer up an acceptable sacrifice to God; when she losing
our senses from delight, that she may engage in the search of Truth, so fair a
pretext serves for excuse to her Injustice, and because knowledge is the souls
Ornament, she will have all things allowed thereunto, no bounds being
prescribed to her desires, not laws unto her sury. From the secrets of Quam
late patet curiosit^ ipsa in specta^lis in theatr is in sacrament is
Diabolicis, i^ magic i^ artibus, in malefici^ipsa e^ curiositas. Aug. ^ct. 2.
in Epist. Joannis.
Nature she easily passes to Impiety; for she consults with the Stars that she
may know what is to come, and if their Aspects or Conjunctions do not
sufficiently instruct her, she raises up Spirits, treats with Devils, and of
an useless Science frames a dangerous superstition. The Amphitheaters of past
ages, the Circi, and the Arenae, are the inventions of this desire of Novelty,
Dancing and other Sports, are not so much the occupations of the Idle; as the
diversions of the Curious. it is the desire of seeing somewhat of new which draws
us forth with multitudes into the fields, and all these fashions, which we
invent, are rather signs of our Curiosity, then of our vanity. Alipius
conjugium desiderabat, nequaquam victus libidine tal is voluptatis, sed
curiositatis. Aug. lib. 6. Confess. cap. 12.
This Passion is much more violent, then that of voluptuousness, for the
latter is easily contenten, and destroying her self by enjoying, her own
delights turns often to be her punishments: but the other is never contented:
remedies imbitter her violence, and the earth is not able to satisfy her with
Novelties, the Passion of the flesh extends it self only to pleasures, as soon
as an object cease to be pleasing she scorns to pursue it, and the voluptuous
have this advantage, as that they see all their desires confined with the
limits of delights: but the Curious mingle Pain with Pleasure, and agree these
two contraries together, to entertain their restlesnesse, they try poisons
under pretense of composing Antidotes, they dissect the dead, under color of
curing those that live; they tear up the bowels of the earth to learn secrets
thereout, and go down to the depths of the Sea, to know the wonders thereof.
There is nothing which may not be come at by the fury of so Irregular a
Passion, which has nothing of equitable in her disorder, save that she is the
Eternal Punishment of those that love her. Innocence, and sin may have been
the original thereof; Innocence, because whilst in that condition, man knew
all that with justice he could wish for; Sin, because he would know more then
he ought, and that discovering his heart unto the Devil, he indiscreetly
suffered the immoderate desire of knowing all things to enter there.

Pride or the Ambition of Command; is the last, and most dangerous effect of
Concupisceuce. Flattery, whose chief employment is to praise sin, confounds
this Passion with virtue, and makes all glorious faults lawful to Conquerors.
She builds the glory of the Alexanders upon the sin of Malign spirits, and she
will persuade Magnum delictum quod ex Ang^lo fecit Diabolum. Aug. in Psalm. 18
Princes of the world, that the furious desire which changed Angels into
Devils, can turn men into Gods; but our Religion teaches us that there is no
more insolent Passion then this, and that all other sins are the ushers in of
Pride. In effect, if other sins do busy the mind, this possesses it, if
others fly from God, to shun his justice, this draws near unto him, to set upon
his greatness, if others leave us when we grow old, this accompanies us even
unto death, and if the rest chance sometimes to be the sin of the Elect, this
is almost always the Reprobates fault, it will supply Gods place; whatsoever
name is given to the Impiety thereof, it is design in making it self be either
loved or feared, is to govern over men, either by force or fair means, and to
commit a rape upon that Glory, which belongs only to him, who is the beginning
and end of all things: this Passion dies not with men, they preserve the sense
thereof after death; and their care of having their Prayers recorded in History
their Statutes erected in public Places, and stately Monuments in Churches,
are assured proofs that their Ambition ends not with their lives, this disorder
can only proceed from the first man, who not being able to permit that even God
should be his Sovereign, unjustly pretended to Independency, and endeavoring
Sovereignty by Rebellion, reaped thereby nothing but a shameful servitude; all
these irregularities which derive from self-love, as from their springhead;
and all our fins which burst out from thence like rivers, the Devil who very
well knows, how to te^pt man, makes no use of any other means then these to
seduce him, he beats us with our own weapons, and he loses the hope of
overcomming man, when man keeps himself from delight, Curiosity, Tria sunt
istae and nihil inveni^ unde tentetur cupiditas human^, nisi aut desiderio
carnis aut desiderio oculorum aut ambitione saeculi. Per tria ista tentatus est
Dominus a diabolo. August. tract. 2. in Epist. Joan.
and Ambition, he raised all these batteries against the first man, and judging
of their Power by their good success, he made use thereof against Jesus Christ
in the Desert, but seeing that his soul was sufficient proof against all his
onset, she resolved to set upon him by sorrow and gr^ whom he could not seduce
by delights

The ninth Discourse.
Wherefore Concupiscence remains in Man after Baptism.

WE are taught by Divinity, that nothing but the Power of God can make all
things out of nothing; nothing but his Providence can draw good out of evil,
and make a man's fault to amend his life. Natural Philosophy cannot comprehend
the former of these wonders, and moral Phylosopy cannot comprehend the second.
Nature works nothing without materials, her workmanships are rather
alterations then productions; she may well change one thing into another, but
she cannot make a new thing, and there is so little proportion between nothing
and subsistancy, as Aristotle chose rather to believe that the World was
eternal, then that God created it of Nothing. This great Genjus found it less
inconvenient to acknowledge numberless causes, then to confess one only, the
power thereof was unlimited; and moral Philosophy, which is not greatly more
enlightened then natural Phylophy, finds such opposition between good and
evil, as she would rather think to draw light out of darkness, and beauty out
of deformity, then Virtue out of Vice: but Religion which adores in God
Almighty a Power which has no bounds, and an unclouded Providence confesses
also, that the one may have framed the World out of nothing, and that the other
may have extracted Grace, out of sin, in effect the work of our Redemption, is
the sequel of ou^ loss. And if Adams sin be not the cause, it is at least the
occasion of our salvation, the same sin which has drawn reproaches from forth
our mouth, has returned praises for it, And the Church calls that sin,
fortunate, O (...) cul^ quae talem ac tantum meruit habere Redemptorem.
which has merited so excellent a Redeemer, Concupiscence being the daughter
of sin, we must not wonder if divine Providence has made it serviceable to her
designs, and if she employ her Enemy to execute her will, for though this
guilty habit be past, as it were into nature, and that it makes sin so hard to
be overcome, yet did God leave it in the souls of his faithful Ones to
exercise their virtue, to allay their Pride, and to make them have their
Remembrance of their misfortune always before them. During the happy estate of
their Innocence, Virtue was so natural to man as it met with no Resistance.
Man took delight in doing what was good, and the greatness of Merit was not
measured by the difficulty of the work, his passions were obedient to reason,
his senses were faithful to his soul, and his body had no other motions then
those of the soul, the practice of Piety was not as yet become a Combat,
Continency and Fortitude were not enforced to give battle, to bear away the
victory; and these two Noble Habits were given man, rather for his ornament
then for his defense, so we must confess that if he had more quiet then we, he
had less glory, and that if he tasted more delight, he could not hope for so
great reward, for all our life is spent in Exercise and fighting, all our
virtues are austeer, they are always environed with Enemies, they cannot go out
of their ordinary tracks, without falling into a Precepice, and they are
Reduced to the Vita justi in isto corpore adhuc bellum est, nondum triumphans.
Ergo hic semper pug^andum est* quia ipsa concupiscentia cum qua nati sum^
finiri non potest q^mdiu vivim^s. Quotidie minui potest finiri non potest. Beda
in Romans 8. in August.
Necessity of Continual fighting unless they will be defeated, but of all the
Enemies that sets upon them, they are most vexed with Concupiscence, and yet win
most glory thereby, for she is so opinionated as (...) cannot be overcome,
Grace which triumphs over all our Evil, complains of being resisted by this,
although it lose it is vigor, it loses not it is courage, and though the Saints
do still weaken it yet they cannot stifle it; they must dye to defeat it, and
it must cost them their life, to get the full victory, yet is this the field
wherein they purchase all their Bays, it is the matter of their fights and
Triumphs: and their virtues would languish in Idleness, did not this domestic
Enemy keep them in breath. To say truth, they run much danger but gain much
Glory; the same subject which causes their Pain heighthens their courage and
increases their merit.

If Concupiscence be of use to virtue, she is no less fatal to sin, for
though she be her Daughter she is likewise often her Murderer; and of all the
remedies which Grace has ordained to cure us of Pride, there is none more safe
then that of this disorder. We are naturally Proud and Miserable, and it is
hard to say whether Pride or misery makes the greater Impression in our souls.
Pride is so well engraven therein, as we in our sad Condition continue the
coveting after all those greatnesses which we did possess whilst innocent; We
persuade our selves that we are Princes, because our Father was so: We will
have Nature to obey us because she bore respect to his will, and we think that
all honors are due to us, because he enjoyed them in the Earthly Paradise.
Death which is the reward of sin cannot be the cure thereof; the Creatures
revolt cannot persuade us, that we have lost the Empire of the world, and the
sicknesses, which do alter our Tempers, cannot teach us that the Elements are
our enemies, but Concupiscence teaches us humility, this insolent Mistress
teaches us obedience; Quae hominis alia est major miseria nisi adversus eum
ipsum, inobedientia ejus ipsius. Aug. lib. 14* de Civit. cap. 15.
and her frequent rebellions makes us know that we are no longer Masters of our
selves, by two contrary Motions, she inspires us with Pride, and teaches us
modesty, she fills us with courage, and makes us know our weakness, she incites
us against Heaven, and obliges us to implore the assistance thereof* In fine,
she wounds and cures us, at the same time; and like to those prepared poisons,
whereof Medicines are made, she is the antidote of al our evils. For who is so
proud a Prince as does not humble himself, when he sees he is less absolute in
his person then his state, that his* Passions are more rebellious then his
subjects, that there goes more to tame them, then to reduce Rebels to
obedience, and that though reason super-intend in his soul, she has
irrational subjects who despise her Authority. Saint Augustine confesses that
this Punishment is as shameful as cruel, and of as many Irregularities as sin
has produced in men, he finds none more infamous then Concupiscence.

She makes us also see the unfortunate state of our condemna^n, and even in the
State of Grace, she presents unto us the Condition* of sin; for we are divided
between Adam* and Jesus Christ, we belong to two Masters, we are the Members of
two opposite Commanders, and we the Children of two Fathers, that war one
against the other* We hol^ still with Adam, according to the flesh, we follow
his Inclinations, and in Christian Religion, we forbear, not to ob^y his will,
his sin has made such an Impression in our Neque viv^ ut vult homo nisi (...)
perv^eris ubi mori sal^i (...) offendi non possit. August. lib. 14. deCivit.
cap. 25.
soul, as we continue to bear about with us all the marks of his Rebellion, and
unless we contend against our senses, we find by experience; that our desires*
are the Pictures of his.

All our sins are so many undertakings against the Authority of God, we will be
Independent in our Government, we will taste delights unmingled with
bitterness, and have knowledge ^exempt from error, we still seek after the
effects of those abusive promises, which the wicked Fiend made unto us, and
pretend in the depth of our Miseries, to arrive at the height of greatness,
from whence we are fallen, thus does Adams sin triumph yet in our souls, and this
Father which is dead so many ages ago, lives yet in his Children. It Is true that
according to the spirit we belong to the only Son of God, his Grace is shed
abroad throughout our hearts, we work by his Motions, if we be inanimated by
his spirit, and we desire to kill Adam, that Jesus Christ may live in his
place; but this is but a languishing life, we are but imperfect works, Grace
meets always with contradictions in her designs, and the soul being engaged in
the bodies rebellion, has very much ado to submit her self to the Spirit of
God. We Vt sim^ initium aliquod c^caturae ejus. Jacob ideo Christus vocatur
pater futuri saeculi.
wait for the day of resurrection, to the end that Jesus Christ may be the
Father both of our body, and soul, and that the two parts whereof we are
Composed may submit themselves to his will. We wish that death may bereave us
of all that Adam gave us, and to the end that Jesus Christ may reign absolutely
in our Soul we* desire that our soul may be loosened from the sinful body
which she inanimates; from thence derive the opposite motions which divide the
greatest Saints, from thence arise those contrary desires which divide their
wills, from thence finally proceeds those differing inclinations which do so
diversely agitate them, and which teach them that though they be Subjects to the
Empire of Grace, they are not notwithstanding freed from the Tyranny of sin,
it is true that they Comfort themselves amidst their misfortune; When they
consider that they are not made guilty by the motions of Concupiscence, save
when they are voluntary, and that Baptism, which has left them languishing,
has not left them Criminal, for our revolts are not always sins, if our will
approve not of them, they are rather Subjects of Glory then Confusion. The
disorders of our Passions become not offenses, save when they draw along our
consent, as long as the soul opposes the disorders of the senses, she is
innocent, and as long as she surpasses Sorrow and Anger, Concupiscenti^ host
is mea quomodo agit malum and non perficit malum: agit malum quia movet
desideriu^ malum: non p^rficit malum quia nos non trahit ad malum and in isto
bello est tota vita sanctorum. Bed. in Romans 8.
if she do not triumph she is at least victorious. He who looks Pale and
sigheth, is not always overborn with Fear, or Sorrow, he whose color rises
when he is offended is not always overcome by choler. These Passions must be
voluntary to be Criminal, and to be really termed sins, they must pass from
the body to the soul, he who trembles is not afraid if he will not Commit
some base act, he who weeps is not sad, if he will wipe away his tears; he who
finds Anger to arise in him is not irritated, if he endeavor to quench his
flames, and amidst all these Passions a man may boast that he is void of fear;
Grief; and Anger, if his will go not along with their motions, by all this
discourse a man may easily gather, that Agit caro desideria sua age tu tua: non
opprimuntar, non extinguntur a te desideriaejus, non extinguat tua, ut in
certamine labores and non victus trabetis. Bed. in Romans 8.
Concupiscence may be made good use of by the Faithful, and that if, of her
own Inclination, she be the root of all vice, when conducted by Grace she may
become the seed of all virtues.

The tenth Discourse.
That Gods Justice has permitted that Man should be divided within himself,
for the punishment of his sin.

THe Philosopher Seneca being desirous to make it known, that Destiny has no
share in the Worlds Government, and that whatsoever accidents befall us in the
Course of our life, are guided by a Sovereign Providence, vaunted that he had
undertaken a work Rem saciam non difficilem causam Deorum agam. Senec. Provid.
which was not difficult, since he therein pleaded Gods cause, and that he had
the honor to defend it; Me thinks I may begin this Discourse in his words, and
boast together with him, that the business I undertake is not very hard, since
I plead in the behalf of the Justice of God; and that I go about to free it
from the outrages which it receives from so many foul mouths, which accuse
Gods Justice for leaving so many wicked men unpunished. I very well know that
the unfortunate Innocent have complained of these, and that without dis-regard
to the respect which is due to the Justice of God, they have often desired that
God would be more speedy in his Punishments. D^cunt in bonis dies suos and in
puncto descendunt in inferos Job.
David murmured inwardly seeing the prosperity of sinners, Job complained, that
the good fortune of the wicked was so constant, as it accompanied them even to
death, and Saint August. in Psalm. 72.
Augustine, who seems to have sought into all the secrets of Divine justice
confesses, that it is no less difficult to accord the Power of Grace, with
man's Liberty, then Divine justice with the Prosperity of the wicked. This is
the scandal of silly souls, the wicked man's despair, and the rock whereon all
those run ship wrack, who are not soundly grounded in the Faith of Jesus
Christ: yet this great Doctor avoucheth two or three maxims, which may pacify
the mind of man, and which prove clearly enough that there is no sinner who is
not miserable.

To understand his Doctrine we must know that Omnis animae poenoe and praemium
semper aliquid consert justa pulchritudini dispositionique rerum omnium. Aug.
lib. de quantit. animae, cap. 56.
Punishment and reward go to the making up of one part of the worlds beauty;
and that as Virtue deserves some Pay, sin likewise deserves some Punishment. It
would be unreasonable if the just man should not be recompensed, and Irregular,
if the guilty should not be punished. Divine justice is answerable to these two
sorts of men, and as the great Tertullian says, she is no less obliged to
Erect Heaven for the good, then to make Hell for the wicked; that Divine
perfection, which maintains the order of the world never overthrows this:
Virtue receives always her reward, and vice is never exempt from Punishment;
they do not only follow, but accompany one another, and as the Epicurians did
not believe that delight could be separated from virtue, Saint Augustine did
not believe that Punishment could be parted from sin. This effect is always
found with it is cause, and man can no sooner Commit an offense but he presently
becomes sensible of the Punishment. There is an Lex aeterna and summa ratio cui
semper obtemperandum, illa est per quam mali miseram, boni beatam vitam
merentur, nec enim injustum esse potest ut mali miseri, boni beati sint. Aug.
lib. 1. de lib. arbit. cap. 6
Eternal law which will have good men happy, and the wicked miserable, it
neither defers reward nor Punishment, and without putting off the Punishment to
Hell, or the reward to Heaven, it confers them both on earrh,; God has made
some laws which alters with the times; though he be in himself always the same,
yet he accommodates himself sometimes to his handy-worke, and often times repeals
the Decrees which he has pronounced, but the law which regards virtue, and
vice is immutable, and the ugliness of an offense never goes without the
beauty of Punishment, nor does sin ever enter into Nunquam accidit ut sit in
anima dedecus peccati sive decore vindicta. August.
a soul, but it brings it is reward with it, Though this maxim may appear
strange yet has it been approved of by profane Philosophy; and Seneca In ipso
etiam scelere sceleris supplicium est. Seneca.
acknowledged that man who had sinned could not keep unpunished; that his Crime
was his Torment, and that without having recourse to the revengfull furies he
bore about with him, his hangman, and his sin. They therefore deceive
themselves who believe that there be any guilty unpunished, because they are
honored; for though men through base flattery confound vice with virtue,
though they put a value upon what they ought to dis-esteeme, though they raise
Altars to those that merit the Gallows, though the Heavens seem to favor their
designs, that Fortune fore-running their desires, mounts them upon Thrones, and
put Crowns upon their Heads, yet are they unhappy, if wicked, and amongst this
imaginary felicity which provokes our Envy, they suffer Pains, which would
move our Compassion, if they were as evident as true: for if they should suffer
no other Torment then to be upon ill Terms with God, are they not sufficiently
Miserable, and say they should undergo no other loss, then that of his Grace;
should they not be rigorously enough punished; banished People will admit of no
Consolation, because they are far distant from their Country: though they enjoy
their estate, though they live under a Temperate Climate, though they converse
with fair conditioned men, they think themselves unhappy, in that they breath
not the Air of their own Country. Favorites will not outlive their Masters
favors, the Magnificence of their Palaces, the number of their meniall
servants, the greatness of their offices, cannot charm their sorrow; they are
pleased with nothing because their Prince is offended: all their contentments
cannot countervail the loss of his Favor, and his wrath is a Punishment,
which all the reasons of Philosophy cannot sweeten: if experience teaches us
that banishment and loss of Favor are Punishments, shall we doubt whether he
that is not upon good Terms with God, be upon bad terms with himself or no?
and can we think him happy who through his own default has lost the well
spring of true Happiness? the sinner then is miserable; and if men esteem
them happy amongst so many sufferings, It is for that they do not know wherein
happiness consists. I looked upon the prosperity of the wicked (says Saint
Vidi malos and displicuit mihi Deus. Hoc enim volebam ut non permitteret Deus
malos esse foelices: Intelligat homo: numquam permittit hoc Deus sed ideo malus
foelix putatur quia quid sit foelicit^is ignoratur. Aug. tract. 28. in Joan.
Augustine) with indignation, I could not tolerate that good luck should
accompany them in their ways, I could have wished that Divine Justice would
have made an example of them, and that it would have abased their Pride,
thereby to appease the murmuring of the Innocent, but I did unjustly accuse
Divine Providence, for it never leaves sinners unpunished, and if such as are
blind think wicked men happy, it is because they know not what happiness is.

As man's wickedness draws on Gods justice, and as we conclude he is miserable,
because sinful, we ought also to argue that he is sinful because miserable,
for God is not severe without reason, our faults do always precede his
Punishments, and he took not upon him to be a revenger, before we became
faulty, It is our offenses that provoke his justice, and he had never let his
thunder have fallen on our heads if we had not neglected his Commandments. It Is
one of Saint Video ^ie in poena and apud te non video iniquitatem: si ergo in
poena sum and apud te iniquitas non est, nonne rest at ut pro iniquitate
crudias hominem. Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Augustines Arguments which convinces the most opinioned, and obliges them to
confess, that since there is no Injustice in God, man must needs be Criminal,
because miserable, for God afflicteh nothing that is Innocent, nor ruins not
his workmanship without a cause, he should injure his own goodness, should his
justice punish a man that were not guilty. Philosophers agree in this truth,
the light of reason has made us know, that Punishment presupposes sin; the
Ignorance of our Miseries has persuaded them, that man was punished on earth,
for sins that he had committed in heaven, that his body was his souls prison,
and that she was detained there to expiate the faults which she only had
committed. Though these be not so pure truths but that they have an
intermixture of Error, yet they teach us that sin precedes Punishment, and
that man's misery does assuredly witness his offense. For what likelihood is
there that Divine Providence would have condemned man to so much misery without
a fault, wherefore should the body rebel against the soul, whereunto it is
united: Wherefore should man be composed of Parts which cannot agree? and why
should the workmanship of God be out of order were it not corrupred by the sin
of man. We must have offended this judge, before he have condemned us, his
justice Numquid ille prius ulcorquam iste peccator? absit neque enim Deus
davinat innocents. Aug. lib. 11. de Genesis cap. 17.
never punishes the Innocent, and his goodness would not permit us to be
miserable, if we were not guilty: but we must also confess that his justice
would have been remiss, had he not punished sin, Adams Rebellion deserved that
all men should be punished for it, his sufferings were to be hereditarie, and
there had been some sort of Inconvenience, that a guilty Father should have
produced innocent Children, we inherit his punishment and his sin, and
receiving our being from him, it was reason we should partake of the Miseries
which do accompany it, In Point of high Treason, the Children are punished for
the Fathers fault, When a Princes Anger breaks out upon great personages that
are guilty, it falls likewise upon their Families, to have any relation to them
suffices to be guilty. Crime is contracted by Alliance, and though the
misfortune may exceed the sin; there is always reason enough for the punishment
throughout all the Judaicke Law the Children bear the punishment of their
forefathers sins, God Non sibi tantum de Dei misericordia, blandiantur, ut
sibi etiam injustitiam ejus polliceantur. Aug. in Psalm. 80.
requires it to the fourth Generation Non sibi tantum de Dei misericordia,
blandiantur, ut sibi etiam injustitiam ejus polliceantur. Aug. in Psalm. 80.
as a Child is a part of his father, we presume he has drawn along with him
Part of his sin, and that he cannot inherit his being without inheriting his
offense also, Gods greatness merits this rigor, and offenses committed
against so high a Majesty cannot be sufficiently punished. Our Complaints
proceed from our Ignorance we defend our own cause only because we know not his
Sanctity whom we have offended, if we had a little light we would prevent Gods
decrees, and we should find that Hell is to small a punishment for such as
rebel against him. In whatsoever sort it be that we have contracted sin, it
deserves Punishment, we cannot be blameless since we proceed from a guilty
father, and since the bodies maladies are hereditary, we must not wonder if
those of the soul be contagious: there is no difference between Adams sin, and
ours, save only that his is voluntary, and ours Natural, that he is more
guilty then unfortunate; and we more unfortunate then guilty, that he has done
the mischief and we have received it, that he has committed a fault, and we
bear the Punishmnnt, that his disorder is become our Nature, that his Rebellion
engages us in disobedience, and that as the tree is lost in it is root; we are
infected in our beginning and corrupted in our father. After all these reasous
there is no more reason of complaint; Miserable man instead of accusing Gods
Justice must implore his mercy, and must find out that innocence in Jesus
Christ, which he has lost in Adam, to the end, that as natural generation
has been the cause of his misery, Spiritual generation may be the cause of
his happiness, and that he may there partake of grace without any other merits
then those of the Son of God; as he has received condemnation without any
other fault then that of Adam.

OE THE CORRUPTION OF the Soul by SIN: The Second Treatise:
The First Discourse.
Of the Souls Excellency, and of the miseries which she has contracted by
Sin.

THe Church has often times seen the Truth of her belief gainsaid by contrary
Heresies, neither has she almost at any time explained the mysteries of faith,
but that she has seen new Sects arise, which by different ways have
endeavored to bereave her of her Purity, and to engage her in Error, when she
explained her self upon the mystery of the Trinity, and that she had taught
her Children to adore the plurality of Persons, in the Unity of the Divine
Essence, she was opposed by two contrary Heresies, the one of which confounded
the Persons, the other divide the Nature, when to declare unto us the Economy
of the Incarnation, she has taught us that Man-God did unite in the unity of
his Person, the Divine Nature; with the humane, there arose Veritas and virtus
medium tenent, ^esis and vitium extrema occupant in qua de viare sine periculo
ne^o potest.
Heretics, who desirous to destroy one another, quitted the Catholics
opinions, and persuaded themselves either that there was but one Nature or two
Persons in Jesus Christ, when finally, the same Church distinguishing, between
the purity and the corruption of nature, taught us that the one was the work
of GOD, the other the work of sin, two Heresies sprung up, which withstood
this truth with different weapons, for the one confounded the corruption of
Nature with her Essence, and Imagined that there was a bad Principium, of which
all things visible were the work: the other by a clean contrary tract, would
excuse the disorders of sin, by the goodness of Nature, and persuade us that
man's Irregularities were nether the effects, nor the punishment of his
Rebellion, it approoved of Concupiscence, and placed it in the Terrestiall
Paradise before the Serpent had seduced the first woman; it made merry with
Original righteousness, and bereft her of the Power of composing the differences
of the soul and body; it approved of all those revolts which we look upon as
the cursed consequences of sin, and employed it is reason to persuade
Catholics, that they were rather the effects of our Constitution then the
Punishments of our disobedience, it maintained together with Philosophy whose
arms it borrowed, to fight against Religion, that death was rather a law then a
punishment, and that even in the state of Innocence a man could not have fenced
himself against death. The Churches belief being equally distant from these two
Errors, and since she does as constantly confess the goodness of nature as
her corruption. I have thought good throughout all this work to mingle
Invectives with Panygericks, and to observe as well the Advantages which man
receives from God, as the miseries which he contracts by sin, I therefore think
my self obliged to set forth the beauties of the soul, before I describe her
blemishes, and to paint forth on the same Table her perfections, and her
defaults.

The souls Original contributes to her greatness, and though she be brought
Ex Nihilo, it is no small miracle that Divine Power has been able to draw so
excellent a thing from so barren a subject. Philosophers Consiste in medio
anim^, seu divina and (...) res (...) sec^um plures Phylosophos, seu minime
divinae quoniam quidem mortalis ut soli Epicuro placet seu de coelo exciperis
seu de terta conciperis, seu numeria seu atomis concinnaris, seu cum corpore
incaeperis, seu post corpus induceris, unde and quoquo modo hominem facis
animal rationale sensus and scier (...) capacissimum. Tertul. de testi. animae.
who never knew the truth without the mixture of falsehood, and who have always
in Religion mingled Fables with History, Imagined that soul made a part of the
Divine substance that she was a slip of his being, and that after having
inlivened the body which served her for a sepulcher, or prison, she should be
happily reunited to her Principium. Some others more modest believe, that she
drew her birth from Heaven, and that preserving the memory of her dear Country,
she could ill bear with the length of her exile. Some others less elevated
have persuaded themselves that she was formed of earth, and that being more
extenuated, and not more noble then the body, she had the same Element for her
Original, the Pythagorians composed her of Numbers, and would have harmony to
be her Essence, as that which makes Peace in the world, and accords the
Elements; some dotards have drawn her from the Atoms of the Sun, and gave her a
body composed only of Light and Heat.

But Christian Religion teaches us, that she is a spirit created by God in
time, infused into a body to inanimate it, the spring head of Motion and Life,
and that in her noblest operations, she stands in need of her salves Organes to
operate withal, Light is in some sort natural to her, in her understanding
she comprehends the Principles of all Sciences; her will has in it the seed of
all virtue, the senses are so many Messengers which inform her with whatsoever
passes in the world, and by their faithful reports teach her those truths
which she was ignorant of, it is true, that there are some truths which are
rather infused into her then acquired by her, and which Nature has so
powerfully imprinted in her Essence as Errors self cannot deface them, she
without an Instructor knows there is but one God, she preserves this belief in
the midst of Superstition, in this point she is Christian, even when Infidel
whilst she offers Nam te quoque palam and tota liberate qu^ non licet nobis,
ita audimus pro nuntiare quod Deus dederit and si Deus voluerit. Ea voce (...)
significas and omnem illi confiteris potestatem ad cujuc spectas voluntatem
simul and c^te os negas esse Deos dum suis vocabilis nuncupas Saturnu^, Jovem,
Marte^, and Minervam. Tertull. de test. animae.
Incense to her Idols, she trusts in him who sees all things, and after having
invoked Saturn and Jupiter, she implores aid from him whom her Conscience tells
her is the true Creator of Heaven and Earth; she is ignorant of the fall of
Devils, and by the hatred which she bears unto them, makes it appear that she
is not ignorant of their guile, whilst she is possessed with these Tyrants, she
cease not to think upon her lawful Sovereign; and sin which has not been
able to destroy her Nature c d Sentis igitur tuum perditorem and licet soli
illum noverint christiani tu tamen eum nosti dum odisti. Tertul. de test.
animae.
could not deface her knowledge, nor her love; she loves God though she offends
him, all the ties she has to these perishable things, are the remainders of
that Natural Inclination, and because every Creature is an Image of it is
Creator, she cannot see them without being in some sort transported, the shadow
of God awakens her flame, but having neither light nor heat enough to raise her
self up to him, she remains engaged on the earth and by a strange blindness
she forgets the Summum Bonum to fasten her self to his Picture, she presageth
her misfortune Sentis animam quae ut sentias efficit: recogita in praesagiis
varem, in omnibus augurem, in eventibus prospicem. Tertul. de test. animae.
before she has any knowledge thereof, she prophesies it before she disputes,
and when she first enters into the world, she witnesses by her tears, that she
has some sense of her miseries, as soon as she has by her cries saluted the
Sun, she teaches those that understand her, that she very well knows the earth
is the seat of misery and that one cannot live long there without suffering
much sorrow.

When age indues her with the use of Reason, she does not lose the use of
Prophecy, her dreams serves for presages. The Heavens whilst she is at rest,
advertize her, of her disasters, and the Angels treating with her in a
condition wherein she cannot treat with men, acquaints her with the good and
bad successes of her enterprises, she makes Non mirum si (...) Deo data ^nima
(...) divinare. ^ertul. de test. animae.
out salleys which cause men to believe that though she be fastened to the
body, yet she is not a Prisoner, for when she pleases she abandons the senses,
and collects her self, that she may be the less interrupted in her
Meditations: she seeks for knowledge, in the Center of her essence, and as if
she did complain of the sights Infidelity, or the ears sloth, she endeavors
to learn at home within her self what she cannot find out in the world, in
effect she would be very ignorant if she knew nothing, but what she learns from
her Officers: for as they are but the Organes of the body, they can only
observe the qualities of the objects, and can only inform their Sovereign of
the luster of Colors, the diversity of sounds, and of the varities of smells,
but when she withdraws within her self she knows subsistances, she treats with
spirits, and raising her self-above all things, created, she forms unto herself
certain Ideas of a Divinity. Nay, she is an Image thereof, and it seems God
took pleasure, to draw his own Picture in the soul of man, and to make us
admire in this chief work of his power, the unity of his Nature, and the
Plurality of his Persons; for though this spirit be engaged In Materia, and
that it works differently according to the several Organes of the body, that
it digests meat by natural heat, converts it into blood by means of the Liver,
distributes it into all parts* by the veins, and by a miraculons Metamorphosis
gives a hundred several shapes to the same food, yet is it not divided, and
representing the unconceivable unity of God, it is Tota in Toto and Tota
inqualibet part. Thus the soul conteins that which seems to enclose her, she
lends her host house room, she upholds her house, she inanimates* her
Sepulcher, and this Created Divinity is so great, as she Circumscribes the
Temple wherein she makes her residence. This admirable unity agrees with a
Trinity of powers, which makes the soul an excellent Image of God; for she has
an active understanding, which conceives all things, a happy memory which
records them, and an absolute will, which disposes of them; she knew the
highest of our miseries by reflecting on her self, before Faith had revealed
unto her the procession of the Divine persons, Nature had given her some
glimmering thereof, by studying what she found to be in her self; she learnt
what was in God, and seeing that she conceived a word in her understanding, and
a love in her will, she had no trouble to comprehend that the father begot a
Son, and that the Son together with the Father produced a Holy Ghost. Plato
who had read no other book then that of his own soul, guest at these Truths.
Trismegistus Monas genuit Monadem and in se suum reflexit ardorem. Trismegist.
who had only learned these lights out of the bosom of Nature, had some weak
knowledge of the mysteries, and we are bound to confess, that neither the one
nor the other would ever have known the Divine Original had they not seriously
considered the copy. As the soul is the shadow of the divine Essence, it shares
in part of his highest perfections; her light is not obscured by her Prison:
the body which is formed but of earth does not derogate from her Nobility, nor
Power, and death which threatens the House wherein she lives, injures not her
Immortality, she is knowing in the midst of obscurity, Absolute, amidst the
revolt of her Subjects, Immortal in the bosom of death it self; the senses
which endeavor to seduce her by their unfaithful reports, cannot abuse her,
and let them use what foul play they please, she has always light enough to
discover their Imposture, she corrects their errors; and when she will make
use of her own rights, she finds Counselors in the Bas^ of her being, who
convince these faithless Officers of fals-hood: she finds often times less
resistance in her body then in her self, one only Act Anima autem movet corpus,
ab illa enim impingi, and pedes in incessum, and manus incontactum and oculos
in aspectum and linguam in essatum velut sigillario motu superficiem into
agitante. Ter. tul. de anima.
of her will, makes the eyes open, the arms be lifted up, and the legs go,
these parts are so obedient to her commands, as they never resist when in
health, their Rebellion arises rather from Infirmity, then malice, and if her
subjects forget their duty, they are never the first Authors of disorder, the
tongues diligence in expressing her thoughts exceeds belief, the eyes makes
prodigious have to bring her news, and the ears as lazy as they are; are
wonderfully faithful, in informing her of what they understand: the hands
invent a thousand means to content her, the five branches whereof they are
Composed are the mothers of all Arts, and they are so affectionate to their
Sovereign, as she has no sooner designed any thing but these industrious
officers do forthwith faithfully execute it. Nature would be jealous of their
labors, did she not know that their Power is bou^ded, and that for all they
can do to imitate her, they can neither give life, nor motion to their
workmanship, in fine, the soul which governs them so dexterously, and which
seems to foregoe all the other parts of the body to inanimate them, loses half
her Power when she has no hands, and this high and mighty Sovereign seems to
execute her greatest designs by the means of these faithful confederates.

As she is absolute in her servitude, she is immortal in her grave, and all
the atteints which sickness gives her, cannot trouble her rest, if she
apprehend Pain, it is because the body that she inanimates resents it, if she
fear death, it is because it destroys her Mansion, and if she seem Porro and
animam compati corpori! cui loeso ictibus, vulneribus, ulceribus condolescit,
and corpus animae cui afflictae curae angore amore cobereseit. Tertul. de
animae.
to be moved or afraid it is because she loves the slave that would foregoe her:
the knowledge she has of her own Immortality, makes her rest quiet, she takes
delight in entertaining her self with thought of the life which must succeed
this life, she sees far into ages that are to come, she ordains things which
must not be accomplished till after her departure, she is very jealous of her
honor, and knowing very well, that death which will destroy her body, shall
not ruin her, she endeavors to do Actions, for which she shall suffer no
reproach in the other world; her cares which extend themselves beyond the
precincts of time, are proofs of her Nam omnibus fere ingenita est famae post
mortem cupido, longumque est eos retexere quorum innumera elogia sunt
contemptae mortis propter posthu^ sa^am. Terrul. de any.
Immortality, and the Paision she has for Glory, witnesses that she is not
ignorant of the happiness which is prepared for her in Heaven, when the moment
wherein she is to make her entrance thereinto approaches, and that she is
ready to be divorced from her body she operates with a new strength; she sees
things with more light, all her words are Hinc denique evenit saepe anima^ in
ips^ divortio potius agitari, d^ ex major^ suggestu jam in liber^ constituta
enunciat quae videt, quae andit, quae incipit nosse. Tert. de animae
Oracles, it seems that freeing her self from Materia, she becomes a pure
spirit, and that having no further Commerce with men, she treats invisibly with
Angels, her last endeavors are usually the greatest, she gathers strength out
of her bodies weakness, and death destroys her Prison, only to set her at
liberty, she beginsto taste the sweet of Heaven, and she looks upon parting from
the earth, as upon the end of her servitude. I should be too tedious if I would
perticularize in all the souls advantages, the rest of this discourse must be
employed in showing what out rages she receives from sin; for as soon as she
took up her lodging, she became slave to the body; she lost her Power when she
lost her Innocence, when she ceased to obey, she ceased to command, and as if
obedience had been the foundation of all her greatness, rebellion was the
cause of her miseries, of all the cognizances whichwere together with Grace
infused into her, none remained in her but doubts and jealousies, which makes
her as often embrace fals-hood as truth; though she know God: she adores the
workmanship of his hands, her enlightnings detein her not from engaging her
self in error, and the great Inclination which she has for the Summum Bonum
does not estrange her from the love of perishable things, she is the Image of
God; and cease to resemble him, she expresses his greatness, and does no
longer imitate his virtues, she conserves the Trinity of her power in the unity
of her essence, yet cannot conceive one God in three Persons, she makes and
Idol unto her self of every Creature, all that pleases her seem Gods unto her,
her Interest is the soul of her Religion, her love arises from fear, she
adores whatsoever she fears, and unless the God which she serves had thunders
wherewithal to punish her she would have no victimes to load his Altars
withal.

Her Punishment is the Picture of her offense, she meets with rebellion in her
slave; the conspiracy of all the parts of her body is general; her senses do
seduce her, Her Passions do torment her, her Imagination troubles her, and her
subjects do despise her, she sees her self obliged to encourage their disorders
to give life to Rebels, which justle her Authority, to nourish up monsters
which rend her in pieces, and to arm soldiers which plunder her estate, but
nothing ads more unto her Pain; then the love which she bears her enemy, for
though he prosecute her, she cannot resolve to hate him and dares not make War
against him without assistance from heaven: this Traitor is so full of cunning
as he makes himself be beloved by her whom he abuses, she is sensible of all
the evils that he endures, and as if her pain arose from her love; she never
ceased to suffer since she began to love him, she apprehends her slaves
miseries more then her own; she fears death more then sin, she is more afraid
of ruin then of falsehood, and as if this inclination had changed her Nature,
she desires no other good, nor dreads no other evil, then what is sensible:
Music charms her discontents, Pictures serve her for a diversion, she is
pleased with smells, and the greatest part of her delights consists in what
contents her senses, by a sequel as shameful as necessary, she is burnt by
Fevers, pained by the Gout, weakened by sickness, and whatsoever hurts her
body, abaseth her courage.

After the Injuries which she has received from this domestic enemy, Nam
etsicaro peccairix secun, dum quam vivere prohibemur, cujus opera damnatur
cancupisceeatia adversus spiritum, ob quam carnales notantur iusamia, non tamen
suo nomine caro infamis. Neque enim de proprio sapit quid, aut sentit ad
suadendam vel imperandam peccat^lam: quid, ni? quae in ministerium est. Tert.
de anima.
It is hard to judge which of the two has juster cause of complaint, for each
of them seem to be equally guilty; and that the one and the other of them are
the mutual cause of their displeafures. In Adam, sin arose from the soul, but
in his Children it draws it is birth from the flesh, and in the most part of
their errors, it is the senses which seduce them, Pleasures which corrupt them,
sorrows which keep them, love, and passions which tyrannize over them. Thus our
misfortunes drive equally from these two, and if the soul made our first father
guilty, It is the body which makes his Children unfortunate; yet must we avow
that the soul is the greater Delinquent in us as well as in him, for if she
have no freedom to defend her self against Original sin, and if necessity may
excuse a misfortune which is not voluntary, she is more guilty then the body,
because she commits so many faults with delight, stays not for being
solicitated by the senses, and that by a blind Impetuosity, she willingly
embraces whatsoever is pleasing unto her, she ads voluntary sins, to sins of
Nature, and will have that of her faults, some be the effects of her
misfortune; and others, of her lewdness.

In fine, it seems that those that follow her motions endeavor to exceed the
sin of their birth by the sins of their life, and as if they thought it an
offense to be more innocent then their Father, they strive to be more faulty
then he who committed all the sins in the world; when he made all that
descended from him Criminal.

The second Discourse.
That the soul is become slave unto the body by reason of sin.

THough the soul be the noblest part of man, yet is she not void of fault, and
for any excessive praise that Profane Philosophy may give her, she has
natural weaknesses which do accompany her, even in Innocence, Adams soul was
engaged in his body, and in her Noblest operations, she needed the Organes
thereof to express her thoughts, or execute her designs; though she were
pleased with this dependancy, she ceased not to be servile: and whosoever
should reduce an Angel to this condition, should take from him his glory and
his liberty: she could not quit her body to go to Heaven, whethersoever her
love did carry her, she must carry her host with her, and rather then to forego
this pleasing Prison, she did prorogue the accomplishment of her desire.
Ignorance was in some sort natural unto her, Quod enim a Deo est ^on tam
extinguitur quam obumbratur: potest autem obumbrari quia non est Deus, extingui
non potest quia a Deo est, Tertul. de anima.
and though knowledge was infused into the soul of Adam together with Grace, we
are not sure that he could have transmitted it unto his offspring, had not the
way of learning it been painful, it would have at least been tedious, and if
labor had not been requisite, time would at least have been required to the
acquiring thereof, though the Organes of the body had been well disposed, there
would have been a difference in their temper, and all souls would not have had
the same advantages, of Grace, which was their last perfection, would never
have raised them into the rank of Angels, and whatsoever communication men
might have had with those happy spirits, they could never have arrived at their
Hierarchy.

Though we are hereby, taught that the soul had her weaknesses in the state of
Innocence, yet being Natural they were not painful, and though they were
faults, yet were they not punishments: for in this condition man knew nothing
which pained him, he was satisfied with his Advantages, and was not less happy
though no Angel, his nature being the mere work of God had no defaults, that
which seemed humble ceased not to be glorious; and the tie which the soul had
to the body, was not a servitude though a necessity, she was well pleased with
her abode, and though she were of a more elevated Condition, then was her body,
Certamen corporis and animae non fuisset in illo beatae pacis loco, id est in
paradiso deliciarum, si nemo peccasset. Aug. lib. 1 oper. imperf.
the service she had from thence made her love her Quarter; the Chains
wherewith they were united were so strong, as nothing but sin, could break
them, their Inclinations in the difference of their Nature, were so
conformable, as whatsoever pleased the one, did not dislike the other: the body
by an admirable prodigy heighthned it is self into the souls Employments
without violence, and the soul deigned to submit her self to the necessities of
the body, without injury to her self, she found no difficulty in all she did,
and if the body were not serviceable to her in her more noble works; yet did it
not resist her therein, their contentments were Common, and as the soul was not
subject to sorrow; neither did the body feel any pain. This happy Condition
lasted no longer then the time of Innocence; when man once lost his
righteousness, he lost his happiness: and when he became Criminal, he became
miserable, the soul went less in her greatnesses, and this living Image of the
Divine Essence, saw her self brought to such misery, as may better be expressed
by tears then words; nothing remained entire in man, and the outrages of sin
dispersed themselves into all the parts of the body, the understanding was
darkened, the memory weakened, and the will depraved. In all the faculties of the
soul; the soul received some prejudice in her very Essence, and evil found her
out in such a condition, wherein as being Forma corporis, she was engaged in
the Materia thereof, for since her offense, she her self as it were obliged to
love a cruel Tyrant, to bear with an irreconcilable Enemy, to serve a
rebellious slave, and to make up all her misfortunes, reduced to that
necessity, as she is not able without sorrow, to forego the Cause of all her
disasters.

To conceive her corruption, we must of necessity comprehend her purity, and
observe the Effects which Original righteousness wrought in the soul: the
first was, that notwithstanding her being engaged in a body, she ceased not to
be spiritual, her Functions made her not Animale, and though united to the
body by Grace; yet was she not thereby a Prisoner, she communicated her
perfections to it, and shared not in it is defects, she was free though bound;
her body Tunc corpus non erat carcer animae ut somniavit Pl^, sed erat Templum
Tertul.
was her Temple, not her Prison, and the love she bore unto it did not injure
her liberty, but as soon as sin had insinuated it self into the ground work of
her Essence, she changed condition, the chain of love which tied her to her
body, was turned to a servile ord, which bound her to her slave; her charity
was turned into self-love; she forgot her greatness; and that she might
interest her self in all the desires of her body, she lost all the qualities of
her spirit, sensible things became her diversions, she delighted in nothing but
the voluptuousness of the senses, if she had changed nature by changing
condition, she ccased to love the Summum Bonum, and began to idolize her body,
she fore-went her noble desires, for such as were infamous, and confining all
her wishes, either to the affairs or pleasures Per amorem corporis 'anima^
aliquomodo corpora scit, and definit esse spiritus August.
of her body, she loved nothing but what was earthly and sensible.

They say that in the state of glory, the bodies of the blessed will become
spiritual, and that losing all the feelings of their Materia, they shall only
have the inclinations of the spirit, that they shall follow their soul without
trouble, and by an unconceiveable agility they shall fly faster then the winds,
or lightening, that they shall pierce the most solid things, and that being
more subtle then flames of fire,; they shall penetrate even the substance, of
the Heavens, they shall shine with glory, and being more radiant then the Sun,
they shall fill all parts with light. but in the state of sin, the soul assumed
the qualities of the body, her love engaged her further in the Materia, then
Nature had done; she made her Prison more straight and more obscure, she lost
the lights she was infused withal, that she might see no longer but through
the senses, and her Compliance with her slave did so alter her Inclinations, as
reflecting upon her self; she had much ado to believe that she was yet
spiritual. This violent, though irregular love was occasionally the cause of
good, and served the soul to free her from the body, for Divine Justice (which
often times makes us find our Punishment in our faults) condemned Sinon peccosset
Adam, non erat expoliandus corpore, sed supervestiendus immortalitate. Aug st
lib. 6. de Genes. ad litter. cap. 22.
the soul to forego the body, as soon as she began to love it in excess, the
same sin which did unite them did by death divide them; their Chains grew
weaker, as their affection strengthened, and when the soul had most passions to
retein her body, she was forced to forsake it: for when Original
righteousness was retreated the Elements began to mutiny, Natural heat
usurped upon the radical moisture, and all these contraries which lived in
Peace, declared open War. Nature was enforced to call in industry to her
succor, and took advice with Physic to appease all her domestic divisions;
but she knew by experience, that losing grace, she had lost all remedies, and
that death was an incurable evil. Thus did man's life become a long sickness,
in the which he was for some years preserved by food, which could not
notwithstanding keep him from dying, his soul was fain to employ her care to
defend her self from death, and she who by an irregular love was become
Corporal, by a just punishment became mortal, for though the soul be
immortal in her substance, and that she continues this advantage even in her
very sin, yet is she punished in her bodies death, she is so well pleased with
her Prison, as she loves the lothsomness thereof, and she is so accustomed to
serve; as she abhors the very name of Liberty: she trembles when one speaks to
her of death, she makes her fear appear upon the body, which she in-animates,
she weeps through the eyes thereof, looks pale in it is visage, sighs by it is
mouth: and in this mutual suspiration, a man cannot tell whether it be the
sou^ that is afflicted; or the body that complains. The evil has it is
beginning in the body, but passes into the Igitur anima corpus est, ex
corporalium passionum communione. Tert. de anima.
soul; it is the body that perishes, but it is the soul that suffers, the body
which is corrupt, but the soul which despairs: in fine it is upon the body that
death exercises his cruelty, but it is the soul that is pierced through with
sorrow. This is the bodies death, the souls punishment, and two guilty parties
are punished with one and the same scourge.

But this bodily death is the effect of a spiritual death, which is peculiar
to the soul; and which though it be invisible cease not to be veritable, this
death is nothing else, but the privation of Original righteousness, which
commits more outrages upon the soul, then natural death does upon the body: for
man by losing grace lost all the advantages whereof Grace was the cause, he
ceased to be upon good Terms with God, Non in cupiditatibus fraenandis continen
tia laboraret, si nibil nos contra quod contenderet detineret; si nihil bonae
voluntati ex mala concupiscentia repugnaret. August. lib. de Con^. cap. 3.
and began to be upon bad with himself: all his Inclinations were changed, all
his enlightenings darkened, and all his faculties out of order; he could not
conceive how being still himself in appearance, he was no longer effectually
so, and that the fault which had drawn down Gods just anger upon his head, had
bereft him of all those glorious Qualities which he possessed with Innocence,
he sought himself out, and could not find himself, he was ashamed of his bodies
nakedness, and afraid of his souls misery, he could not endure himself, when
he yet loved himself better, by a strange miracle, self* caused hatred, and the
same sin which made him proud, loaded him with confusion.

He was sensible of all evils at once, and passed in a moment, from supreme
happiness to extreme misery: we are not sensible of sin, because it is born
with us, we are not touched with the disorders thereof, because it fore-runs
our reasons, Nature and sin are mutually confused in us, and nothing does so
much comfort us in our misfortunes, as that we have been always unfortunate, If
we have recourse to Grace in Baptism, it is of so nice a Nature, as it is
undiscernable, and as we continue to find illusions in our senses, and revolts
in our Passions, we have much ado to believe that Grace should reign there
where sin does yet live: when by a voluntary offense we lose it, we were hardly
sorry for the loss of a thing, the Possession whereof we are hardly sensible
of, we must become convinced by reasons before we* Hanc pugnam non experiuntur
in semetipsis nisi bellatores virtutum debellatoresque vitiorum. Non expugnat
concupiscentiae malum nisi continentiae bonum. Sunt autem qui legem Dei omnino
nescientes malas concupiscentia^ nec inhostibus deputant inque miserabili
coecitate servientes, in super etiam se beat^s putant satiendo ea^ potius quam
domando. August. lib. de Continent. cap. 3.
be persuaded to believe that we are unfortunate preserving in our offense
whatsoever we value most in our Innocence, we cannot believe that we are
faulty; for a Philosopher becomes not ignorant, though he lose Grace, a Prince
though fa^ulty descends not from his Throne, the avaricious rich man, augments
his Revenue by continuing his usury; a proud man loses not his greatness,
though he lose humility, nor does a fair woman lose her beauty, though she
stain her honor. Our sins bereave us not of our advantages; and finding no
change neither in fortune, nor body, we cannot believe that any such has
befaln us in our soul, if the same, sin whereby we lost Grace, had taken from
us our health, we should strive more to preserve our Innocence, and did Crimes
cause the same disorder in our conditions, as it does in our souls, we should
often times set Philosophers ignorant, Kings without subjects, rich men ruined,
proud men abased, and fair women become ill-fauoured; but all the loss being
spiritual, it is insensible and because it leaves us whatever is most precious
to us, we doubt whether it be true or no.

The Pledges of Heaven which Grace gives unto us, the quality of the Children
of^ God which she obteins for us, the dignity of u Omnis pulchritudo ^ilie
regis ab into. Psalm. 44.
the Temples of the Holy Ghost which she procures us, and the honors of being
the Members of Jesus Christ, which she acquires in our behalf, are the
advantages which we possess without being sensible thereof, and which we lose
without sorrowing. Faith is requisite to the knowledge of our souls health, and
of our loss, and unless we carefully enquire into our conscience, hardly can
we know whether we be guilty or innocent, but Adam had all miseries, poured
down at once, upon him, his loss was not by degrees, as ours is, it was great
at the first, and if any advantages remained to him after his loss of favor,
he needed new Grace to make good use thereof, he was sadly sensible of the
privation, because it was general; he was so much the more unfortunate, for
that his misery succeeded a height of happiness, and he had so much the less
reason of Comfort, for that the fault which bereft him of righteousness took
therewithal from him, all that he was thereby endowed withal, his soul found
no longer any submission in her body, no more faithfulness in her senses, nor
obedience in her Passions, she was forced to encourage all their disorders, and
to give life to Rebels, or such as were guilty, she felt her self distracted by
her own Inclinations, and not comprehend how being but one in her Essence, she
was divided in her will:

But nothing did so much astonish her, as to see that Rebellion was spread
abroad throughout her whole Empire, and that all her subjects were become
Rebels, for her Passions which formerly followed her orders, now did nothing
but by their own motions, they waited no longer for Commands from reason, and
consulting with nothing but their own Interests, began to rise as often as they
were solicited either by Pleasure or Profit so to do: if her senses were not
disobedient, they were unfaithful, and being corrupted by objects, made her no
Ignorantia peccati poena, peccatum est, and peccatorum plurium origo inde ait
Psalm. delicta juventutis, and ignorantias meas ne memineris. Et si enim
damnabiliora peccata sunt qua a scientibus commi^untur, tamen si ignorantiae
peccata nulla essent hoc non legeremus quod commemoravi. Aug. lib. de Gratia
and arbit. cap. 3.
more true reports. Falsehood entered into her by the eyes or by the ears, under
the likeness of Truth, vice did insinuate it self, into them with more delight
then virtue; and these wicked Spies holding Intelligence with the enemy, took
Pleasure when once they had suffered themselves to be corrupted, to abuse their
Sovereign.

In fine, the revolt was so general as it passed even into all the parts of
the body, the operations whereof being necessary, it seemed they could not be
irregular. Natural Heat did no longer perform all it is Functions, and were it
either that it had lost it is strength, or that it found any resistance in Food
it could not perfectly digest nourishment: and crudities were occasioned
thereby, which furnished matter for sicknesses. Old age, which was a
consequence of this disorder, took from her the use of her Members, and the
soul was never more troubled then when she found, that an humor falling upon
the Nerves, hindered their motion, and caused Pain in them, Man abhorred
himself, he saw wrinckles in his face; and he thought his death was not far
off, when he saw his hair grow gray, that his eyes lost their luster; that his
ears distinguished no more of sounds, and that his legs, grown weak, could no
longer sustain him.

To all these evils that the soul of our first Father suffered after having
sinned, our disorders have added some more direful; for the soul seems only to
be fastened to her body, that she may undergo a thousand Punishments. Death
presents himself before her, in a thousand dreadful shapes, every sickness is
a Torment, every part of the body is a place where Pain may assail her, the
remedies which she seeks for to cure her, are new pains, and the very virtues
which she calls in to her aid, are so austeer, as they often times send her back
to despair; sometimes she changes her disease into a remedy, and by an
extravagancy which Nature teaches her, she makes use of the rigor of death
against the miseries of life. Though this blind Fury Contra inju^ rias vitae
beneficium mortis habeo. Seneca.
be always unjust, and that it be not lawful for any how unhappy soever, to
hasten the hour of his death, yet it is a good proof of the misery of sinful
man, and an excellent argument, to prove that the soul is very unhappy, since
she finds no more wretched Place of abode, then her body: and that she
resolves to lose life that she may recover her liberty.

The third Discourse.
Of the weaknesses which humane understanding has contracted by Sin.

IF the understanding be not the Noblest of all the faculties of the soul, it
is at least the most illustrious, it is the Sun of our soul which conveys light
into the will, which guides this blind Queen, which dictates her decrees unto
her, which pronounces them for her, and which serves her for an Interpreter
when she will express her intentions. it is this which seeks out truth and
finds it, which vaunts it self to be to be the Father of Sciences, and which
solicited by admiration discovers the causes, the effects whereof she has
observed, It is this which conceives the perfections of each Creature; and
which without losing it self from the soul, has the virtue of attracting
objects, and of transforming them into it is self; that it may know them, it
makes the Sun descend from the Sky without Magic Carmima vel c^lo possunt
deducere lunam. Virgil.
it makes mettle rise from the bottom of Abisses, without violence; and
dissects whole Nature without the effusion of blood. It is this Noble faculty
likewise which appears first in man, which entertains Company, and takes the
heart, and which makes it self be admired even by those that do condemn it:
but though it retein so many advantages as makes it be generally esteemed of,
yet has it it is defects, and a man may easily judge by the weakness thereof:
that as it had a great share in the sin of man, it had the like in his
punishment, for to convince man's understanding, and oblige him to condemn
himself, making him his own Judge, you need but set Nature and Religion before
him, and let him see the shameful spots he has contracted by sin, in these
two faithful lookingglasses.

Since it is Rebellion, it is become slave unto the senses, and cannot discover
truth, but by their Nihil est in intellectu quodprius non suerit in sensu.
Arist.
Inter medium, it is inwardly possessed with ignorance; it is cruellest enemy is
it is first hostess, it carries it is butcher in it is bosom, and though nothing
be contrary unto it then error: yet nothing is more natural, it has much ado
to rid it is hand thereof, and knowledge which promises to free it of Error is
not got without much labor, it is roses are mingled with thorns. Curiosity is a
Punishment, and it is disputable, whether sciences be not more troublesome then
the evils whereof they cure us. Colleges are shameful Prisons, the Masters
thereof are unsufferable Tyrants, and the Scholars unfortunates innocents to
learn Sciences, we lose content, and liberty, and our understanding is so out
of the way as it must be made to endure a great deal of evil, before any good
be done unto it, whatsoever cunning is used to make arts Nelentibus subintravil
ignorantia rerum ^ndarum and ^upiscentia noxia^um quibus comites sub infer^ntur
error and dolor. Aug. (...) ^hirid. c. 24.
pleasing unto us, they always cost us tears, and that we may see ignorance is
natural unto us since we are become guilty, it is hardly driven away, but
returns with ease.

But the rigor of our Punishment is the more augmented in that the
understanding is enjoined to employ unfaithful Officers to be instructed by
ignorant Masters and to be led by blind guides. In the state of Innocence,
truth was written by the hand of Nature in the bottom of our soul, knowledge
was thereinto infused, and was not seduced by the senses, the soul learnt
nothing of them, which she knew not before of her self, she was wise without
trouble or error, and if she made trial of her eyes or ears, 'twas rather
for recreation, then necessity: but now Ignorance reigns in our understanding,
and to overcome this Monster, we must make use of our senses which hold
intelligence with it. What Victory can a Prince hope for, who employs Rebels to
defend his State, or to fight against his enemies, and what good success can
man's understanding hope for, which is necessitated to be instructed by Masters
which are as ignorant as its self, the senses perceive but the appearances of
things, their substances are unknown unto them, their operations are uncertain,
and they stand in need of Air or Light to be informed of the Truth. It Is true
that the understanding examines their reports, but what judgment can one
expect from one that is ignorant; what decree can a blind Judge pronounce, who
is instructed: only by corrupted witnesses? who sees not that this manner of
proceeding is too severe not to be a punishment, and who will not confess that
man is faulty, since he is so unhappy.

Those who undertake to defend him, say that the Understanding knows the Truth,
by instinct, that it is knowing without Art, and that as little Birds know
their Dams by the voice, the understanding discerns Truth from Falsehood, and by
a natural judgment, embraces the one; and rejectes the other: but to boot
that it is a kind of Naturalium scientia ne in bestiis quidem deficit. Tertulde
anima.
Infamy to treat man as you would do beasts, and to give him an instinct who
ought to have reason, do we not every day see that he is deceived in his
discoveries, that the chiefest of Philosophers has been forced to confess,
that there were more glorious falsehoods then truths, and more dark and obscure
truths then falsehoods. Has not error more that side with her, then her Enemy?
Does not the number of those that are deceived exceed the number of the wise?
and was it not requisite that God should endue us with the light of Faith, to
free us from Imposturisme and Superstition.

I could excuse the Ignorance of Humane understanding, were it not accompanied
with disquiet, but it can never be at rest; all objects which present
themselves, awaken it, and by a presumptuous vanity, it will make its weakness
pass for a mark of its greatness, it boasts that the noblest parts of the world
are always in motion, that if the earth be fixed, it is because it is heavy, that
the heavens move over the heads only because they are light: but its
restlesness is a proof of its inconstancy: were it more firm, it would be more
staid, and had it not lost the highest Truth, it would not go inquest after the
shadow thereof, its disquiet is both the token and punishment of its sin, it
can find no rest, because it seeks not for in Irrequ^tum ^rit cor nostrum
done^ (...) in t^ Deus. Aug. in Con^ss.
God: it is sentenced to eternal error, because it strayed from its
principal object, and its perpetual motion is not so much a witness of its
vivacity, as misery; it alters only because it is poor, its indigence is the
cause of its agitation, and seduced by vain hope, it still seeks after the the
knowledge of good and evil, which its enemy did promise it in Paradise: being
more inconstant then Protheus in the Fable, it disguizeth it self in a thousand
shapes, by a dexterity which is injurious to it, it adapts it self to all
things that it would know, and receives the Impression of all the objects
which it considers, when it cannot arrive at their greatness, it abaseth
them, when it cannot descend to their lowliness, it raises them up, and thus
abusing it self, it never arrives at the exact knowledge of Truth, it values
things that are common, because it ennobleth them, it inspireth high affairs,
because it undervalueth them, not considering that there is injustice in this
way of proceeding, it obliges the will to follow it is opinions, and enforces
this blind Queen, to love what it puts an esteem upon, and to hate what it
despises.

All this while it so badly judges the things which present themselves before
it is eyes, as it always prefers Novelty before Greatness, and Raritie before
Excellence: the Non mag^a sed nova miramur. Seneca Quaest. Nature.
Sun seems not to be so pleasing unto it in his Luster, as in his obscurity he
appears not so beautiful unto it, in his rising, as in his Magna miracula
assiduitat^ viguerunt. Aug.
Eclipse, and by an inexcusable piece of Capriciousness, it does not so much
admire his beauty, as his blemishes. Though he rise in Glory, though he equally
dispense his heat and light, though he go round the seasons, ripen the fruits
of the earth, and enrich Nature by his labors, our understanding values him
not, but if he Sol spectato^m non habet (...) cum de^cit. Lunam (...) psectamu^
ni^ labor^ntem. Senquaest Natural.
grow dim at noonday, if he step in the midst of his carreer, if the Moon hide
him from the earth, and if he who gives life to all things, begin himself to
faint, the understanding wonders thereat, and prefers an irregularity, before
Common Miracles: it is not more equitable in it is other judgments, it is
undervaluation, is not better grounded then it is esteem, and it is easy to
observe that so capricious a Judge is corrupted.

But is it not a convincing proof of this, that it can do nothing of Great
without being agitated, that it draws its Force from its vexation, and that it
dares under take nothing of difficulty till it be out of it is ordinary seat,
Poets droop, when not enraged, wisdom is an enemy to their work, they must
Nam sive Gr^ Poetae credimus, aliquando and insanire jucundum est sive Platoni
frustr^ Poeticas fores compos sui pepulit: sive Aristoteli, nullum magnum
ingenium sine mixtura dementia fuit. Non potest grande aliquid and supra
caeteros loqui, ni^ mota men^. Cum vulgaria and solita contempsit in^ inctuque
sacro surrexit excelsi^r, tunc demum aliquid cecinit grandius ore mortali.
Senecde tranquil. animae.
lose their wits to get heat, and to learn the language of the Gods, they must
forget to speak like men. The greatest men have vegaries which deserve the name
of Folly, the Gallantest actions of antiquity, are out of the common road, and
conquerors are only famous because they were irrational, had Alexander measured
his forces with his designs, he had never conquered Asia, and had Caesar well
considered the difficult of h^s enterprise, he had never assailed the Roman
Republique: the understandings Noblest salleys are extravagant, it is Boutadoes
are better then it is argumentations: and man is become so unfortunate since his
fall, that if he will undertake any thing memorable he must forsake reason. In
fine, Folly is so natural unto him, as the greatest understandings are the
most irregular, there is not any in the world without some mixture of Folly,
wise men, and fools are made of the same Temper, and that malancholly which
effects the rarest things, is the same with that which does the greatest
extravagancies; who sees not that man's understanding is corrupted, since his
perfection consists in his disorder, and who will ^ot judge so miserable a
Creature to be faulty, since his noblest faculties cannot act unless they be
Irregular.

But religion will furnish us with better reasons of his weakness* then Nature
can. And we shall find as many reasons of Humiliation in grace, as in sin. All
our remedies reproach (...) maladies, all the favors which we receive from
heaven witness our misery, and one need but consider the manner of Gods
treating with men, to know that man is Criminal. Faith does not so much raise
his Captiv^ntes intellectum in obsequium fidei Apos^olus.
understanding as she does abase it: she obliges it to believe what it cannot
comprehend, she mingles obscurity with all her lights, she seperates certainly
from what is apparent, she commands man to lose his life, in mainteinance of
his belief, and seems to have a design to make him irrational, that he may
become believing* He is not more advantaged by revelations, or ecstasies, then
by Faith, all of them discover unto him his weakness, and teach him that to
understand the things which are of God, he must raise himself above himself.
Prop^cie is a kind of madness, and ecstasy (...) and ^ (...) sob^ii (...)
comp^s (...). Tunc (...) ape^issime and optime prae^icunt futura, cum toti a
Deo cor ipiuntur. Ja^b. in myster.
is an alienation of the understanding: the Prophet who fore-sees things to
come; forsakes the laws of wisdom; He is transported when he pronounces
Oracles, and he cease to speak like a man, when he serves God for an
Interpreter, Revelation enlightens the understanding, but in discovering the
truth unto it, it upbraids it with Ignorance, it is more passive then active,
and the heavens which will humble it in the raising of it up, have often times
chosen the time of sleep to acquaint it with their will; for whilst the senses
are lulled a sleep, that the imagination is drowsy or irregular, that the
understanding is at rest, God is pleased to discover unto it his mysteries, to
the end, that it may know that this enlightening is extraordinary, and that it
wax not proud of an advantage which it only receives, then when it cannot beg
it.

Repentance and Sacrifice which are the two chief means whereby to obtein
pardon for our offenses, are strong proofs of our misery; for they are both of
them injurious to us, the one upbraideth us with our Crime, the other with our
Inconstancy, the one teaches us that we are faulty, the other assures us that
we are fickle; the victime suffers Sacrificium ita est institutum ad do^ntum
pecc^tum ut ipsum appell^tur in sc^pt (...) peccatu^. August.
the death which we deserve, and with it is blood washes the earth which our
sins have sullyed: we learn by it is dying voice, that having not sufficient
merit to satisfy Gods justice, we are bound to offer up unto him borrowed
sacrifices, and to seek for that from without us which we cannot find in our
selves. Repentance is our shame as well as our remedy, for in this sort of
sacrifice, Maxima est enim sact^ injuri^ poe^afecisse: nec qu^quam (...) q^m
quid ad suppliciu^ poe^n t^ae du^ur. S^n c. li. d^ lia c. c6.
our souls health is only grounded upon our inconstancy; unless we can change,
we cannot repent, if we had the constancy of Angels, we should have the
opiniatrecy of Devils, and were we more stable in what is good, we should be
more obstinate in what is evil. Divine mercy husb^ndeth our defaults to
convert us, but at the same time, tha^ it does us a favor, it reproacheth us,
and teaches us that the wo^k of our Salvation is an effect of our weakness:
and its goodness, let no man then hereafter boast himself of his advantages,
after so public a proof of his misery; let him acknowledge that he is totally
corrupted by sin, that God has found nothing in him whereby fitter to save
him, then his Inconstancy, and that he was pleased the virtue which should
expiate his sins, should be grounded upon his levity.

Though all these reasons do sufficiently manifest the corruption of humane
understanding, the greatest of our mysteries is notwithstanding the strongest
prooofe thereof, Ideo De^ factus est bomo, ut ab ^omine p^sset intelligi.
and the Incarnation of our Savior CHRIST does most evidently testify it, for
that proud understanding which pretended to be as knowing as God, has not been
able since his fall to form a true Idea thereof, it has made Gods of all
Creatures, it has offered Incense to the workmanship of it is own hands, and
built Temples to it is Ancestors, or to it is Kings, after having taken them from
their Graves; It has suffered it self to be so guided by sense, as it has bin
able to conceive nothing but sensible Gods, and whatsoever had not a bodily
shape seemed to it, unworthy of adoration. This belief was so universal as the
Jews could not fence themselves from it: all the miracles of Egypt, and of the
Desert could not free them from superstition, and after having seen, as many
prodigies as they had received favors they became Idolaters. God lived with
the Jews as a Sovereign does with his subjects, and gave often times sensible
proofs of his presence. He divided the sea to set them at liberty, he clove
rocks to quench their thirst, made Manna fall in the deserts to appease their
hunger, uttered his oracles by the Mouth of his Prophets to instruct them, made
the Elements fight to defend them, ordered their Troops and gave the word to
their Commanders to encourage them to combat, yet did this people despise his
greatness; so many Miracles could not turn them from Idolatry: After having
obtained so many victories, and triumphs from heaven, they sought for Gods on
earth, and believing more in their senses then in their judgments, they adored
men whom they saw die, unless the Devil which tempted man in Paradise had
corrupted his understanding, so monstrous a error could not have had so many
partakers, and had not blindness been the punishment of our sin, so fearful a
disorder, could not have so long reigned in the world: but if the Malady was
strange, was not the remedy very extraordinary; for to disabuse humane
understanding, Deus non p^tuit ^umanes congressus inire, nisi humanos and
sensus, and affectus susce^t pe^ quos v^ majestatis sue intolerabilem utiquae
hum^nae (...) te^peraret si^i quidem indigna, ^omini aute^ n^cessaria and ita
jam Deo digna quia nihil tam Deo dig^um quam salas ^ominis. Te^tul. lib. 2. in
Marcion. cap 20.
the Son of God must accomodate himselfto the weakness thereof, to restore
unto him the knowledge of God, which he had lost, Christ must take upon him a
body, and suffer his bright Sunshine to be shadowed, that he may become
visible: God became man, to win men; he abased his greatness to m^ke it be
known, he darkened his own light to lighten us, and un-rob'd himself of his
power, to purchase love. In fine, by an excess of mercy, he changed man's fault
into Piety, turned superstition into Religion, and clothing himself with
Mortal Nature, he suffered him to adore a man, and to perform his most just
duty, by satisfying his most unjust desire. It was by this means that God did
draw us out of error, he has freed us, by fitting himself to our Ignorance,
he has made us spiritual by making himself sensible, and to say all in a
word, by making himself man he has made us Gods; but if this mystery declare
unto us the goodness of God, does it not discover unto us the misery of man?
and if it make us admire the Inventions of his Providence; does it not make us
blame the blindness of our understanding, which never knew God so well as when
he became Mortal? and which never conceived the true Religion so well, as when
Religion put on the appearance of superstition?

The fourth Discourse.
That there is no Error into which humane understanding has not plunged it
self, since the State of sin.

Philosophers have made an Idol of humane understanding, they have given it
praises in their Writings which appertein only to God not considering that it
is a slave to the body, and that it cannot work but by the Organes thereof;
they have endeavored to make it have no dependancy upon fortune, and to raise
it above Nature: they fancied to themselves, that humane V^luit Deus seminare
omni ^nimae initiae i^tellectus initiae sapientiae qua legitimum aliquid facit
and sapit. August Scrm. 28. de verbis Domini cap. 8.
understanding, had an infused knowledge; and that it did so readily conceive
all things, as it might easily be discerned it did not learn them, but recall
them into memory. They feigned that it had the seeds of all virtues, and that
by being careful in the improoving of them, it was easy to make it perfectly
virtuous, they persuaded themselves that it had light enough to distinguish
between Truth and Falsehood, that it was naturally pious, and that Religion was
engraven in the groundwork of it is essence: but certainly we must have lost
the remainder of our understanding, if we observe not the fallacy of their
maxims, Ignorance Na^ (...) op^ (...) ^omine ^d (...) ruit, and si (...) ^em
(...) quae om^ virtutem (...) accip^ (...). (...) si ne do^t. in^ ^titias p^ is
rerum m^ximarum. s^d virtute^ s^ inchoavit and uihil amplius. Cicer. lib. 5. d^
finibus.
is natural to the understanding, the wisest Philosophers have complained that
science was long, life short, and that we were surprised by death, before we
could be learned. Aristotle compared the understanding to a Painters cloth,
which may indeed receive all manner of colors from the Painters hand, but
which not having any one ofit self, cannot become a Picture, without the
Painters help. Humane understanding may acquire knowledge, but possesses none;
and the difficulty that goes to the learning of it, is a sufficient proof that
there goes somewhat more to it, then bare remembrance.

Man's sin deserved punishment, and for his desire of too much knowledge he was
adjudged to remain ignorant; for as a disorderly desire of greatness threw him
headlong into misery, and as his immoderate desire of living always made him
die, his unjust thirst after knowledge, made him fall into blindness and
ignorance: We are born with this punishment, Error is an hereditary evil as
well as sin, and as all the sons of Adam are guilty, they are all ignorant. If
we want Masters to teach us, this evil grows with us, and thinking to get more
light, we engage our selves in new darknesses. It Is the first piece of Art the
Devil uses to undo us: he blinds our understanding, to corrupt our Will; and
throws us into error that we may fall into sin, we have two Enemies which set
Dominus illuminatio mea and sal^ mea. Sic. Dominum i^ ocat ut illminatio
detra^t ign^rantiam and s^lu. infirmi^atem. August. in Enchirid. cap. 81.
upon us at unawars, the ignorance of things which we ought to do, and the
desire of what we ought to shun: these two evils draw on two others; for
ignorance produces error: and desire sorrow. We spend our whole life in this
Combat, and very well knowing that we cannot utterly defeat these two powerful
Enemies, we think our selves happy enough if we can but weaken them. We expect
the victory and Triumph in Heaven, and knowing that we cannot be conquerors on
earth, we are there content with Combat. Sicut de calce quod ^ervet in aqua in
o^eo s^igida est: de magnete ^apide quod stipul^m non moveat, and serrum
rapiat, dep^lea sic s^gente ut fluescere nivem non sinat sic cale^te ut
^maturescere po^a compellat. Aug. lib. 21. de Civit. cap. 7.
Thus do the greattest Saints beg of God, that he will be their strength, and
light, that as light he may dissipate their darkness and as strength sustein
their weakness, a man must be as blind, as proud to dispute these Truths, and
unless we will side with that proud Sect, which would not acknowledge any
fault in man, that they might not be bound to correct it, we must confess that
Ignorance and weakness, are equally natural to us: the first is seen in all
actions, Nature, Morality, and Religion furnish us with as many proofs thereof
as they give us Instructions.

For though Nature be not jealous of her works, though she freely expose all
her beauties to our eyes, and that she discover unto us her rarest products,
who is he that knows all her secrets? though the heavens be extended over our
heads, who knows whereof they be Composed? though the Sun rise, and set every
day, who knows his Influences, and Motions? though the earth bring forth her
flowers under our feet, and ripens her fruit before our eyes, who knows what
art it uses to give them their several colors? who knows by what secret
virtue Nature changes earth into gold, and taking from it is impurity, gives it
that glittering Luster, which makes the final ornament of all our workmanship?
Who can comprehend how the dew congeals into pearl, how the water thickens into
Crystal, and how becoming solid, it continues still transparent? who can
give a reason for these natural Miracles, which we neglect only because they
are too common? who knows why straw being so Cold as that it preserves Ice in
the midst of Summer, is yet so hot as that it ripens fruit even in the midst of
winter? Does not Amber and the Loadstone make all Philosophers wild? and these
Miracles which come so near our senses, do they not confound our understanding?
we see all things, that know nothing; we have the use of the Elements, but not
the knowledge of them; Whatsoever entertains our vanity, accuses us of
blindness, and whatsoever serves for diversion to our eyes or ears upbraids
our understanding with Ignorance.

Morality confirms this truth as well as Nature does: for though she undertake
to enlighten man's understanding, and to rule his will, though she boast to make
man an Angel, and to take from him all the feelings of the flesh and blood,
does she not lay open unto him his ignorance, when she instructs him and does
she not show that he is blind, in offering her self to be his Guide and
Mistress? it is true that he may glory, that he himself has formed her who
teaches him, and to be his Mistresses Master, since she has no Maxims, which
are not the inventions of the understanding. But this his vain glory is very is
very ill grounded; and Morality is a bad proof of his sufficiency, (...) in
(...) and no^ (...) ti^u, in (...) a^is, i^ (...), ia lo is (...) ac (...) sua
qua^ opinion^ (...), ubi and si (...) vera (...), ead^m licentia di^bantur and
(...), p^orsus (...) ^rustra talis civitas mysticum vocabulum Bab^nis
acceperit. Aug. l^b. 8 de Civit. c 4^.
since she herself is so full of errors, and doubts* For what is that Truth
which Philosophers dispute not about? into how many Sects have they divided
themselves? on what principles do they agree to establish their Maxims? and
what propositions have they put forth, which they themselves have not crossed
or gainsaid? has not every one of them made unto themselves a differing Idea
of Happiness? And this point; which is the ground work of Moral Philosophy,
has it not been the rise of all their disputes? Aristotle made it to consist
in the knowledge of the Summum Bonum, Seneca in the possession of Virtue, and
Epicurus in the enjoying of Delight.

But do not all sinners make a party in Morality, and do not their Inclinations
formas many several Sects? do not the Ambitious place their felicity in Glory,
the Curious in Novelty, the Avaritious in riches, and the unchaste in love? If
men cannot agree in their choice in the Summum Bonum, how will they agree in
the definition of Virtue? this indeed is the rock of all Philosophers, and it
seems that following their Inclinations, rather then their judgments: they
would make virtues of all vices, which they delighted in, sins against Nature
have not only been excused, but even highly commended in their schools.
Socrates the Stoics God, and the only just man who all Philosophers oppose to
our greatest Saints, did not he love Alcebiades? the Praises which he gives him
in Plato, do they not taste of wantonness, does he not seem as if he made love
to a Mistr^? and the Panygericks which he makes of his good behavior, and
beauty, do they not afford us reason of suspicion; whether it were his body his
mind that he was most in love withal.

Is not Pride and madness the soul of all the Stoics virtue? do not they
compare their wise men with their Jupiter? do they not make a God of their
Zeno? and as often as they put their Gods and Masters together in balance, do
not they prefer those who first formed their proud Philosophy? would not
Epicurius make virtue a slave to voluptuousness, and according to Seneca's one
opinion, is he not guilty of having endeavored to set the servant, and the
Sovereign upon the same Throne? Is not Plato a pleasant Dreamer, who tastes more
of the Poet, then of the Philosopher? we reverence his Disciples, only because
they endeavor to heighten themselves by straying out of the way, if we put a
valuation upon them, it is because they have taken a more obstruce path, then
others, and that quitting reason and judgment: (which are men's guides) they
would raise themselves up even unto the height of Celestial intelligences, but
into what errors have they headlong fallen? what Fables Dolcobona fide
Platon^ omnium h^reticorum co^dimentarium sactum. Tertul de anima.
have they mingled with their superstititions? what reasons have they invented
to excuse unch^st l^ve? what cunning have they made use of to establish it is
Empire? and with what impiety have they gone about to persuade us that God lay
hidden in his Creatures? and that whosoever loved beauty in women, or goodness
in men, loved the Images and shadows of the Diety. The Academicks appeared to
be a little more rational, the best Ancient wits have sided with them, or been
their Disciples; Cicero and Virgil, (the r^rest Ornaments of the Roman
Republique) followed their Maxims they were not so proud as the Stoics, nor
so poorly minded as the Epicurians, yet they held Paradoxes which justled Truth
as well as reason, they allowed of sin under Ante omnia caveai^ Natura, ne quis
vos (...) invitos, patet exitus: si pu^re non vult^ l^cet sug^e, ni^il seci
(...) quam (...). Atten^te m^do and videbil is quam brevis ad libertate^ and
quam expedita, ducet via. Senec. de Provid. cap. ulti^o.
the name of virtue, and when they wanted Patience or strength to keep back
grief or sorrow, they betook themselves to despair: In fine, all these
Philosophers pertook of of the sins of the people; they were not less
Idolaters, though they had greater Lights, and making policy of Religion, they
worshipped the Gods of their Wives and Children: they in their writings made
Panygericks to the Divine Essence, and in their Towns they erected Temples to
evil spirits, they were Christians in their speeches, but Infidels in their
Actions: they had good conceptions, but committed bad deeds, they knew God
because they could not be ignorant of him, and they offended him, because they
had not the courage to serve him.

My last proof wherewithal to confound the pride of humane understanding, and
to make it confess that it is guilty, since ignorant, I will borrow from
Religion the, Scripture, and Divinity teaches us, that man bears the Character
of God, being formed after his Image, he cannot see himself without discerning
his Author, this first glimpse of light cannot be defaced, all the darkness of
error cannot obscure it, and when man consults with his conscience or reason,
he is by them instructed that there can be but one Etiam anima circum venta ab
adversario me^ sui auto^s. Si mirum si a Deo data ^alem canit quae Deus suis
dedit nosse, Te^tul. (...). (...). animae.
God. Without the help of Philosophers, or Instructers, he knows this Truth;
and when he suffers Nature to speak through his mouth upon this subject, she
pronounces Oracles, and utters no falsehoods: thus when the Pagans were
surprised with any danger, and that instinct did in them prevene reasoning,
they implored the succor of the true God, they spoke the language of O (...)
apud (...) ^nia (...) ^ficit (...) Christianorum. Tertul. de testim animae.
Christians, not thinking of it, and condemned the worshipping of Images of
which the soul of their Religion was Composed. The first Fathers of the Church
opposed them with this reason. Tertullian delights to let them see that they
were only Idolaters then, when they use violence to Nature, and that they
stifled her resentments, to follow those of superstition: but when they
suffered themselves to be led on by opinion, or example, there was no Error
which they did not embrace nor no so infamous creature to which they did not with
their mouths make vows, and offer Incense with their hands. The Foeli^es
populi quibus (...) nascuntur in hortis. Numina.
Egyptians who vaunted themselves to be the Fathers of all Sciences, worshipped
Onions, good store of Gods grew in gardens; Laborers might boast that in
manuring of the Earth, they gave their Princes Gods, and that their Canonizing
did not so much depend upon the Peoples consent, as upon husbandry and Labor.
The Cum f^licitate colebantur and Pavor and Palor, and Febris and cetera non
numina colend^ rum sed crimina colentium. August. lib. 4. de Civit. c. 23.
Romans whom time ought to have polished, and Philosophy civilized; made Gods
of all things, War, and Peace, had Temples in their Republique: all the
passions were there adored, the most infamous ones were there sacrificed unto,
and these People owed all their glory to their valor, forbore not to offer
sacrifices to Fear and shame, the ignorance of Physicians, and the weakness of
those that were sick, procured the like honor to Agues, the fits whereof,
redoubled fits, and intermissions, were the mysteries which made it be adored.
In fine, their Canonizing, became so common, as the wiser sort did despise it,
and seeing that Insecta had their Altars, they thought it to be more honorable
to be man then God. These reasons may suffice to beat down the Pride of humane
understanding, and to make it confess that Error is very natural unto it:
since that not being able to comprehend the unity of God, it could not know the
most glorious Truth of all others.

The fifth Discourse.
That reason in Man, is become blind, and a slave, since sin.

Philosophy being the Daughter of reason, we must not wonder, if she defend her
mothers interest, and if she employ all her cunning in excusing her faults who
gave her life: for presently after our loss, reason invented Philosophy, and
built this stately Edifice upon the ruins of innocence, she drew her chief
advantages from the light which God had infused into the soul of Adam, she did
imbellish it with the most precious remainders of original righteousness, and
taught her all those gallant Maxims, which she had learnt from Angels in the
earthly Paradise; In fine Reason did deck Utinam quem admodum universi mu^di
^acies in conspectum venit ita Phylosophi^ ^ota posset nobis occ^rere pro
^erto: omnes mortales in sui admirationem rapere^. Sen^c. Epist. 89.
Philosophy in so becoming an array, as she became In-am^r'd of her beauty,
she made thereof a false Diety, and whilst the blind people offered Incense to
the workmanship of their own hands, the haughty Philosophers adored the
workmanship of their own heads, and raised Philosophy above Religion. This
daughter was not ungrateful, and to acknowledge the favors which she had
received from her Mother, she gave her all the praises which her vanity could
not aspire unto: she made her to be man's Summum Bonum, the guide of his life,
the Mistr^s of all the virtues, and Queen of passions, she intrencht upon the
rights of Grace and Faith, to make her more Illustrio^s, and endeavored to
persuade her Disciples, Lauda in ho mine quod nec ^ripi potest (...) dari quod
pro pri^ est hominis. Queris (...) sit? animu^ and ratio in animo (...). Senec.
Epist. 41
that to be rational, was sufficient to be happy: All Philosophers have used
this Language, their writings are Panygericks of reason, and to he^r them
speak, you would think this Idol were the only Diety that is to be adored.
Sen^ca is never less rational then when he defends reasons side, the justice
of his cause makes him insolent, Omnes mortales multo anteced^s non mul to te
(...) a^te edens. Quid int^r ^e, and i^os sit inter fu^urum qu^? (...) S^.
(...). (...).
to pre^erve his parties advantages he ass^ils Religion, and to heighten man's
dignity, he abuset^ Gods Majesty: he will have his wise man to be as content as
his Jupiter, that their happiness is equal, though their condition be
different, and that nothing in the world can add^ unto their facility.

It Is true that these Blasphemies are intermingled with some rational Praises:
for he is not deceived when he says that reason is man's proper good, that all
these are strangers to him, and that naught ought to be esteemed in man, save
what one cannot give him: the riches which he possesses, are not his; the
beauty of his Palaces, great revenues, number of his slaves, or vassals, and
the glory of his Apparel, are advantages which he may lose when fortune shall
cease to favor him. To know his happiness he must know his desert and to know
if he be fortunate, he must inquire whether he be rational or no, reason is
the most ancient and most illustrious of all his Qualities, he cannot lose it
without changing Nature, and if he do not preserve this privilege, there is no
creature in the world which is not richer then he, for if he think to ground
his happiness In homin^ optimum quid est ratio, ^aec antecedit animalia, deos
sequitur. Ratio ergo perfecta, pr^fectaprop, ium hominis ^num est: cae^era cum
animalibus illi communia. Valet? and leones, formosus est and pavones, velox
est? and ^qui. Corpus habet and arbores, habet vocem sed quan to clariorem
canes, acutiorem aquila, gravior^ tauri dulcio rem mo^ilioremque l^inae. S^n.
Ep^st. 76.
either one strength, or courage; there is neither Tiger, nor Lion, which will
not dispute the business with him, if he will boast of his height. Trees are
higher and much more straight, and if he glory in his beauty, I know not
whether Peacocks in the glory of their Plumes will give way to him or no; if he
take Pride in his voice, he will be enforced to confess that Dogs have it more
shrill then he, Bulls more strong, Nightingales more sweet and pleasing. If he
boast of his Activity, Horses, and Hearts will shame him, and unless he place
his greatness in his reason, he must confess that Nature has not dealt so
favorably with him as with beasts. Indeed, it is Man's Glory, and chiefest
difference, it is that which gives him the Command over all Creatures, and which
makes him be the Image of God, and if a body would know his greatness, we must
not ask whether he be Lord of large Territories, whether he command over many
People, whether he distributes justice in a Throne of Gold, whether he lie in a
bed of Ivory, or whether or no he drink in a glass of Crystal; but whether
his reason be not a slave to his Passions; Cums^aratio (...) homin^ ^tio
perfect* beatum facit. Sen^. Epist. 76.
and whether or no his noblest part, has preserved its authority: this weak
reasoning has prevailed so far with men, as that there are many in
Christendom, which love much better to be reasonable, then faithful, and who
take more care to inform their judgments then their belief: they content
themselves with the name of Philosophers, not pretending to the quality of
Christians, and so long as they as-subject the body to the soul, they do not
greatly care whether they submit their soul to God or no.

Notwwithstanding all this, reason wants not her weaknesses being blind she
needs a guide, and to the end that she wander not out of the way, she must be
led by Faith: sin put out her eyes, when she M^to (...) non ^ris rational^s sed
(...). Aug.
became slave thereunto; if she stumble upon the Truths it is by hap-hazard: and
she ought rather to praise her Fortune for it, then her foresight. This Enemy
took from her both her Light and Strength together; she gives way to the
weakest on-sets, the least resistance astonisheth her and as soon as the
Passions or senses give against her designs, she changes them as much out of
weakness as Complacency: servit^de insues her defeat; for when she has once
given way to the violence of Passions, these Rebels grow upon her and take her
weaknesses for a sign of their Power. Factio^s People being for the most part
insolent, these force their Sovereign to defend their side, they make use of
their Credit to authorize their revolt, and abuse even the name of reason
thereby to destroy her Empire. This is a prevailing Mischief in most men, who
in their greatest undertakings consult only with their one inclinations. They
act either through ambition or love, their motive is either Pleasure or Glory,
and the Passion which possesses them is always the Primum Mobile which hurries
about all the faculties of their soul. Reason has no other employment then to
seek out pretenses to excuse their designs, and this Sovereign is reduced to
the necessity of favoring the disorders of these her ^ebellious slaves: if she
sometimes defend her self, against ambition or love, it is that she may be
overcome by Grief, by an erroneous piece of Prudence, Multa bona nostra nobis
nocent, timoris enim tormentum memoria red^cit, provi^entia anticipat. Nemo
t^ntum praesentibus miser est. Sen. Epist. 5.
she foresees her mischief before it happen, and by an angersome remembrance,
she afflicts her self when it is gone, One and the same evil make; her three
times miserable, and she employes all the differences of times to increase her
dislikes, she dreads them before their birth, rescents them during their life,
and remembers them when they are dead: for experience teaches us, that reason
which ought to appease our evils, does irritate them, and that after having
well discust the matter, we are forced to have recourse to ignorant men's
remedy, and to cure that with time, which we could not cure by Philosophy.

She is not much more lucky, in the guidance of our actions, then in the curing
of our Maladies; for though she boast her self to be the soul of Policy, and to
furnish Morality with all those brave Maxims which makes Families fortunate,
she is so little equal, as what she approves of in one country, she condemns
in another, Laws, which Si lex ratio^e co^stat lex ^rit omne j^m quod ratione
(...) a qu^cumque productum. Tertul. de (...) Mil^.
are the mere work of reason, differ more then Climates. What is permitted in
Africa, is forbidden in Europe, what is accounted a virtue in France, is a
vice in Germany. Every Nation has it is several Customs, and often times in the
same State and under the same King, every Province has it is peculiar Fashions.
Reason puts her self into a hundred several shapes to defend them, and when
she confers them together, she does like those wicked Judges who make both
Parties hope for Profit in the cause that they may prolong their process: she
is ingenuous enough to make doubts, but not wise enough to resolve and after
having examined all opinions, she is obliged to forsake the Philosophers Part,
and to embrace the opinion of the Pyrrhonians. What esteem can one put upon so
fickle a Mistress? what belief can one have of so unconstant a Sovereign? which
fits her self to the honor of her subjects, which changes with the Climates,
which sides with the Heavens that cover her; and with the earth which bears
her? what likelihood is there of being guided by her advice, since she has
none that is settled and since that she is so inconstant in her resolutions, as
the last do always like her best.

To boot that this good is so frail, and that sin has brought it into such a
condition as we seem to enjoy but the appearance thereof rather then the thing
it self, there are moreover a thousand other accidents which may bereave us of
it: for of as many things as we have in our disposal, there is not any one
that we oftener lose then reason. Our Infancy inhibits us the use thereof Infans
dum nascitur ^acet n^ens ubi sit, quid sit, a quo creatus, ^am reusde^cti non
d^ capax p^aecepti. Aug. de paen. merit. c. 36
during our first years, We are Masters of this Treasure, but cannot make use
of it, this Sun is so weak at it is first rising as it cannot disperse abroad
it is beams: this fountain is so small in it is spring head, as it cannot frame
rivolets; We are poor amidst our treasure, and unless we trim and prune our
understanding it either continues barren; or brings nothing forth but thorns:
the senses, which seem to be ord^ined by Nature, for the service of reason,
keep her in ignorance, or throw her headlong into error. The passions which
are born to obey her, rise so tumultuously against her, as she is forced to
follow their Motions, and to side with Rebels. To enjoy peace she is content to
be engaged in a fault, she believes that to serve willingly, is to reign, that
to follow her passions is to command them, and to approve of their Revolts, is
to preserve her authority. Yet is she so little at liberty in this Non libera
voluntas dicenda est* quamdiu est vincentibus and vincientibus cupiditatibus
subdita. Aug. Epist. 44.
condition, as that one must excuse her sin by her servitude, she is only
thought innocent, because she is a slave, her faults are forgiven unto her only
because she cannot, and she preserves her reputation, only through the loss of
her Liberty. When the first Motions of her Passions are a little alaid, and
that she may avenge her self of the affronts done unto her by her insolent
subjects, it is observed that by siding with them she is infected with their
Inclinations, that by suffering their disorders she corrupts her own purity;
and that by going about to excuse their revolt, she her self becomes guilty.
Thus man is almost never rational, because he is always passionate, and he
does but seldom make use of his reason, because he often times follows his
passion.

To so many Enemies which bereave man of the most glorious of all his
Qualities, sickness is added; which making war upon our bodies, declares it
openly also against our souls: for these two parts are so straightly bound
together, as their good and bad are Common between, though the soul be the more
Noble, yet stands she in need of the body in her chiefest operations, she must
follow after that which she would avoid, borrow forces from her Enemy to fight
him, and make use of the senses to reduce him to his duty. If this slaves
Temper be altered by any disorder, the soul rescents it, if the blood spring in
the veins, if the vapors which arise from thence trouble the Imagination, or
if a burning Feavor seize upon the brain, the soul can reason no longer, This
Noble part of man falls into extravagancies, the confusion of species puts it in
disorder, and all the wisdom thereof is turned to folly.

Sleep is not so violent, yet is it little less shameful then sickness, for
it benums the senses, luls the faculties of the soul asleep, blots out the
remembrance of Glory from out the minds of Conquerours, stops the designs of
Monarchs, interrupteth the waknings of Philosophers, Levels the conditions of
the living to that of the dead, and to preserve our life takes from us the use
of reason. For my part, I cannot think that sleep did us thus much injury
before the State of sin, I am of opinion, that the power thereof extended only
to the senses, that it undertook nothing upon man's most Noble Part, that it
le^t him the liberty of reasoning, and that like to Jesus Christ, his soul Ego
dormi^ and co^meum vigila^.
was awake, though his body slept. For what likelihood of belief is there that
man should be every day reduced to a Condition wherein his highest operations
should be interrupted, wherein his will can command nothing, his understanding
conceive nothing, nor his memory represent nothing unto him; Who can suppose
that in so happy a condition, man should pass half his life away in sleep,
that his soul should be able to do no other functions, then what the souls of
beasts do, and that all her employment lay in the digesting of meat, dissolving
of vapors, and moving of Arteries.

When I consider what disorder sin has caused in man, I am forced to say that
he has very much altered his Condition, Homo animal rat^onale mortale. August.
9. Apul.
and that Philosophers had reason to believe, that death was as much of his
Essence, as reason was, for from the time he began to live, he began to die, he
lost his life as soon as he received it, and this decree pronounced against
him, is executed the very first moment of his Birth, that which we call life is
but a prorogued Agunt opus su^m sata: nobis sensum nostrae necis auferunt
quoque faci^ius obrepat mors sub ipso nomine vitae lat^t. Sen. ad Martiam. cap.
20.
Death, and Divine Justice seems to take pleasure in prolonging it, that we may
be sensible thereof* Life would be undeservable did it last but a Moment, and
our Punishment would not be very great, if it ended at the same instant that it
began. We dye in life, and live in death, death is engaged in life, and life
subsists only by death, but reason is as it were a stranger to man; When he
began to be Criminal, he began to be i^ationall, he lost his principal
advantage, in losing his Innocence, and he left us in doubt whether he was any
longer man, being become a sinner, for reason which is his principal
difference, is an accident which forgoes him upon a thousand occasions. Nature
admits him to life; before she admits him to reason, When age grants him this
benefit, Passion forbids him the use thereof, when passion does not molest his
judgment she dozeth it, and of all things that man is Master of, he loses none
more often then his reason. Yet this loss is indifferent to him, he complains
of all the rest, and laughs at this: he esteems himself unhappy if he have lost
his wealth, he gives himself over unto sorrow when he falls from his
greatness, and languisheth in Pain when he has lost his health. But when
passion bereaveth him of the use of reason, when sleep reduces him to the
condition of beasts, or when sin blots out the Image of God from out his soul,
he does but jest at his disaster, and takes pleasure in hazarding that thing
which of all the world he ought to esteem most precious.

This is also that dread full punishment wherewith divine justice chastizeth
the greatest sins. God never gave a more fearful example, of his rigor then
when he bereft Nebuccadnezar of his reason, when r Dan. 4. 53.
he turned a Sovereign Prince into a wild beast, and that together with the
shape of man, he took from him his understanding and judgment. There is no
monarchy which has not seen some of her Princes stripped thereof, Providence
takes Pleasure in beating down Thrones, in (...) of Septers and in taking away
of Crowns, she sets upon Sovereigns in their Palaces, and after having raised
them up to the highest pitch of greatness, she throws them into a precepice of
miseries her most ordinary revenge is chang^: no age passes over wherein she
witnesses not her power by these sorts of Punishments,: but when Innormities
of the fault deserves a greater punishment, she together with their Scepter
takes away their reason from such Monarchs as she will Chastize: she troubles
both their State, and their judgment; and brings them to a Condition wherein
they are both the scorn and the hatred of their subjects. By all this discourse
it is easy to conclude, that reason without grace is no great advantage; that to
restore unto her her former Luster, a man must have recourse to Faith, that to
be solidly rational, a man must be truly Pious, and that humane understanding
which so much Glory in, is so weakened since the Corruption of our Nature, as
that the Wise man had reason to say the Number of Fools is infinite.

The sixth Discourse.
That Memory, has lost her vigor by the means of sin, and that she agrees not
very well with judgment.

IF it be lawful to judge of the excellency of things by their usefulnes, we
must confess that memory is very excellent, since she is of such use; for
humane understa^ding would soon be weary of taking Pains, did not memory take
care to preserve its productions; and if this faith full Officer did not
Memoriam Plato se^um and intellectuum (...), and Ci^ thesaurum omnium studiorum
praedicavit. T^ll. lib. de ani^.
assist it, in its affairs; for though it be fertile, and that like him whose
Image it bears, it be never drawn dry, yet would it be very unhappy, if the
thoughts thereof were lost as soon as produced, and that as often as it would
discourse it were bound to form new Conceptions: but this Favorite which knows
all its secrets, eases it of that Pain; for she keeps in store all its
inventions, and by a dexterity which cannot be sufficiently admired she
presents them to it, as often as is desired. She has nothing else to do, but to
receive the species which it commits to her trust, she disposes of them
passing cunningly, the number of them causes no confusion, and though we have
but weak conjectures to guess at the order she observes therein, yet is it
probable that she lodges those which are alike, in one and the same place: it
is true that their being, being spiritual, they take up no place; without
justling, or confounding one another, they reside in one and the same place,
and though they love motion they never make any commotion, unless commanded by
the understanding, with what terms it uses to make it self be understood, we
know not, but hardly has it expressed its will, Ibi quand^ sum (...) ut pro
seratur quod vo lo, and qu^dam statim prodeunt, qu^dam requiruntur diu^us, and
tanquam de abstrusioribus quibasquam r^ ceptaculis cru^ tur, quaedam catervatim
se proruunt, and dum aliud petitur and quaeritur proficiunt in m^dium quasi
dicentiame sort nos sum^s. August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 8.
when presently it is obeyed, of as many confused species as are enclosed in
the bosom of memory, none but that which the understanding calls for, appears;
all the rest keep quiet and silent, and if sometimes any confusion prove to fall
out among them, it is occasioned by their extreme desires to follow its orders,
if that which it seeks for be somewhat slow or idle, her Neighbors endeavor
to quicken her, they present themselves before their Master in a Crowd, to give
him satisfaction, and often times in looking on them, he finds out that which he
sought for.

All Sciences are the products of memory; in vain should the understanding
conceive Truths, if she did not retein them, it is a living book wherein we write
our thoughts in invisible Characters, This secret is much more ancient, and
much more certain then that of Printing, he who is only wise by the means of
books, is ignorant, and who cannot frame a Library in his understanding is not
learned: Our knowledge is subject to the Empire of Fortune, as well as our
riches; when it is engraven upon bark or writ in paper, worms may eat it, and
fire which makes us Poor may make us ignorant, if our Treasury be locked up in
books, our knowledge must make up a part of our selves, and must be so
imprinted in our souls, that even Haec omnia recipit recolenda cum opus est,
and retractanda grandis memoriae retractanda grandis memori^ ^ecessus. Idem
ibid.
death may not bereave us of it. This is likewise the Philosophers and x
Consilium fut riex pr^terito ve^it. Senec. Fpist. 83.
Politicians riches, it is from this bottom, which cannot be drawn dry, that they
draw their Maxims, that they frame Monarchies, and m^ke men happy, for though
wisdom be employed more in considering what is to come, then what is past, and
that the makes it her chief work to foresee future things, yet does she
instruct her seif by History, she informs her self of what is past, to foresee
what is to come, she grounds her conjectures upon what has already happened,
she steers her course by the life of her Ancestors, and has all their
instructions from memory, if those great men who sit at the Helm in St^es did
not call to mind what has been done in former ages, they would commit gross
faults in government, and did not their memory assist their wisdom, they
would not so often light so right upon the t^ick of Ibi and ipse (...) i (...)
meq* rec^ quid, quan^o vel ubi ege^m, quo^ue (...) c^agerem aff^ctas su^im.
(...) sunt o^nia quae s^e exper^a a me sive cre^ita me m^ni. Au^. 10. Cenfess.
cap. 8.
State, they must find expedients out of her Treasury, they must unravel their
in^ricacies by her Counsel, and this mother of inventions must furnish them
with means to allay that Tempest which thre^ens a Monarchy. In fine it is this
admirable Faculty of the so^l, which Composeth Annals, which m^kes the dead
live, which draw^ Heroes from their Sepulchers, which in-^nimates the living by
their example, and which by her labor triumphs over forgetfulness.

She ventures upon the laws of time, and as if she were an Image of Eternity,
she accords what is to come with what Quisnam est quid^cat mihi non esse t^ia
tempora, si ut p^eri didi^imus pue^osque do cuimus praeteritum praesen^ and
futurum, sed tantum prae sen^, q^iam illa duo non s^? An and i^sa s^nt, sed ex
al^quopro cedit at unto, cum ex futur^ fit praesens and in aliq^od recedit
occultum cum ex p^aesenti si^ praeteritum. Aug. 11. Confess. cap. 17.
is past, and obliges the present time together with her to bear with them:
those three parts of time whereof our lives are composed hold so bad
correspondency, as that they are not to be united, the time past dreads the
present, cannot abide it is approach, but vanishes away as soon as it is Enemy
appeare^h, the present times makes not long use of this advantage,, for it
retires as soon as it discovers the time to come, it yields the victory unto it
without fighting, in it is defeat it has this of satisfaction, that the
Conqueror forgoes his own name to ass^e that of the Conquered, and ceasing to
be future becomes present. These three times do only live by death, they
subsist only by division within themselves, and if they did cease Combating
their Triumphs would cease: all things are preserved by their defeat, and all
Creatures are so well accustomed to this change, as it cannot be staid without
offering violence to all Creatures. Nothing but eternity can appease their
Quarrels, Pr^s autem si s^er esset praesens* nec i^ praeteritum transi^et ^am
n^n esset tempus sed aet^s. Aug. lib. 11. Con^. cap. 13.
which in it is undividable unity, does miraculously enclose the differences of
the time to come, and of the time past, and makes them subsist together under
the name of the time present. Memory as a true Copy of this excellent
Original, agrees all these enemies, and not having respect to their interests,
makes use of them in all her designs; sometime she calls back the timepast, to
bereave it of whatsoever, it keeps locked up within it is Treasury, sometime she
discards the present time, to entertain her self with the future; sometimes she
prevents futurity, and looking far into the obscurity thereof, she discovers
what it keeps concealed, and does distinctly observe what is not yet happened:
whatsoever command she has over all the differences of time, she busieth her
self Praesentia bena nond^m tota in solido sunt, potest illa casus aliquis
incide^, futur^ pend^nt and incerta sunt: q^od praeteri is inter tuta se
positum est. Sen. lib. 3. de Benef. cap. 4.
most about what is past, which is her chiefest employment, and her most
pleasing diversion, she loves it better then the rest, because it is the most
to be trusted, and least Subject to the change of Fortune, it reports things
without dissimulation, it discards all passions which impede the knowledge of
Truth, represents the lives of great ones without falsehood, and as it does not
excuse their vices neither does it flatter their virtues; it is a much better
judge of their actions then the present time, it is not abused by fear nor
hope, it freely instructs us, and as long as it can, fence it self against
forgetfulness we may build upon it is fidelity.

Though these great advantages of memory, deserve rather Panygericks then
reproach, yet has she faults enough, and a man need be no great Divine to
observe what ill offices original sin has done her; for to boot that she is
extreme weak, that age does diminish her, that the best things escape her, that
she is dazzled with those that glitter most, she is often times of so little
efficacy, as the more she labors, the less progress she makes. She is
imbroiled when pressed with too much have, she must be allowed time and respite to
find what she looks for, the desire she has to give us satisfaction, troubles
her, and she falls into a confusion, of which nothing but rest can acquit her,
Time which does instruct her, makes her ignorant, that which heapeth up all
Treasures dissipates them, and raises up an enemy against her, against whom
she has much ado to defend her self. For forgetfulness reigns in it is Empire,
it effaceth those species which do enrich her, puts her whole State in
disorder, and as an insolent Conqueror slights all the Towns that she has
taken, and leaves no mark thereof to her Posterity; this victorious enemy,
overthrows all the works of the understanding, and leaves no footsteps thereof
in memory, we are left nothing but sorrow for not having retained what we had
gotten, and the being fallen into a misery which is so much more grievous, for
that it succedeth so happy a fortune, yet nothing is more natural to memory
Tanta est in ^riae ub i^o, qu^nta est gloria ^jus cujus est inju^a, memo ria
sci^icet. Tertul. ^b. de anima.
then forgetfulness, she learneth sciences with difficulty, preserves them with
care, and easily forgets them, she grows rusty when un-exercised, and weary if
two much exercised; Labor, and Idleness do corrupt her, and one knows not
what art to make use of, to entertain any thing of so nice a Nature.

Ignorance and sin were born at the same time, as soon as the one made himself
Master of the will, the other seized one the understanding, and if man's first
sin, were disobedience, Ignorance was his first Punishment, this Malady was not
without remedy and knowledge would have made us amends for all our damages, had
not forgetfulness assisted Ignorance. But to what purpose do we spend whole
nights at our studies, to what end do we gather up the opinions of
Philosophers, and observe all the delightful varieties of History, since this
monster renders our labors useless, since it dissipates the Treasures which
we had gathered, reduces old men to the condition of Children, and ads the
shame of ignorance to the other miseries of their age: they dare not offer at
any thing for fear of being mistaken, they forget the names of their
Domestics, this faithless Companion puts a thousand affronts upon them, if
they engage themselves in a long discourse, they lose themselves. If they will
relate their Travels they cannot call to mind the names of Town, or Rivers, and
when they have most to discourse of they are enforced to be silent, the
Stepmother Nature, takes delight in lessening their memory, when she
perfecteth their judgment, and takes from them the remembrance of what is past,
when she gives them a foresight into things to come.

Man seems to be become a Monster, since he became Criminal, the parts whereof
he is Composed Nobis pudendum est quod imperio nostro caro non s^rvit. quia b^c
fit per infirmitat^m quam peccand^ meruimus. ^g. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. cap.
22.
cannot accord together, and the advantages which ought to make him perfect,
destroy each other, the body and the soul suffer a division, which last as long
as does their life; the understanding and the senses have always some
difference to determine; Reason and the Passions do never hold so good
Intelligence, but that one may perceive in their profoundest Peace, some Face
of War. I confess the Domestic discentions are angersome, and that man is a
miserable Creature since he cannot live in Peace: he nevertheless, takes it
patiently when he considers that these parties are of a different Nature, and
he wonders not that they be not upon good terms, since the one are common to us
with beasts, the other common to us with Angels, but he has reason to complain
when he considers this rent passes even into his soul, that her her faculties
are at variance, and that the solidity of judgment cannot agree with the
fidelity of memory; these two advantages are incompatible, and nature must do a
miracle to join them perfectly well together in one and the same person: she
inricheth memory at the cost of judgment, she restores to judgment what she
takes from memory, and leaves man the displeasure of knowing that there are
perfections of the mind which he cannot equally enjoy. Who would believe that
God would have left that blemish in his workmanship, had he not been thereunto
obliged by our offenses, who can persuade himself that he would have envied us
these Qualities, if our fault had not deserved such a punishment, and who will
not confess that in the state of innocence, Memory and judgment were at peace
together, thereby to make man perfect.

To so many reasons which necessarily conclude our soulss corruption must be
added, that Memory is never more faithful to will, then when she puts it in
mind In ruissimus omnium qui oblitus: nusqu ^m enim gratus ficri potest, cui
totum beneficium elapsum est. Sen. de Benefic. lib 3 cap 1.
of injuries, she easily forgets all the favors which she has received, she
is ashamed to remember them, and banisheth the thought thereof as a reproach of
indigencie; but she ingraves injuries in indelable characters, she renews the^
every day lest they be forgotten, and she is never more happy then when she is
offended, there has been means found out to strenghthen the weak nesse of
memory, there is an Art taught, how to keep her from going astray, or being
mistaken; Invention supplies the Temper, and we obtein that by labor, or
industry, which Nature has refused us, but there is no secret yet found to
make us forget Altius injuriae quam merita (...).
injuries; the remembrance thereof is everlasting; and though our Religion
promise Heaven to those that do forgive, so high a reward cannot efface out of
their minds the resentment of an affront. In fine, memory is so corrupted by
sin as it is only useful as far as it may be hurtful to us. She is busied
about present things, and cannot think upon futurity, she represents unto us
all earthly vanities under such pleasing forms as do seduce us; and paint out
unto us the joys of Heaven, so wretchedly as it is easily seen she has no
design to make us wish for them, she is never more languishing then when she
labors in the behalf of Etiamsi ^dtum super ^t aeiat^, p^ce jam dispensandum
erat ut suffi^ret necessa^: nun^ quae dementia est s^pervacua discere^n tanta
temporis ^ge, (...) S^n. Ep. 48.
virtue; nor more vigorous then when employed about vice. If she strive to
outdo her self it is in things of no use, her chiefest works serves but to amuse
us, and as Tumblers delight people by their tricks of activity, and win Credit
by their dangerous leaps, memory amuseth her self in reteining things which
have no co^nexion, and to repeat things in order, which have no order in
themselves, and astonisheth simple people by these vanities, which they term
her Masterpieces. When all this is done that ancient Writer had reason to say
that memory was only useful to three sorts of people; to those who did
negotiate, who to the end they may not be surprised, are obliged to have always
all their affairs present, to those who speak much, for it is memory that
furnishes them with acceptable things, which serve for recreation to the
Company, and to those that use to lie, for that to shan the shame which
accompanies that sin, they must remember their falsehoods, on the contrary the
default of memory may be of use to us; and as we profit by our losses we may
draw from thence three advantages; The first is not to lie, lest we be
surprised in that sin. The second, not to speak much, but to keep silence, out
of a happy necessity. The third, to love our enemies, and to practice the
excellentest virtue of Christianity, by a noble forgetfulness of injuries.

The seventh Discourse.
That Conscience is neither a good Judge nor faithful witness since sin.

THose who pretend that nature is not corrupted by sin, and that she remains
still in her prrimitive purity, have no better proof thereof then what
conscience does furnish them withal; for conscience takes always Gods part,
and never absolveth the guilty: (...) she is so just as that she condemns her
self in her own g P^ima haec est (...) quod se (...) cenemo nocens absolv^ar.
Juven. Sa^y. 3
cause: no reasons can justify us before her Tribunal, and let us use what
art we please, it is impossible to make her approve of our Misdemeanors.
Philosophers have also acknowledged, that she was both our witness, Judge, and
executioner, and that such secret sins as are left unpunished by man's justice,
receive their whole payment from conscience, she her self is worth a thousand
witnesses. Nothing can be hid from her eyes, which are never shut, she is an
ever-waking Dragon, and has such qualities as will not suffer her either to be
abased or surprised.

Witnesses, that they may not be accepted against ought to have three
conditions; The first to be well informed, therefore those who have seen are to
be preferred before those that have heard, for the eye is more certain then the
ear. The second that they speak truth, and h Multa sacta quae nomi^ ^us
impro^anda viderentur, testimoni^ tuo approbata sunt: and multa (...) data
(...) bus, (...) damna^, cum se al^ter babet species facti and animus
facientis. Aug. lib. 5. Confess. cap. 9.
that they say nothing which they do not think. The third, that they be
rational, and do so calm their passions, that neither hatred, nor love, nor
hope, nor fear, may ever make them disguise the truth. Conscience has all
these three qualities, for she is well instructed of the fact, and nothing
passes in our hearts which she has not perfect knowledge of, she knows our
most secret thoughts, she see^h the end of our intentions, and not stopping at
our words, knows the secret motions of our souls. It is easiy to cozen men
who ground their judgments only upon the change of our countenances; they are
abused by dissimulation, and he that can but counterfeit, may easily cozen
them, but Conscience is our best Counsel, nothing is done whereof she is not
aware, she assists in all our Resolutions, and this Sun which never sets, does
by her light dissipate all the darkness of our hearts. Hence it is that she is
true in all her depositions, for she speaks things as she sees them, she cannot
be deceived, nor can h Si honesta sunt quae facis, omnes sciant: si turpia,
quid refert nemin^m scire ^um tu scias? (...) te miserum! si hunc contemnas
testem. Sen. Ep^st 43.
she lie, disguises are so contrary to her Nature, as she cease to be her
self when she b^gins to feign. Her Essence consists of Truth, and though she
may fall into error, the cannot fall into a lie. In fine she is so rational,
as she is not to be troubled or seduced by passion, she is a derivative of that
primitive reason which we adore in God, a copy of that Divine Original, a beam
of that Sun, which is never Eclipsed, and they are so straightly joined
together as Quid prodest hominem fallere and Deum testem in cord habere.
August.
Saint Augustine does mix their lights, and makes but one Deposition of the
Testimony of God; and of conscience. How miserable are they who set at naught
so faithful a witness? for what satisfaction can those men have, who want the
Peace of Conscience? to what purpose does Public applause serve, when secret
approach gives it the Male de nobis actum erat, quoad multa scelera legem and
judicem essugiuat, nisi in Incum judicis timor cederet. Sen. Epist 97.
lie? what advantage can they pretend too, from the peoples approbation, if
they condemn themselves? And what Happiness can they enjoy, if whilst others
praise their false Virtues, they be enforced to blame their real sins.

This Faithful witness is a severe Judge, which can neither be bribed by
presents, nor frightened by threats; and who being always Innocent never spare
the guilty. All his decrees are just, and though the guilty be his Allies, he
forbears not to condemn them. Whatsoever favor they may obtein from other
Judges, they can never be absolved by this. and whilst their Mouth pleads for
them, their consciences condemns them. And truly we ought to thank Divine
Providence, for having given us this uncorruptible Judge to keep sinners within
the bounds of duty: for there are faults which escape the rigor of the Law,
and which being unknown are unpunished, Frenum ante p^ccatum and fla^^llum post
p^ccatum.
there are sins, which being glorious ones, are rewarded, there be some, who
being Authorized despise correction, so as our condition had been very
deplorable, if Conscience had not taken the place of Laws, and if she had not
condemned that which men dare not blame, nor cannot Punish.

In fine, this Judge becomes an executioner, and after having denounced
judgment, he himself does execute it, he believes that if it be glorious to
condemn sin, its no dishonor to punish it, whatsoever tends to the defense of
virtue, and pulling down of vice, seems glorious unto him, and the names of
Judge and Executioner are equally honorable to him; True it is that he uses
not this rigor, till he employed his harmless cunning to frighten the faulty.
Mala etiam co^sc^entia in solitudine anxia est atque solicita. Senec. Epist. 43.
For Conscience is a bridle which holds men within their duty before sin, but
when once they began to despise her Counsel, she became their Punishment, and
being no longer able to keep back sin, she endeavors to punishit. Nec ullum
scelus licet illud fortunae exornet muneribus, licet tueatur ac vindic et
impun^um est, quoniam sceleris in scelere supplicium est. Senec. Epist. 97.
It Is a revengefull fury which never suffers the wicked to rest in quiet, she
assails them in towns and in deserts, she declares war unto them in the midst
of their palaces, where danger can get no entrance, thither she sends fear, and
into whatsoever Sanctuary sinners retire themselves, she makes them feel the
smart of their offenses: when they see any punishments, they apprehend what
they themselves have deserved, as often as they feel the earthquake under their
feet, or the thunder roar above their heads, they imagine justice is armed to
punish them. In fine, all their sweets are mingled with some sowres, they can
take delight in nothing; remorse of conscience troubles their contentments,
they tremble amidst their Armies, they are afflicted in public rejoycings,
they languish in their best health, are poor amidst their riches, infamous
amidst their honors whatsoever praises men give to their misdemeanors they
taste not the sweets thereof, and this domestic executioner turns all their
pleasures into punishments. In fine, it seems he has a design to oppose the
injustice of Fortune, and to rob the wicked of that glory, which Fortune
endeavors to procure them: for Fortune honors crimes, recompenseth Murders,
Crowns Parricides, and that she may weaken virtues Party, prosecutes her
followers, but Conscience which has no other interest then that of justice,
punishes sin in the Throne, Deum mala conscientia pungit amara sunt omnia.
August.
and teaches the guilty, that greatness is but a weak defense, against her
just endeavors. Thus faults never fail of punishment; and though they be
defended by violence disguised by cunning, excused by reason, or raised by
falsehood, they always find their Punishments in the depth of their conscience.

As she punishes the wicked: she rewards the good, for if the cry of the
public do not praise them according to their desert, they find satisfaction
in having done their duty; and the approbation of this just Judge makes them
more glorious, then all the Panegyric on earth, in this it is, that the
happiness of the Innocent consists; it is this that comforts them in their
afflictions, that incourageth them in their combats, and which crowns them in
their victories. Their soul is a living Throne, where Interiora pulchritudinis
conscientiae amat Christus. ibi videt, ibi amat, ibi lequitur, ibi coronat.
Aug. iu Psalm. 44.
Jesus Christ keeps his residence; they famaliarly with him, and receive on
earth the assurance of that Happiness which is promised them in heaven.

Though these reasons prove sufficiently that Conscience is the punishment of
the wicked; and the good man's recompense yet is it not hard to prove; that she
is misled by sin, that this Counselor is unfaithful, that this Witness is
corrupted; that this Judge is interessed; and that this Executioner is
backward, and fearful. For what advice can Conscience give us, since she is
blind; and that the same darkness which overshading the light of the
understanding, clouds hers? how can she divert us from sin, since sin often
mixe^th his uncomelinesse with the beauties of virtue; and since there be whole
entire Nations which approve of Incest, and excuse Parricide? How can she
accuse us since she undertakes to defend us, and that being ^educed by the
senses, she strives to make whatsoever is pleasing unto them lawful? we form
Consciences to our selves, which destroy those that Nature has given us; We
think that a crime is lawful? When it is either profitable, Prosper^ ac ^lix
^us vi^tus vocatur. Sen^.
or Honorable. We think the laws unjust when they thwart our desires, suites
at Law hurt not charity because they have some color of justice; Duels are
authorized because they preserve Honor, drunkenness is permitted because it
is ordinary: and Pollution shall be no more blamed because it is glorious. Thus
the Conscience which did accuse us, does excuse us, and this witness being
bribed by sin, speaks only in its behalf.

If he be unfaithful in his depositions, he is as unjust in his decrees; for
being ill informed he cannot pronounce judgment aright, and his instructions
being false, his decrees cannot be equitable; he no longer condemns secret
faults, and because they are not scandalous, he will have them pass for
innocent, if he cannot authorize them, he excuses them, and if he cannot
absolve the guilty, he signs their pardon, if sometimes the heinousnes of their
offense oblige him to condemn them; he is slack in punishing them, and his
connivance adds to their licentiousness. For though great crimes be
accompanied with horror and disquiet, that those that are highly guilty are
not endured, and that being subservient to Divine Justice they be the Authors
of their own punishment: though the Neroes waken in a fright, and that their
Mothers Ghost assail them in the midst of their guards, though the Domitians
carry their executioners in their heart, though the Heavens prolong, their
lives only to prolong their torments, and that their cruel death be the least
part of their punishment, yet there be sinners, who have not this remorse,
there are some that enjoy quiet after Parricide, who peaceably usurped Kingdoms
and who neither find revolts in their States, nor trouble in their persons.

It Is true Hor^or cruciatusque ^ormidantis conscientiae ultimus ad re^piscendum
stimulus, quid si etiam tollitur de salute d^speratum est. Aug.
S. Austine was of opinion that this calm was more dangerous, then a storm,
and that the reproach of Conscience was not so severe a punishment as her
silence: for when she galls us, it is that she may heal us; when she awakens us,
it is to give us advertisement of the dangers which threaten us, her hurts are
favors and her stings are the last that languishing nature can do, but when she
has lost her feeling, our hope of health is lost, her Stupor non dolet, a^it
sensu^ doloris, ta^o insensibilio^ quanto ^ejor. August. in Psalm. 55.
stupidity presageth our misfortune, and as the sick man, who is become
unsensible of his pains, is abandoned by his Phisician, the sinner who has no
longer sense of his sins, is forsaken by Jesus Christ. Yet most men live in
this deplorable condition; their Consciences confederate with their Enemies,
holds Intelligence with the Devil to deceive them, is silent, that she may
surprise them, and refuses to advise them, only that she may continue them in
their sins.

Nay often times, through a high piece of Insolence, she furnishes them with
reasons to defend themselves; for though it be easier to commit a fault, then
to excuse it, she undertakes to make their Apology, and if the Crime bear with
it any Glorious appearance, she endeavors to make its Panegyric. Thus she who
ought to convert them, ads pride to their other wickedness, and after having
made them infamous sinners, she endeavors to turn them into proud Devils;
They then begin to glory in their sins, the higher their offenses are, the
prouder are they; their success in their first crimes, engages them in
greater, and as the Pleasure which accompanies virtue, does encourage gallant
men to glorious enterprises: the satisfaction which these men find in sin,
encourages them to Sacrileges, and Parricides.

The eighth Discourse.
Of the unrulinesse of the Will, and of it is inclinations to evil.

WHatsoever advantages Humane understanding may pretend to have over the
Faculties of the soul, it must give place to the will, and confess that if he
be the Counselor she is his Mistress, for though his advices bear great credit
with his Sovereign, yet is she so free, as nothing can constrein her, the
reasons which convince the understanding do Permissum ^it vile nefas: Quod
licet, i^gratum est; quod non licet, acrius crit.
not force the will, and after her officer is won, she can defend her self,
there is no insinuating into her favor but by sweetness, her consent is only
won by submission. Constraint confirms her in her designs, fear rather alters
her actions then her desires, and violence which often times makes the
understanding say what it thinks not, never makes the will pleased with what it
is displeased, she is free amidst Irons, and whilst the other Faculties of the
soul crouch under Force or sorrow, she is still obstinate in her resolutions,
and is never more free then when she seems most constrained. Her Empire is as
large as her liberty, all the parts of man do naturally owe her obedience, and
even those which act out of necessity cease not to reverence her power. She
effaceth out of the memory those species which she has been trusted with, if
you will except such Injuries, and displeasures, as are never to be forgotten,
the will to forget a thing is sufficient to think no more thereon. She stops
the understanding in all its operations; after it is convinced by the Truth, she
suspends his judgment, and by an absolute Authority keeps this Judge from
pronouncing Judgment. Though the imagination be not so indifferent, and that
her fickle humor, makes her often times start aside from her duty, yet does she
allay her storms when her Sovereign speaks, and if she have made any party in
her heart, she is the first that does dis^e them, when the will commands. The
passions which are as rebellious as wild, respect her authority, and if their
first motions be not submitted to her power, it is because they are not capable
of reason, when their fury is over, they return unto duty, and won by love,
(which is their Sovereigns only son) they rank themselves under his Laws.
Though Imperat anim^ corpo^e, and par^tur statim. Imperat animu^ ut moveatur
manus and tanta e^t facilitas ut vix a servitio discernatur imperium. Aug. lib.
8. Confess. cap. 9.
the sense, do necessarily act, and that they dispose of their objects in their
operat^ons, yet cease they not to pursue her order, and to suspend their
motions when that Queen commands, the eyes close themselves to please her, the
^ares become deaf to obey her, nay those parts of the body which pretend to
hold of her authority, and to be led only by Nature, do notwithstanding
experience the greatness of her Power. For though she cannot hinder natural
heat from digesting meat, nor the Liver from sending blood into veins, yet she
^roubles all their workings, and if Nature hold not Intelligence with her, all
her operations do but languish. In fine, the will is so considerable, as man
draws from thence his chief advantages: a good wit may make his Company well
liked of, Imagination may make him a good Poet, his hand may make him an
industrious Artificer, but it is only will that can make an honest man: it is she
that wins him the Title of virtues, Interest qualis sit voluntas (...) ^is,
quia si perversa est per vers^s habe^is ^os mot^s; si autem recta est, non
solum inculpabiles veru^ etiam* laud^s (...). August. 14. d^ C^t. c 6.
and Integrity, which is the souls chief ornament, is the pure work of this
Noble Faculty. Notwithstanding all this, all Sciences busy themselves in
ruling all the other powers of the soul, not troubling themselves with the
ruling of this. Logic forms the understanding, and teaches us how to reason;
Rhetorike teaches us the art of persuasion, and furnishes us with figures to
set forth truth; Astrology contents our curiosity, and raising us above the
earth discovers unto us all that passes in the Heavens; Poetry heats our
Imagination, and burning it with a fire which does not smoke, makes it do
things which triumph over death and time: Mechaniek Arts make our hands
cunning, and teaches them to imitate the rarest workmanships of Nature: but
the will is only formed by morality, yet is she so free, as nothing can enforce
her. Virtue has not charms enough to endue her with love, and all the
recompenses which she can promise, are not powerful enough to bereave her of
her Liberty. Grace must come into the succor of Virtue; Morality must be
assisted by Religion, to gain upon the will, for since she is become criminal
nothing can bend her, she is the w^rse through her advantages, her greatness
makes her a slave, her Power makes her insolent, and her Liberty renders her a
captive; she is brought into a condition wherein whatsoever heightens her
merit, contributes to her misery, and she is so ill dealt with by sin, as she
cannot recover her former perfect Liberty but by servitude: but to the end you
may not think I exaggerate her loss in the describing it, I will show her unto
you in her greatest advantages, and will demonstrate that since Adams sin, all
her perfections are prejudicial to her.

As Bona privata quaerunt, sive sensus corporis sive facultates, animae. Sola
volentas bonum publicum procurat.
will is the Sovereign in man she respects the universal good, and whilst the
other faculties are only busied about their own particular Interests, she takes
care for the welfare of her whole State. The understanding seeks only after
truth, and when he thinks he has found it out, he leaves further pursut.
Memory labors only after the reteyning of those species which are committed to
her fidelity, and when she has acquitted her self thereof, she thinks she has
done her duty. The imaginations only care is to entertain commerce between the
senses and the understanding; the senses have no employments but to consider
objects, and to give there opinion thereof to the imagination, the passions
themselves, which are the motions of love, have their exercises limited; desire
goes inquest after things which are absent, or a far off, Fear drives away
dangers which threaten us, hope flatters us by her promises, Audacitie assails
Enemies that injure us, and choler furnishes us with weapons to fight, but
the will is like a Queen in the midst of her State, who rules all these
disorders, and remedies all that is faulty; she listens to what the senses say,
calmes the fury of the imagination, appeaseth the passions tumults, gives ear
to what the understanding counsels, and from the Throne where she sits,
gives out orders, and pronounces decrees. When she is peremptory in what she
says, she is always obeyed, her power (as in God) is Composed of her will, and
so long as she is not divided between her body and her understanding, she
seldom undertakes any thing which she brings not to effect.

The supreme Authority, is doubtless one of the wills chiefest Advantages, and
the general care which she takes of the guidance of all the other Faculties of
the soul; is an excellent proof of her worthiness; but who sees not that this
eminent greatness, is accompanied with extreme misery, since she that can do
all sees nothing, and that she who is so Coeca voluntas, coecus ejus amor,
coecum ejus regimen, nec mi^um si inter tot tenebras aberret homo.
absolute; is blind, for she discernes Truth only through borrowed eyes: she
must ask counsel of the understanding upon the advice of this faithles
officer, she must examine reports made by the senses, stop the violence of
passions and assuage the fury of the imaginations. Objects corrupt the senses,
The passions suffer themselves to be guided by the imagination, The
understanding is perverted by opinion, and this blind Queen amongst so many
mutinous Subjects, and so many interressed advices, knows not what resolution
to put on, neither to what object to fasten her self. imagine the miserable
condition of a Prince, who being blind should have a great State to govern,
Provinces to rule, Enemies to fight with, Subjects to guide, Treaties to
conclude, Rebels to punish, and who to effect all this, should have none but
interessed Officers, or ignorant Counselors. This is the deplorable condition
of the will; she has a Dominion which though it be enclosed within man,
cease not to be larger then the whole World; she has passions which are
wilder then Tigers, she has intestine seditions, and wars abroad; she has
rebellious Subjects to suppress, secret Traitors Amor meus pondus meum, eo
feror quocunque ferer. August. Conf.
to discover, corrupt Judges to reform, and amongst so many disorders, she has
but a weak instinct, which supplying her ignorance, indues her with aversion to
what is evil, and with Inclination, to what is good.

But some may say, I make Monsters to destroy them, that I make the evil worse
then it is to have the pleasure of curing it: for in the state of Innocence,
the will was blind, yet was not unhappy; she was led by nothing but instinct,
and went not astray, she took her light from the senses, and her Counsels from
the Understanding, and yet did not this necessity make her miserable? It Is true
she is naturally blind, and that it is as much out of her power to know the
truth, as for the understanding to love virtue, but she was assured of her
officers fidelity, the senses were not unfaithful, nor the Passions wild, the
imagination was not troubled, nor the understanding darkened, she lived in a
peaceable condition, she neither feared her Enemies, nor distrusted her
Subjects, but now she is shie of them all; the senses will deceive her, the
Passions revolt, her Imagination is confounded, the understanding goes about to
corrupt her, and amidst so many disorders, she has but a weak inclination to
Good, which to say truth, does never abandon her. We must moreover confess
that this inclination is much weakened by sin, and that it is a kind of Miracle
if it be not corrupted.

The Summum Bonum is so Excellent, as he cannot be known, without being
beloved, as soon as he suffers himself to be understood, he makes himself be
desired, nor can the will be so depraved, but that she must always reserve
some love for so ravishing an object. The Angels find their happiness in
possessing him, and the Devils their misfortune in losing him, they cannot
choose but wish him, and how maliciously so ever their will be bent, it always
languisheth after the Summum Bonum. If they could be without love; they would
be without sorrow, nor would they be sensible of their loss, could they suffer
it without sorrow. Yet this inclination is rather natural then voluntary, it is
rather grounded in their being, then in their Liberty, and it is rather a mark of
the goodness of their Nature, then of their good will, If they naturally love
God, they hate him freely, though they desire him they detest him, and though
their Inclination be forced, their aversion is voluntary. Thus we see that the
wills instinct is not so constantly set upon Good, but that it may be taken
off, and experience teaches us that since the corruption of sin, man is more
inclined to vice then virtue. Gratia oneri est, ultio in quaestu habetur.
Quidam quo plus debent, magis oderunt.
We are much more prone to revenge an Injury, then to acknowledge a good turn;
We remember an affront better then a favor, we write good offices done in sand
or water, but ingrave ill ones in Brass or Marble; Whole ages are required to
efface an offense, but an obligation is forgotten in a moment. The favors
which we have received are debts, and the injuries interests, wear ashamed to
be indebted, and glory to be ungrateful, we think we lose our liberty when we
are obliged, and we think to recover it by being unthankful. Man's nature is so
corrupted, as his hatred is purchased by favors, and the love he bears to
Liberty makes an obligation odious to him, a good turn is sufficient to lose
him, and to be repaid with a bad one.

From this disorder another arises which is as unjust, (...) se ingra^ and
macerat: ^dit quae accepit quia red^ est, and extenuat; injuri^ vero
dilata^tque auget. Quid autem eo miserius cui ben^ia excid^, (...). Senec.
Epist. 81.
and more detestable, We are much more eager in our hatred, then in our love,
we pursue our Enemies, with much more heat, then we do serve our friends, we
are slack in friendship, and vigorous in revenge, we attempt impossibilities to
rid our selves of one that has offended us, the remembrance of the injury
augments our strength, and we never want reasons to excite our Anger. In
assisting a Friend we are weak, all things seem difficult unto us, what he
demands appears unjust, and when once he is become necessitous, we esteem him
too importunate. This evil inclination of the will, appears no less reviling,
then in hatred, we are flow to praise but ready to deprave, we are naturally
eloquent in Invectives, but faint in praises; All Antiquity has been able to
make but two or three Panegyricks, yet all her Satyrs are pleasing. An
Historian who praises virtue is not so much valued as he who blames vice, and
experience teaches us that Orators cease to be eloquent, when they become
Panegyrical; Tacitus ows the most of his Reputation to his reviling, he is
muchmore pleasing when he paints forth Tiberius his faults, then when he
describes Germanicus his virtues, we adhibit more faith to his criminal then
to his Innocent Maxims; he passes for a Statesman when he condemns the Caesar's
intentions or those of their officers, his suspicions are as good as proofs,
when he speaks ill of Emperors, and his reasons not so good as conjectures,
when he excuses them. If he praise Agripin^s Chastity, he blames her pride, if
he heighten Germanicus his courage, he abaseth his mildness, if he value
Augustus for his Government, he blames him for his cruelty, and if he make
Tiberius his wisdom appear, he every where discovers his dissimulation, and
fear. It is easy to discover by his writings, that the greatest part of the
Pagans good works were sinful, since he attributes criminal Intentions to
Actions which appear innocent. He is only praised of all men, for that he never
praised any man, and I am much deceived, if his Design was not to win
reputation, at the cost of as many Princes as ^e writ off.

In fine our will is so depraved as we cannot see an other man's harm without
some sort of satisfaction, we are afflicted at his good success and rejoice at
his Qui alienis malis sicut suis bonis laetantur, divites sunt alienis
jacturis, locupletes calamitatibus, immortales funeribus. Valor. Maximus.
misfortune, not being offended with him, we are pleased with his misery,
displeased with his happiness: we think his Glory lessens ours, and like
Caesar who could not look upon the Image of Alexander without weeping, we
cannot look upon our Neighbors advantages without sighing; It seems as if
fortune gave us, what she takes from others, and that she takes from us what
she bestows on others, and that she cannot make them happy unless she make us
miserable; Injustice is become natural unto us, and unless our inclinations
be reformed by Grace, they are much more bent to Vice then Virtue. But you will
say the will is always Free, that she may do well, even in what she does amiss,
since she may desire it, and that this advantage alone is so great, as that it
recompenceth all her faults. The following Discourse shall answer this
objection, and will let us see whether man has sufficient Liberty left him or
no in the state of sin, to boast that he is rich in his loss, happy in his
misfortune, and in his misery glorious.

The ninth Discourse.
That the Will to be able to do good must be set free from the servitude of
sin, by the Grace of Jesus Christ.

THe Passion which all men have for the preservation of their Liberty, is no
weak proof of the Excellency thereof: there be but few who do not prefer it
before life, and do not rather love an honorable death, then a shameful
Servitus obedientia est fracti animi and abjecti, arbitrio carentis suo.
servitude, all revolts have had no other pretexts, and Conquerors have only
been odious because they have intrencht upon the Public Liberty, we suspect
their Virtues because they bear with them some shadow of Tyranny, and men have
hardly believed, that they were very just, who would Command over free people;
yet man has no advantage which he oftener loses then his Liberty: he becomes a
slave without a Master, and finds servitude as well in a Republique as in a
Monarchy, he has not the use of this perfection, till a long time after he be
be born; he lives when he is not at liberty, and he who ought to command the
whole world begins his life in slavery. Nature Sit datum liberum arbitrium
humanae naturae ut eam tamen necesse sit vivere sub potestate melioris. August
gives him Kings in his Parents, and if death take them away, the laws appoint
him Tutors which supply the place of Masters, in his minority he is a slave,
and wanting wisdom to govern himself, he is not suffered to dispose of
himself: the better part of his life is spent in servitude, and unless he have
permission from the Prince, he must be 25 years old before he can dispose of
his goods.

When this age puts him in possession of his principal advantage, enemies
arise, who clap Sibi servire gravissima servitus est. Senec. Praefat lib. 3.
Quae. Nature.
Irons upon him, for the passions are Imperious Mistresses, who entrench upon
our Liberty, and which making use either of fair or foul means, makes man do a
thousand things unworthy of his condition, he sometimes breaks his Chains, but
forgeth new ones himself, and he thinks he is free, because he is the Author of
his own servitude: If he calm his passions, and amidst their quiet recover his
Liberty, he cannot defend himself from a pleasing Enemy, which deprives him of
the use thereof, for sleep which preserves our life bereaves us of our Liberty,
his poppies which sweeten our vexations, and inchant our sorrows take from us
the disposal of our will: We are not at Liberty when we sleep, and as the good
actions which we do in that estate cannot expect recompense; so neither ought
our bad ones to fear punishment.

Thus Liberty is a Treasure which we are often robbed of, it is a Good which we are
not always Masters of: and if rest be reasons Grave, it is also Liberties
Sepulcher; it is true that it restores us what it had taken from us, and the same
awaking which delivers us from death, frees us from servitude, but we make
trial of a Tyrant, who treats us much more rigorously then does sleep, for
when sin has possessed it self of our Liberty, it never makes restitution: Our
slavery ends not with our lives, we are born and dye slaves thereunto. There is
nothing but the Grace of Jesus Christ which can free us from the Tyranny
thereof. It enters into our soulby our body, and gives us death when our
Parents give us life, and penetrating even into our Arbitrium voluntatis tunc
est vere liberum, cum vitiis peccatisque non servit* Tale datum est a Deo, quod
amissum proprio vitio, nisi a quo dari potuit reddi non potest. Aug. lib. 14.
de C^it. cap. 14.
will sets there the Characters of its usurpation, and of our servitude Reason
is too weak a succor to defend us against so powerfu^l an Enemy, and Profane
Philosophy is not a sufficient remedy to cure us of so dangerousa Malady; We
cannot drive away sin but by help from Heaven, nor can we recover perfect
Liberty but by the servitude of Jesus Christ: we may well shun one fault by
another, but hardly can we do anything which is solidly virtuous, without our
Saviors assistance, we defend our selves from intemperance only through vain
glory, if we be chaste it is because we are proud, but in the one and the other of
these Actions we are slaves to sin.

To understand this truth (which is Saint Austins very Doctrine) we must know
that in our belief, Piety was never parted from Morality, and that to be
virtuous, a man must always have been Faithful. The will was created together
with grace, they both contributed unto merit, and when they were once divided,
sin seized upon the will, and man operates by this mischeivous principle, all
his actions began to be criminal, proposing no other end but himself unto
himself, he strayed from the latter, (from grace) and looking upon the creature
forbore looking upon the Non est igitur Gratia Dei in Natura liberi arbitrii,
quia and liberum arbitrium ad diligen dum (...) eum pri^ ^i peccati graditate
perdidimus. August. Epistola 107.
Creatout. Let reason infuse what light it pleases into his understanding she
cannot redress it, for she her self is blind, and as the will cannot love the
Summum Bonum, the understanding has much ado to know supremam veritatem, they
each of them have received a mortal wound which cannot be cured unless by a
Physician who was never sick, Peccans ille qui sine peccati necessitate creatus
est in eo quod animae sanitatem delinquendo perdidit, etiam illae cogitandi
quae ad Deum per^nent, ami^t protinus facilitatem Aug. lib. de Incarnat. and g
^ia, cap. 13.
the remedy must derive from Heaven, and the same hand which had united grace
and nature together in the first man, must reconcile them in his offspring and
restore unto their will the Liberty which she had lost. Till this deliverance
come man is still a slave to sin wheresoever he goes he carries his Tyrant a
long with him, and let him do what good action he pleases, it is hard for him
not to have therein some bad Intention.

To enlighten this imagination a little more, we must remember that Gods design
was not to make man merely a rational Creature, he would have original
righteousness to be his principal advantage: this Et istam quis fecerat nisi
ille qui eos cum bona voluntate, id est cum amore casto quo illi adhaerent,
cr^vit, simul in eis and condens naturae and largiens gratiam. Aug. lib. 12. de
Civit. cap 9. id dicit de Angelis, idemque sentit de homine.
Divine quality joined the soul to the body by cords as holy as pleasing; she
did accord so well with Nature; as if she pertook not of her Essence, she
pertook of her perfection, whatsoever proceeded from this principle was holy,
and whatsoever man did by the motion of grace deserved an everlasting
recompense. But when sin had banished Original righteousness, and that man
became a slave to his concupiscence, he began to work by the motions thereof,
he suffered himself to be led away by her blind impetuosity, did cowardly obey
her unjust Ordinances, and till he be freed from this tyrant which possesses
him, he undertakes almost nothing but by her Orders. i Liberum voluntatis
arbitr^m in (...) homi^e (...) d^co, qu^ primus formatus est. Ille ^c factus
est, ut nihil o^no volunta^i ^us resister^t, si vellet Dei praece^ta servare.
Po^quam autem livera ipse voluntate peccavit nos i^ necess^atem praecipitati
sumus. August. disput. 2. cont. Fo^t.


Natura ^umana etiamsi in illa integ^tate permaneret in qua est condita, nullo
modo seipsam creature suo non adjuvante ^rvaret. C^ncil. Arausic. ca^. 19.
Thus the most part of his good works are sins and his actions proceeding from
a bad principle must needs be faulty, this misfortune is the spring head of all
our mischief, this disorder is the original of all our servitude, as long as
we are slaves to sin we cannot recover our entire liberty, and till the son of
God does infranchize us, our inclinations are strong to evil.

But as the Nature of any thing is not better discovered then by the opposing
unto it, its contrary, to know the wills servitude, we must compare it with her
first liberty, and by the difference of original righteousness, and Christian
grace, Judge of the diverse conditions of man, in innocence, and in sin. Man
whilst innocent had the use of liberty, but because the end that was proposed
unto him was supernatural, he stood in need of Grace to elevate his will, and
sustein his weakness. He could not unite himself to Na^urahominis prim^tus
inculpata, and si ne ullo vitio creata est. Natura vero i^a ho^inis, qu^
unusquisqu^ e^ Adam nas^tur ^am medico indig^t quia sa^a non ^st. Augu^. lib.
de N^ura and Gratia, c. 6.
God without her assistance; and whatever of Noble he had received from Nature,
Grace was necessary for him, to fix himself to this Summum Bonum: but not being
as yet hurt by sin, this aid did sufficiently fortify him, this grace without
giving him remedies did only furnish him with strength to love and know Primam
veritatem. This grace was assubjected to his liberty; as he might use it, so
also might he abuse it, so as his happiness depended on his will; but since
sin wounded his soul, since malady is joined to weakness, since irregularity
is glided into Nature, and that the will, Quid enim opus erat Deo si status
integer naturae maneret, (...) ^em suscipere nostram? Perge adhuc (...)* (...),
(...) a^trium si. ex A^am susc^ptum, (...) med^a Christi non ^digens per se
sive (...) imple^e quod ve^. Author ^brerum. (...).
which was only weak, is become sick, a grace was requisite which might rather
be a remedy then a help, and which should partake more of Medicine then of
nourishment; In innocence 'twas sufficient to raise man, but in sin, he must
be cured* in innocence there needed no more but to sustein his Liberty, but in
sin it must be healed, in innocence 'twas enough to lead man the way, but in
sin he must be put again into the right way; In the State of innocence he
needed only to be succored, but in the State of sin, the chains which keeps
him from operating must be untied and broken. A man to whom Nature has given
good eyes, cannot see without light, but if the Sun lighten him he discerns
objects, and not demanding other help, he sees all the beauties which this
constellation can discover unto him, but if a defluxion weaken his eyes, the
light of the Sun offends him, if the spot be already formed, the ocu^t must use
his industry to take it away, and to restore him to his sight, must cure his
Malady. V^t no^, ^abet ambula^di poss^vilitatem, de homine san^s pedibus
^lerabiliter dici po^est, confractis vero si velit non habet, vitiata est
natura de qua loquimur. A^g. li. de Natura and Gratia, cap. 49.
In the State where into sin has reduced us, Adams grace would be of no use to
us, all those glorious advantages which our Father possessed in the St^te of
innocence could not deliver us; his Grace was succor to a man in health, but
ours is Medicine for a sick man: Original righteousness endued him with
strength, Christian righteousness gives us life, original righteousness
heightened his will, and Christian Grace frees ours. In ^egno na^ sumus ubi
pare^e libertasest S^nec.
Adam was vigorous, and we languish, he was free, and we are slaves; for the
tyrant which does possess us, keeps us inchained, he has made chains of our
affections, and as to make a Captive walk you must break the Irons wherewith
his feet are fettered, so to make a sinner operate, the cords must be broken
wherewith his will is inthralled.

After having discovered the nature of his sickness, we must find out the
cause, and seek by what excess he has fallen into this Misfortune, Physicians
oft-times judge of the quality of sickness, by its original, and the disorder
from whence it arose, makes them find out a cure for it. Man lost his liberty
only for loving it too much, he is become a slave only because he would be too
free, and he hurld himself into a miserable servitude, only for that he desired
to shun a Glorious one. In grace as well as in policy, servitude is joined to
liberty, and to be a true freeman, Servire Deo, regnare est.
a man must be a voluntary slave. In kingdoms we find our liberty in our
obedience, and our submission to our Sovereigns will, is the rice of our
felicity, those who think to better their condition by revolting, are often
undone by their rebellion, and fall from their legitimate greatnesses Servire
Deo, regnare est.
for having sought after unjust ones, so in the kingdom of God, man's glory
consists in obedience, his liberty depends on his submission, and that he may
command overall Creatures, he must obey his Creator. This glorious servitude
was the original of all his greatness, he reigned in the world by serving
God; he found perfect Liberty in his faithful submission, and whilst that his
will was subject to the will of God, he met with no revolts, neither in his
person or in his dominions, but when abused by the Devil, and egged on by a
vain desire of reigning by himself, he would shake of his first Sovereignes
yoke, he lost his Quid illi deerat ut tangeret lignum vetitum, nisi quia sua
potestate uti voluit, praeceptum rumpere de^ctavit, ut nullo sibi dominante
fie^et ^cut Deus, qu^a D^ullus utiq^e dominatur, A^g. in P^al. 7
liberty by desiring to increase it, thinking to make himself Master, he became
a slave, he forged out chains of iron to himself, out of a desire to break
silken cords, and lost the command he had in the world by forgoing the respect
he owed to his Creator. It was very fitting doubtless that he should be thus
treated, the heinousnes of his crime did well deserve this severe punishment:
for what could a Rebel expect but a shameful servitude, what ought a
perfidious man to expect, but sedition in his State, and what could a guilty
person look for, but to have his passions revolt, and to lose his Liberty?

Unhappy Adam; What did thou want in that happy condition whereinto thy
Sovereign had raised thee? what just wishes could thy soul make which it might
not have accomplished in obedience? All Creatures adored thee, the beams of thy
countenance infused both fear and love into them, God made himself visible in
thy person, Angels treated familiarly with thee, they assumed bodies to
satisfy thy senses, these pure spirits became sensible that they might be
pleasing to thy eyes, they left Heaven to converse with thee on earth, and they
begana commerce here below, which they were to continue in glory; the earth
reverenced thy footsteps, the sea bore respect to thy words, all the Elements
did adore thy power, and savage Beasts which persecute us, changed their Imago
Deido^abat feram, and Deus non ^omuit imagine^ suam. Aug.
fury into fear when they came nigh thee: might not thou have bounded thy
desires in so happy a condition? and without listening to the Devil who envied
thy happiness, was it not sufficient for thee to have the beasts for thy
slaves, the Elements for thy subjects, Angels for thy companions, and only God
for thy Sovereign? Pride was thy fault, misery was thy punishment, Liberty was
thy desire, and servitude thy reward. Thou would reign Independent, and thou
live now under tyranny, thy punishment is the Picture of thine offense; thy
childrens Conditio servitutis jure intelligitur impositapeccatori. Nomen istud
culp a meruit non Natura. August. l. 19. de Civit. cap. 15.
misfortune upbraids thee with the quality of thy crime; they are slaves only
because thou were a Rebel, and they grown under their Irons only because thou
could not live under thy Sovereignes Laws. It Is true that their imprudency
excuses thy impiety; for they love thy chains, they glory in their servitude;
they follow thy evil examples uncompelled, they delight to est range themselves
from God, they commit wickedness, with cherfulnesse, their servitude is
voluntary, because they are pleased with it, since they will wear their
chains, it shows they are delighted in them, and to the end it may be known
they offend Heaven willingly, they add voluntary faults, to that natural sin,
which they are guilty of in their birth.

The tenth Discourse.
That evil Habits bereave the will of her Liberty by engaging her in Evil.

THough corrupted Nature may be termed a bad Habit, and and Lex peccata est
violenti^ cons^etudinis quae trabitur, and ten^tur etiam invitus animus eo
merit^, quo in ^m volens illabitur, August. lib. 8. Conf. c. 6.
that all men who descend from Adam, have a natural leaning toward sin, yet
are there certain acquired Habits or Customs, which augment this natural
disorder, and which add new faults to that which we do inherit from our first
Father: for as excesses do complete the irregularitie of our will, and makes
our conversion the harder; the mischief which we bring with us from our birth,
may be cured in the same sort as it was acquired, being got unwittingly, it may
be lost when we think not on it, the conception thereof has made us criminal;
and Baptism acquits us of that Crime. Adams sin is become our Punishment, and
the Grace of Jesus Christ is become our remedy: but the malady which we our
selves contract is much harder to be driven away; for as it is our own
handiwork, and has not crept into our soul without our own consent, it cannot
be expelled but by an Act of the will, and as Baptism does cancel Original
sin, and leaves Concupiscence, so Contrition or repentance, does wash away
actual sins, and leaves an ill Habit, which we have reason to term an acquired
Concupiscence, which is more dangerous then that which is Natural, because it is
more Malignant, and the cure thereof is more rare, because more hard: we shall
see all these truths, in the pursuit of this discourse.

It Is a great misfortune, to be born in sin, and to have received bad
Inclinations, before we knew them, it is a deplorable condition to be the Object
of Gods Anger, before we have provoked him, and to be born away to mischief,
before we were able to make resistance; but this misfortune is much the
greater, when man joys Custom to Nature, when to those bad Inclinations which
he inherits from his Parents, he adds many actual sins, which forms an
Imperious Habit, which ingageth him in evil. For Duo sunt qu^ ad peccandum ^os
sollicitant, Natura and habitus; illud ex poena originali, hoc ^x p^a
frequentati peccati, cum illo in ^anc vitam nascimur hoc vivendo addimus, qu^
duo con^uncta ro^ustissimam faciunt concupiscentiam. August. lib. 83. qq.
quaest. 66.
as Saint Augustine observes, there are two things which solicit us to sin,
Nature and Custom: the first is an effect of Original sin; the second of
actual: we contract the one in being born in sin, we acquire the other by
living in sin, and these two joined together, strengthen Concupiscence,
establish the Tyranny thereof and bereaves us of hope of destroying it.

For if the will be not strong enough to oppose the unrulinesse of Nature, how
can she suppress the disorders of a bad habit; and if the assistance of Grace
be absolutely necessary for her, to free her self from natural miseries, what
kind of assistance stands she in need of to acquit her self of her acquired
miseries. It Is the difficulty which makes sinners despair, it is upon this
occasion that they find that irregular Inclinations, do never more rebel
against their will, then when they have borrowed new force from a bad Custom,
and the best advice that can be given them is, by their diligence to prevent so
opinionated an Evil, and to set upon their passions in their birth, lest being
assisted by Habit, they grow to headstrong, as to be unsuppressible. When love
is not as yet perfectly Qu^ndo nasci^ cupidi^ antequa^ obu^ ^ctat adv^sum te,
mala cons^tudo p^vula est, elide illa^ ad petram qui Christus est. Aug. in
Psalm. 136.
shaped, that he is rather in the eyes then heart, that he deserves rather the
name of complacency then of Inclination, that his Flames have more of Luster,
then of Heat; he is easily stifled, and an ordinary virtue is sufficient to rid
man of so weak an Adversary, but when with time he is grown greater, when he
has powered his poison into the heart, and has made himself Master of all the
Faculties of the soul, many a battle must be given before so strong an Enemy be
overcome, and unless the will call in indignation, anger, and grief, to her
aid; it is very hard for her to drive out a Tyrant, whose power is strengthened
by Custom.

In the second Place, corrupt Nature presupposes but one sin, though Ex
peccato est omnis mal^ consue^ndo, and ad peccatum i^linat. Aug.
it were a great one, yet was it but one, and though it gave against all the
perfections of God, yet was it committed in a moment; Repentance came quickly
in the Place thereof, and when once Adam felt the Punishment of his sin, he was
sorry for it, his Tears appeased Divine Justice, the sentence of his death was
deferred, and he had time granted him to people the world, to instruct his
Children, and to bewail his sins: the disorders which we find in our soul and
in our body, are only the effects of this fault, and when we are first born we
are only capable of of this offense; Incensed Heaven can impute nothing to us
but our first Fathers disobedience, and whatsoever Punishment it inflicteth
upon us, we have always this excuse, that we are more unfortunate then faulty:
but an ill Habit is a bastard Daughter which has diverse Fathers, and which
owes her birth to the malice of almost an infinite number of sins, vice and
virtue are learned successively; Nemo repent fit malus. Nemo est ^asu bonus,
discenda virtus est. S^n. Epist. 123.
a man is not wicked all at once, he must make trials before he can become a
Master in sin, he cannot arrive at that condition, without having committed
many faults, he must be accomplished in wickedness, to get a habit thereof: and
let us flatter our selves with what reasons we please a man must have basely
foregone virtues part, if he be totally possessed by sin; which when it commands
so absolutely in a soul, as it has changed it is power into Tyranny, is grown
stronger by time, has changed inclination into custom, and that it has as
many protectours as parents; Heaven must do miracles to free us from so
dreadful an Enemy.

In the third place, nature is somewhat ashamed of sin, this unlucky Guest has
not so thoroughly corrupted all her inclinations, but that some shamefastnes
remains which may serve her for a bridle in her licentousnesse, and which
obliges her to seek out solitary places wherein to conceal her debaucheries;
if she be wicked enough to scoff at the remorse of conscience, she is not
sufficiently affronted to bear with her neighbors reproaches; if she despise
punishment she apprehends confusion, and if she fear not the loss of life, she
fears the loss of Honor. Peccata qua^vis magna and borrenda cum in
consuetudinem venerint, aut parv^ au^ nulla creduntur, usque adeo ut non solum
non occultanda, verum etiam praedicanda diffamandaqu^ videantu. August.
E^chirid. cap. 82.
But bad habit is insolent, it bereaves us as well of shame as of innocence, it
glories in its crimes, and by a horrible sort of corruptions, makes the sin the
greater by making it glorious, it disarms virtue, and takes from her the only
means she had to defeat her Enemy. Hence it is that shameless people glory in
their loves, that lost women number up their gallants, and that affronted men,
call their debaucheries good fortunes. Glorious names are invented to honor
sin, Thrones, and altars are erected to it, and solicited by this evil habit
which rules in the soul, such honors are given thereunto as belong only to
virtue.

Tanto amplius in concupiscentia superanda voluntas laborat, quan^o ei ma ores
vires consu^tudo dedit. Aug. lib. 6. c^nt. Jul. cap. 7
By all this discourse it is easy to Judge, that a vicious habit, is a fearful
monster, which adds new discorders to the irregularities of Nature, which
fortifies bad Inclinations, which presupposes many sins, which presages a
greater Number, which renders virtue infamous, and vice glorious, and which to
crown all mischief, hurries us into such a fatal necessity of sinning, as can
only be overcome by a powerful grace. There be different steps whereby a man
may descend into the precipice of sin: Inclination leads us to desire, desire
brings us to the act, if the act be multiplied, it throws us into a habit, and
if the habit be not the sooner ruined, it ingageth us in a necessity which may be
termed the bottom of sins Abyss, Dum servitu libidini facta est consuetudo,
and dum consuetudini non resi^titur facta est necessitas. Aug. lib. Cons.
for as S. Augustine says, as long as man obeys his evil inclinations, he forms
unto himself evil habits, and when he does not resist evil habits, they throw
the soul into a hard necessity, which bereaves it of the power of conversion.
Then is a sinner an unfortunate slave, he draws near the condition of the
damned, he finds his hell on Earth, he carries a Devil in his bosom which ingageth
him in sin. This malady is by nature incurable, and if it be sometime cured by
grace, it is by a kind of miracle. The evil habit which produces this
necessity is somewhat less difficult to cure, but the means that are to be
used are extreme difficult. For though the Sacraments be ordained to destroy
sin, and that Baptism and repentance do break our Irons and set us at Liberty;
yet does not their power extend to evil habits; they take away the blame and
reconcile us to God, but they leave this languishing which weakens Nature, and
do not Efface those Malign Impressions which sin has made in our soul, they
leave us our bad Tenent pravae consuetudines quem semel ^eperant, atque
quotidie duriores existunt, and non nisi cum peccatoris vit^ fi^iuntur. Gregor.
Moral. l. 15
inclinations to exercise us, and it has pleased Divine Justice, that that
byas which we have toward evil should not be redressed but by our
pains-taking, we must fight to overcome it, and as much time is requisite to
the loosing of it, as went to the contracting thereof. Years slip away in this
Exercise; without much progress, and to weaken so powerful Enemies, many
combats must be had. The Sacraments which shed so many Graces into our souls,
make us not victorious at the first, that very Sacrament which unites us so
straightly to the Son of God, as our souls seem thereby to be mixed together
with his, does not overthrow bad habits: as long as we carry them in our
bosoms, we have desires of revenge, and ambitious thoughts, the presence
thereof which chaseth away Devils, does not chase away our irregular
inclinations; these Monsters give not place to Divine Power, and our will is
divided between the motions of Grace, and those of concupiscence, it is
troubled that since it carries about with it its Savior, it is not yet at
liberty; It wonders that whilst it conceives humble thoughts, it has yet
sometouches of pride, that having no more sin, it yet resents the Effects
thereof; that being one of Jesus Christ's Subjects, it is yet under the slavery of
the Devil, and that tasting the pleasures of Paradise, it feels notwithstanding
the punishment of Hell: these disorders do subsist with charity, and much time
must be had to drive them away, many tears must be shed, many sighs made, and
as many good deeds must be done to destroy them, as evil deeds have been done
in the forming of them; but to the end that we may the better know the Nature
of so dreadful an Enemy, we must consider him in his birth, and see by what
cunning means he insinuates himself into the will.

Habit and custom are of the same Nature: that which the one does in estates,
the other does in souls, their wiles are alike, and as they are established by
cunning, they are preserved by violence, their Gravissimum est Imperium
consuetudinis Senec. in Proverb.
beginnings are undiscernable, and they are so weak in their birth, as they are
despisable, they grow without making much noise, and establish their authority
without any great pomp. There is nothing more pleasing at first sight; they
are so plyant as they suit themselves toall our desires; they are so shamefac't
as they play least in sight: they seek pretenses to make their designs be
approved of, and in all their undertakings they lean either upon reason or
example: they flatter their enemies that they may undo them, and hiding their
malice under an appearing mildness, they are in a posture of defense before
any one thinks to set upon them: but when they are once established, Dismit esse
remedio Iocus, ubi quae suerant vitia, mores sunt. Senec. Epist. 39.
and when abusing man's happiness they have confirmed their tyranny, nothing is
so insolent as their Government, they loose both shame and Recti apud nos locum
tenet error, ubi pullicus factus est, Idem.
mildness, that they may reign with affrontednes, and violence; they ground
their authority upon their usurpation; and placing all their right in their
might, they oppose reason, and destroy the Law: then does the will become a
slave, the Counsels of the understanding are no longer listened to, and all
good inclinations are so weakened, as they dare not frame a design to obviate
their Enemies.

But that which is more deplorable in this condition is, that man who is
possessed with an ill Habit, is no longer capable of deliberation in his Actions:
he follows the Tyrant that inslaves him, he thinks he is bound to defend him,
because he has assisted to set him up; he believes he enjoys Liberty, because
he loves servitude; and not considering the evils which threaten him, he with
contentment suffers himself to be guided by his Enemy: when he is surprised by
any Action, In repentinis agimus ex babitu. Aristoteles.
he has not leisure to argue the case; his usurper prevenes his reason, and he
is as it were compelled to obey him, hence it is that Lascivious men meeting
with an unexpected death, think more on their loves than on their souls health,
hence it is that Libertines in any eniment danger are apter to swear and curse,
than to pray; hence it is that revengefull men, when they fall into any danger,
think rather how to revenge themselves, than how to pardon. For the Tyrant
which possesses them is always in action: he is in the will, as in his
throne; from thence he gives out his orders to all the faculties of the soul,
and parts of the body; the understanding conceives only such thoughts as are
pleasing to him, the memory is only employed about such species as he forms
there, The imagination is full only of such Phantasmes, as he does there
imprint, the senses act not but by his guidance, and the whole man is so under
his power, as he undertakes nothing but by his motions. This unfortunate
condision is more common then men think, for all unbeleevers are reduced into
it, and wanting true virtues wherewithal to resist the evil inclinations of
nature, those inclinations must needs be changed into bad habits; the greatest
part of Christians are herein likewise engaged, for not making good use of
grace to suppress the disorders of concupiscence: they find themselves as
subjected to their wicked customs, and are no longer able to defend themselves
against these domestic Diffi^ile est peccati consuetudinem vincere: pravus
usus vix aboletur: affidua consuetudo vitium i^ naturam convertit. Antmus
sceleribus adstrictus, vix ab it is divelli potest. ^fidor. lib. 1 solil.
enemies, because they have suffered them reign too long, the longer they
defer the ruin hereof, the more do they establish the Tyranny; the more they
suffer their violence, they do the more confirm their power: whilst they are
employed about unprofitable things, and that not considering the evil which
threatens them, they take vain diversions, these monsters making use of their
imprudencie become so redoubted as they dare assail them no more: The only way
to overcome them, is to stifle them in their birth, and not to fall often into
the same sin, least an evil habit being formed in our soul, we be enforced to
live under the Tyranny thereof.

OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE VIRTUES: The Third Treatise:
The First Discourse.
A Panegyric of Moral Virtues.

IF a man may use Civility in combating, and if the Fury of War keep not men
from treating their enemies with respect, I think I may be permitted to handle
the virtue of the Pagans with esteem, and to make the Panegyric thereof,
before I make it is process, for though I hold with Saint Augustine that their
chiefest virtues have their defects, Omnis infidelium vita peccatum est, and
nihil est bonum sine summo bono, ubi, enim d^est agnitio aternae, and
incommutabilis aternitatis, falsa virtus est etiam in bonis operibus, Sent.
106. Prosp.
I do notwithstanding find beauties in them, which obliges me to reverence them,
and though I am their enemy, I cannot choose but be their admirer. For when I
consider that these great men had no other light than that of Nature, and that
self-love which tyrannized over their will, was the soul of all their designs, I
cannot imagine how so fatal a cause could produce such gallant effects, and I
wonder that the desire of Glory has been powerful enough to make them
overcome Pain, and despise pleasure. The Ambition of Command, has made almost
as many Martyrs in the Roman Common Wealth, as Charity has done in the
Christian Church; and all those Glorious Saints whose lives we read with
admiration, have suffered no more for the defense of Religion, than those first
Romans did for the defense of their Liberty: her Senators and Consuls were a
long time Corruption-proof. The Generals of their Armies did subdue their
passions as well as their enemies, the greatest danger could never abate their
courage, they were most famous when most miserable, and Romes greatness never
shone brighter, than in adverse Fortune. Worth was not confined to the most
illustrious Subjects of that Common Wealth: the people were obedient, as long
as the Senate was modest; Particular Families preserved their Innocence, whilst
Public persons preserved justice; Wives were chaste, whilst their Husbands
were valiant; the Vestals kept their Virginity, whilst the Priests kept their
Religion; all these actions which have so fair an appearance, had no other
Principle then Virtue, and Virtue had no other Force then what she drew from
Glory or Eloquence; she was praised by the mouth of Orators; Every Philosopher
was her Panegyric, and hardly could you read their works without being
passionate for her, who was their only Subject: She is so well set forth in
Seneca's writings, as one could not see her there, but they must reverence her;
And he being the man that speaks the most worthily of her, I think I am bound
to borrow his words to make her Panegyric: Listen then to what he writes of
her in diverse parts of his book.

Virtue has this of advantage that she is Noble and easy; her Nobleness
gives her value amongst men, Quid enim quiet animi otiosus? quid ira
laboriosius? quid clementia remissius? quid crudelitate negotiosius? vacat
pudicitia, libido occupatissima est. Omnium denique virtutum tutela facili^
est, vitia magno coluntur (...). 2. de lia. (...) 3.
and her easiness invites them to seek after her, the desire of her is
sufficient to acquire her, and this Famous beauty does not scorn any that love
her; she bestows her self freely on all those that court her; and be she never
so chaste, she cease not to be common; you need not cross the seas, nor
discover new worlds to find her out. We have her Principles in our selves; and
if we be but a little careful in the husbanding thereof, we may turn every
good Inclination into a Virtue; she raises us above our Condition; for though
we be composed of Clay and dust, by her Inter-position Inter bones viros ac
Deum amititia est conciliante virtute, tunc etiam necessitudo and similitudo.
Sen. de Provid. c. 1.
we may enter into alliance with God; who loves those that are virtuously
given; who in his greatness disdains not any one; and virtue is the only
disposition which he requires in those who would approach him; He acknowledges
them for his Children who vouch her for their Mother; and Heaven is their
Inheritance, whom she adopts on earth: This last recompense is that alone which
does in-animate her Lovers; all other rewards are indifferent, to them:
Interrogas quid petam^x virtute? ipsam: nihil enim est melius, ipsa pretium sui
est. Senec. de vita beata c. 9.
And knowing that happiness and virtue never part asunder, they hold for
certain that a virtuous man cannot be miserable; the delight which accompanies
their Mistress, does not inhaunce her merit; they are so faithful to her, as
when the servant forsakes her, they increase their love, and they are glad to
love her in a Condition, wherein she can only promise thorns to those that
take her part.

Let her put on what disguise she will, she is always pleasing, be it that she
withstands vice, that she melt into sweat or tears, that dust and blood ternish
her Luster, that fasting, and sufferance pull her cheeks down, she has still
beauty enough to keep her Lovers, the faithfullest whereof love her as well in
open field, as in Towns, and the Luster which she borrows from Apparel, or
Palaces, does not heighten her merit. Non habet unde accipiat injuriam. Ab
homine me tantum dicere putas? nec a fortuna quidem, quae quoties cum virtute
congressa est, nunquam par recessit. Senec. de constable, sapient. cap. 8.
Let fortune assail her never so often, she is still victorious, that hood-winkt
Sovereign which bears down the best established Thrones, which reverses the best
grounded States, which takes delight to bruise Scepters in the greatest
Monarchs hands, comes off with shame when she assails her, though Fortune arm
Tyrants against her, and employ all her slaves to undo her, yet she is forced
to yield the Field, and to confess that Virtue may loose her repute, but never
her courage nor Innocence.

Her Enemies reverence her, and her merit Maximum hoc habem (...) a
naturameritum, quod virtus in omnium animos lumen suum praemittit: etiam qui
non sequ untur illam, vident. Sen. lib. 4. de Benefic. c. 17
wins so much upon them, after having offended her, they give her Honorable
satisfaction, and praise her publicly: if they hear her comeliness spoken of,
they declare for her, and foregoing her adversaries party, they rank themselves
under her colors. When this Tyrant sees that he is abandoned he has no
better way to reduce his slave under his Laws, than to take upon him the
Semblance of Virtue; and to borrow his Enemies beauties to cover his own
il-favour'dnesse. This disguise is virtues highest praise, it is the greatest
advantage she can have, and though she be thereby sometimes prejudiced, yet is
it always glorious to her, for she can easily disabuse the unwary, Let her be
but a little careful to make her beauty appear, she wins their heart, and
causes so much love in them, as it is easily discerned, if they have not taken
her part, it is because they knew not her worth, he who could see her stark
naked would never be disloyal to her, and would she discover all her
perfections, all her enemies would become her friends.

It Is in fine the greatest advantage that man can possess: All of good Proprium
hominis bonum virtus and ratio. Sen^.
that Avarice or Ambition do promise him, are but disguised evils. Riches are
but a little earth, on which the Sun has set a price by giving it a color.
Glory which the Ambitious do so much Idolatrize, is but a little smoke, and
the pleasure which the Voluptuous seek after, is but the Felicity of Beasts:
but virtue is a solid good, who ever possesses her may vaunt to have in her
immortal riches, true Honors, and innocent delights. It Is the way which Nature
teaches us to mount to Heaven by; the means which she furnishes us with all,
to make our selves like God, without sin, and of so many things which we seek
after, there is none but Virtue which can procure us that happiness. We ought
not to hope for riches, since Pa^m Deo pecunia non faciet: Deus nihil habet,
Praetexta non faciet: Deus nudus est. Fama non faciet, nec ostentatio tui: nemo
novit Deum, multi de illo male existimant and impune. Sen. Ep. 31
God has nothing but himself, and that he has not made the world so much for
his use as for his Glory: we ought not to wait for reputation, since he is
unknown, since the greatest part of praises that are given him, are
blasphemies, and that the Libertines do unpunisht, condemn his providence. It Is
not in fine in the Number of our Followers that our Felicity consists, since
God lived without Subjects before he made the world, and that of as many happy
spirits that do wait upon him, there was not any one near him before the
Creation of the Universe. His Glory wholly consists in his own greatness, and
without heightening himself by the Splendour of his workmanship, or number of
his slaves, he finds his happiness in his Essence. Thus Virtue is the proper
good of man: he is rich enough if he be virtuous, he despises the praises of
the world, and finds himself satisfied with the Testimony of his Conscience; he
seeks for no other pleasure than what he finds in doing his duty, and as God
would not cease to be happy though he should ruin the world, the wise man would
not cease to be content, if though he lost his family, he preserved his virtue,
he needs not care for his body, though it be the Organe of his soul, and
without drawing any advantage either from his strength or comeliness, he only
values that Good, which neither fortune nor death can bereave him of.

It Is an Errare mihi visus est, qui dixit: Gratio^ est pul^hro veniens ecorpore
virtus: nullo en^m honest^mento eget ipsa, and magnum sui decus est, and corpus
suum consecrat. Sen. Epist. 66.
error to imagine that the bodies beauty contributes to that of the soul, and
that Virtue appears the more pleasing for being lodged in a handsome personage:
as a great man may come forth of a little village, so a great spirit may
proceed from a deformed body, and Nature oft-times fastens il-favour'dnesse to
Virtue, to teach us that we ought to love her only for herself, for he is
unjust who considers the ornaments which do imbellish her, and who not
regarding the excellencies which she keeps enclosed within her self, amuseth
himself in considering the Pomp, which does environ her. This great Princess
is so high spirited as she cannot tolerate a rival, she is angry when she is
sought after, for the pleasure which does accompany her, and likes not such
lovers, as only serve her that they may by her reap profit or Glory. She will
be her self the recompense of their labors, and though she promises them
innocent contentments, and true riches, she will be the only motive of their
search. Her beauty well deserves this respect, and he is yet ignorant of her
worth, who loves her only out of Interest: We must never ask what she
promises us, since she gives us her self. We must not look upon her hands,
but upon her countenance, nor must we consider her favors, but her desert, she
is lovely enough though she appear without ornaments, glorious enough though
without a Train, sufficiently magnificent though without splendour, and liberal
enough, though she promise us nothing when she calls us. If there go courage to
fighting under her Banners, there goes glory to dye in her quarrel, and as
soldiers love that Indue magni viri animum: cape quantam debes virtutis
pu^cherrimae ac magnificentissimae speciem, quae nobis non sertis, sed sudore,
and sanguine colenda est. Senec, Epist. 67.
Prince for whom they will power out their blood and glory in the hurts they
receive in his service; Wise men love that Virtue for which they lose their
lives, and Glory in the outrages which they receive in her defense, their minds
are not altereed by ill success, when their souls issue forth by their wounds,
they by their mouth publish her praises, and having been her servants, they
rejoice to be her Martyrs.

Her beauty does well deserve this Fidelity, for in whatsoeve condition we
shall consider her, she is so full of allurements, as he who has a heart must
love her. How Generous is she when undet the name of Fortitude, Fortitudo
contemptrix timendorum est, terribilia despicit, provocat, ^git. S^nec. Epist.
88.
she despises whatsoever causes Fear in man, when without pale looks she
assails death, provokes pain, and wins the victory over all those angersome
accidents which entrench upon man's Liberty, how sacred is she, when under the
name of friendship she in sinuates Fides sanctissimum (...) pectoris bonum est,
nulla necessiate ad sallendum cogitur, nullo corrumpitur praemio. Idem ibid.
her self into their hearts, and inspires them with such courage as they can
neither be astonished with threats, nor corrupted with bribes: burn us (cry
they) when inanimated by this virtue invents new Torments, we will never betray
our friends, the more Pain shall endeavor to wrest our thougts from us, the
more careful will we be to conceal them, and to deserve the names of
Faithful, though it cost us our lives, Temperantia voluptatibus imperat, nec
uuquam ad illas propter illas venit. Ide^ ibid.
How delightful is she, when under the name of Temperance she commands over
all sensualities, chaseth away such as are Impudent, moderates those which are
irregular, when she fits our desires to our need; and foregoing all superfluous
things contents her self with necessaries: How sweet is she when under the name
of humanity Humanitas nullum alienum malum putat, bonum autem suum id maxim
quod alicui bono futurum est amat. Idem ibid.
she becomes affable to all the world? when she forbids us to raise our selves
above our equals, commands us not to be severe to our Inferiors? when she
persuades us that another man's mischief can never redound to our advantage, and
that we receive Glory by what is advantageous to our Clementia alieno sanguini
tanquam suo parcit, and s^it homini non esse homineprodige utendum Idem ibid.
Neighbor? How full of charms is she, when under the name of Clemency, she
Pardons the guilty, spares another Blood, as her own. when she converts the
Criminal by her mildness, and by her goodness comforts the miserable? we
must also confess she is as well the ornament of our body, as of our soul; and
that there are no charms like those which we borrow from Virtue. An non vides
quantum oculis det vigorem fortitudo? quantam intentionem prudentia? quantam
modestiam reverentia? quantam serenitatem laetitia? quantum rigorem sereni^.
Senec. Epist. 106.
See you not what life Fortitude puts into our eyes, what Majesty wisdom makes
appear in our behavior? with what sweetness Modesty does season our words?
what a pleasing blush shamefac'tnesse drives into our forehead, and what a
Serenity a good conscience causes in our countenances? Truly if women knew how
much virtue does inhaunce beauty; they would be virtuous, that they might be
baeutifull: and without corrupting Nature by Paint they mould make use of no
other red than that of shamefac'tnesse, of no other white than that of
Innocence, of no other Majesty than that of Justice, of no other sweetness
than that of Clemency, nor of no other pomp than that of modesty, but the
mischief is we are more careful in acquiring Glory than virtue, and labor
more to make our name famous, than our souls innocent: we despise the testimony
of our Conscience, and seek for the peoples approbation, and preferring
appearances before Truth, Qui virtutem suam publicari vult, non virtuti
laborat. sed gloria. Sen. Epist. 113.
we do not greatly care to be virtuous, so as we may have the reputation of
being so.

One cannot notwithstanding merit this glorious Title, unless he part with
pleasure, and Glory for it, for as he knows not the worth of Virtue who seeks
her only out of voluptuousness, so neither does he know her merit who seeks
her only for Honors sake. We must resolve to lose al things to come by her,
nor can man hazard his reputation for a more just subject, than in the
preservation of Virtue.

The second Discourse.
That Moral Virtue has her faults.

AS night never looks more ghastly than when it succeeds a fair day; as a
Tempest is never more hideous than when it surprizeth the Mariners after a
long calm, and as ugliness is never more deformed tahn when it approaches near
Beauty: I thought the best way to make the vanity of Moral Virtue appear, was
to oppose it to Christian Virtue, and to set forth in the same Picture the ones
defects, and the others perfections. This harmless piece of cunning will
suffice to disabuse such Christians as will heighten Paganism, to the
prejudice of our Religion, and who prefer the Constancy of their Socratesses
and Catoes before our Ignatii and Laurentii.

That which I think may have deceived them is nothing else but the Saepe
reperitur simplicitas veridica, and falsitas composita quae hominem suis
erroribus illicit, per linguae ornamenta laqueos dulces aspergit. Isidor. 3. de
summo bono.
Luster, which humane Eloquence has put upon Pagan Virtue: for we must
confess that Plato has much better illustrated Socrates his Innocence, than
Saint Basil, or Saint Gregory of Nazianzen have done that of Abell and of Job:
Titus-Livius paints out Lucretia's Chastity in better colors, than does Saint
Ambrose the like of the Christian Virgins, and Seneca does much more handsomely
commend Cato's courage, than Saint Augustine does the courage of the Martyrs.
Christian Eloquence is uncompounded; she is modest in her praises, she is
ashamed to make use of a falsehood to heighten a Truth, and to honor a Virtue
by an Hyperbole; she attributes the Saints constancy, to the grace of Jesus
Christ, she lessens our admiration by discovering the causes of their patience,
and we wonder not that Saint Agnesse and Saint Cecilie have overcome their
torments, when we consider they were assisted by Angels, and that the wild
beasts did reverence their Innocence. Christians having allways been more
careful of doing well than of saying well, the best of their Virtutes babenti
magna virtus est (...) gloriam. Aug. lib 5 de Civit. c. 6.
actions have been buried in oblivion; their virtue not having received so much
Glory, has not thrown abroad such a Luster; and wanting Orators to speak in
her praise, or Panegyricks, she has oft-times mist Admirors: but the virtue of
the Pagans has had all profane Eloquence exercised in the praises thereof,
and all the most famous Orators busied in composing of Panegyricks to her; She
has made the best ancient Poets sweat; Homer and Virgil, are but skillful
ingravers, or able Painters, who have endeavored to represent unto us rather
the mind, then the visage of their Heroes.

Yet for all the care they have had to disguise Virtues defects, they may be
discovered, if attentively considered: for Philosophers who have defined her,
have placed her in a certain Est virtus habitus animi judicio susceptus, in
mediocritate positus, sic que definitus ut prudentia praescripserit. Aristot.
lib. 1 Ethic. c. 6.
Mediocrity, which takes from her the Liberty of operating, she is environed by
two Enemies which will not suffer her to enlarge her self; if she will exalt
her self, she falls into a precepice, and if she endeavor to do somewhat toward
the acquiring of Glory; Humane weakness which cannot suffer it, does condemn
it as a sin. This languishing virtue is shackled, and dares undertake nothing
of generous, least starting from out the Common road, she be accused of
straying: she is enforced to follow the ordinary Track, and to submit her self
to the rules which are prescribed unto her, if she will preserve her
reputation: Liberality can do nothing of profuse wherein she may not be accused
of prodigality. Simplicitas ^c liberalitas nisi adsit modus in exitium ver.
tuntur. Ta^t. histor. lib. 3.
A Prince dares not be magnificent for fear of being thought too bad a husband.
Men withold their liberal humors through unjust Maxims, and keep him from
following Nature in her Profusions, because some Monarchs have been known, who
after having indiscreetly emptied their Coffers, have unjustly filled them
again: to keep him within his duty, men show unto him, that Ambition often enters
into the souls of Kings under the name of Liberality, that there are few who
know how to dispense their favors, and many that know how to lose them. Thus
Princes cannot make use of Liberality; and though the Heavens have given them
so great Territory, they must temper Avarice by Prodigality to acquire the
title of Liberal.

Valor is under the same constraint, this generous virtue receives daily a
hundred advises, which under pretense of her preservation, have a design to put
a period to her conquests; if she expose her self to danger, she is esteemed
rash; if relying upon her good fortune, she put on such resolutions as fear
approves not off, she is accused of Imprudencie; yet should she believe her
advice, she should never do any thing of generous: and had Caesar's and
Alexanders valor been limited within the bounds of fear, they had never
fought, nor been victorious; upon some occasions wisdom must give way to
fortune, and Conquerours must rather consult with their good fortune than with
their duties, The most glorious virtues ought to be free, they are too
courageous to live inthrald, they are but the most Common ones that Subject
themselves to these Laws, they must dispense with ordinary rules, if they will
attempt any thing worthy of memory. Poets knew this very well; for they have
been enforced to invent heroic virtues, and to indue their Heroes with a
valor, which raised it self above wisdom, and which in the greatest perils
advised only with courage, Sicut heroes natura homines superabant ita virtute,
erant enim inter homines and Deos medii, corumque virtutes modum communem
excedebant. Arist.
weak spirits term it a fortunate rashness, but the wisest Philosophers call it
an Heroic valor.

Now Christian virtue is happily affranchised from this shameful mediocrity,
which weakens moral virtue: for being more Divine than humane, she is not stopped
by weak maxims, nothing seems impossible to her, she suffers her self to be
led on by the spirit, which in-animates her, and wholly throwing her self upon
the Providence which guides her, she neither considers her strength nor yet
her weakness; hence it is that the Saints forgo all their wealth, that without
caring for what is to come, they voluntarily become poor, and leave the care of
their subsistence to him who governs them. Virgins who by their age and sex
ought to be timorous, have sought out Tyrants, and provoked their Executioners:
they thought it was a kind of slacknesse to wait for wild beasts; they
irritated their fury, they desired to loose their lives for the glory of Jesus
Christ, who inspired them with a sanctified rashness; the love which we are
bound to bear unto our Enemies, does much exceed the rules of discretion,
Amicos diligere omnium est, inimicos autem solor^m Christianorum, ita enim
disciplina jubemur diligere inimicos, u^ haec sit perfecta and propr^a bonitas,
non communis, Tertul. ad Scap.
which forbids us to trust in a man who has deceived us; and all Christian
virtues are so Noble, that there is not any one of them whose perfection does
not consist in excess.

Though she be gotten to this high pitch, she cease not to be easy, which is
the second Advantage which she has over moral virtue, whose whole worth
consists, in the difficulty which accompanies her; she would not be beautiful
were she not difficult, and seeing that humane minds betake themselves only
to what is painful, she endeavors to heighten her desert by Labor; she decks
her self with thorns in stead of flowers, covers her self with dust, in stead
of sweet powders, drops sweat and blood, in stead of perfumes, and promises
such as court her, nothing but disasters and ill luck; she is lodged upon a
hill which is smooth, slippery, and steep on all sides, where a man cannot come
at her without danger of falling into a precipice; though she promise honor to
such as love her, she suffers them often times to be confounded, and judges
only of their love, by misprising glory or pleasure. She invites them by her
discourse, but endues them not with strength; she persuades their
understandings, but does not raise up their wills: and like the Law of Moses,
she may well have some light, but no heat: Infidelium virtus idolum est cujus
species jucunda quidem sed virtus inanis.
This is the cause why her pertakers have fallen into despair, and after having a
long time served this rigorous Mistress, they have been forced to accuse her of
ingratitude, and to blame her cruelty; but what could they hope for from an
idol, which being the workmanship of their minds, had no other perfections
than what it had borrowed from their praises, which was only vigorous in their
writings, only beautiful in their Panegyricks, and which was not generous, save
in their actions. Thus had Cato recourse to despair, finding no relief in
virtue; and Brutus acknowledged when he died, that she could not assist such as
served her, that she dazzled men's eyes by a false light, and that she was but a
vain idol, which forsook her followers at a pinch, not being able to warrant
them from the outrages of Fortune.

We may truly affirm there have been two sorts of idolaters in the world; the
one worshipped the workmanship of their own hands, Sicut Nationes manibus ita
Haeretici and Philosophi verbis, idola fabricantur. Tertul. advers. Prax.
and by an Immense folly put their hope in images which they themselves were
Authors off; though they cannot understand them, they serve them with respect,
though they cannot defend them, they fly to them for protection; and dread
their anger. The other adore the workmanship of their minds, and form unto
themselves Noble Ideas which they fall in love with, the more beautiful the
idols were, the greater impression did they make upon their wills, and the more
eloquent they were in describing them, the more superstitious were they in
honoring of them. This error blinded all Philosophers virtue, which is but a
habit which we acquire that we may do Good, was the only Divinity which these
hood winckt people worshipped; and not considering that there is nothing in the
soul of man, which merits a Supreme Honor, they bore respect to the good
inclinations thereof, when they were governed by the rules of morality; this
superstition cost the Apostles, much more pain, than the superstition of the
people, they had more ado to convert Philosophers, than Tyrants; and experience
taught them that reason was more opinionated than force. Two ages were
sufficient to overthrow all idols of brass and marble, and though their
adorers used cruelty to defend them; martyrs through their patience triumphed
over them. But all the Reign of Jesus Christ has not sufficed to destroy the
idols of the mind. The Doctors of the Church have in their writings set upon
them, but have not been able to bear them Idolatria hodie extra templum, and
sine idolo agi potest. Tertul. de Idololat.
down; and there be yet some libertines, amongst the Children of the Church,
that do adore them. They are not so much attracted by the grace of the Son of
God, as by the virtue of the Pagans; good Nature appears more considerable to
them than godliness, and they more esteem Seneca's or Aristotle's morals, than
those of Saint Paul, or of Saint Austine his disciple; yet the Virtue which
these Philosophers taught in their Schools had her esteem heightened only by
reason of her difficulty, and was admired by her partakers only through a vain
beauty which did dazzle them. But Christian virtue is at once both beautiful
and easy, you need but love her to acquire her; to possess her cost us nothing
but desires; and the Holy Ghost who sheds her in our souls, endues us with
strength to overcome the difficulties which accompany her; therefore is it that
virtue in Christians did often times fore-run reason; they were wise before the
years of wisdom, and the Agnesses who had Jesus Christ only for their Master,
were virtuous before rational Grace fupplyed their weakness, torments excited
their courage they were constant, not having read the death of Socrates, the
life of their spouse made up all their morality, and his maxims confirmed by
his examples inspired them with more of Constancy, than was requisite to
triumph over the cruelty of Tyrants, and to confound the virtue of Philosophers.

But truly I do not wonder that the virtue of Pagans was so weak; since they
were divided, and that reason which did guide them could never reconcile them;
for though they be said to have one and the same father, and that they are so
straitely united together that a man cannot possess one of them, without
possessing all the rest, yet experience, teaches us that they have differences
which Philosophy has not yet been able to terminate. Though they conspire
together to make a man happy, they trouble his quiet by their division, and
make so cruel war one upon another, as to have peace in his soul, he is obliged
to drive out one of the parties from thence, Mercy, and Justice cannot lodge
together in one Heart, their Interests are so different as they are not to be
accorded. A man must renounce mildnes if he will be severe, and severity if he
will be merciful. Morality has not yet found out a secret to reconcile these
two virtues, nor to unite them together thereby to make an accomplished Prince.
Wisdom and simplicity hold no better intelligence, the one is always diffident
that she may be secure, she oft-times hastens her misfortune, whilst she
thinks to avoid it; she had rather do ill, than suffer ill; and her humor is
so given to guile, as the best part of her being is made up of dissimulations;
simplicity walks in a clean other track, for she finds her assurance in her
goodness: she fears no outrage, because she believes no injustice, she had
rather be unfortunate than blamefull, and she is of so good an inclination, as
she resolves rather to receive an injury than to do one. If wisdom be not upon
good terms with simplicity, she is not upon much better terms with valor:
Nature must do a miracle to make them both meet in one Subject; they require
different tempers, and the aversion is such, as morality cannot accord them:
wise and cautious men are always fearful, and valiant men are always rash;
wisdom is of a cold constitution, and does not engage her self in any peril
till she see a wicket whereby to get out. Valor is hot and fiery, considers
not danger so much as glory; the one of these startles at all things, the other
wonders at nothing; the one and the other of them has their advantage, and
their defaults, but there is so great an opposition between them, as one and
the same man cannot Possess them both. Thus perfection is an Idea, which a man
may easily conceive, but never acquire. Morality is an Art which has more of
light than of force, and which very well knows the desert of virtues, but
cannot appease their differences.

It Is man's advantage that the vices cannot be reconciled, that these monsters,
who have the same design, cannot make the same Army, and that Nature to weaken
them, has divided them; to say truth profusion and avarice cannot lodge
together in the same breast, and though the one of them proceed from the other,
they wage war one upon another which ends only in death. Audacity and
Cowardice are incompatible, and though Fortitude be their Common enemy, they
cannot join together to charge upon it. Indulgencie, and cruelty, are two
faults equally pernicious to Monarchies; and it is hard to say whether it be the
greater misfortune, to live under a Prince who punishes all; or under Malum
quidem esse, Principem habere sub quo nihil ulli liceat, pe^us vero eum sub quo
(...).
one who punishes none. Licentiousnes countenanceth sin, and when Law, are
violated, and no punishment inflicted, no honest man can live securely. Cruelty
sets all the world together by the ears, and as her injustice makes no
distinction of persons, she does astonish as well the innocent as the guilty;
but Nature does not suffer these two extremes to lodge together, and this wise
Mother not being able to impede their birth, thought to oblige us by hindering
their society. I acknowledge we are obliged to her foresight, and that our
misfortune had been much greater, if these two enemies of our quiet could have
kept good Intelligence; but it must also be confessed that she was wanting either
in Power or in will, when she (...) permitted that the virtues should war one
upon another, and that the good Habits, which she had opposed to bad ones,
cannot join their forces in our assistance. This is also an effect of Original
sin, and I am confident this division was not amongst them in the State of
innocence; that justice was not an enemy to Mercy, that wisdom warred not
against simplicity, and that all these Sisters lodged peaceably together in the
heart of Man. Christian Grace which repairs the miseries of sin, with use, has
pacified the difference between the virtues; they fight altogether jointly
under the banner of charity; this virtue, which they acknowledge for their
Sovereign, quieteth all their quarrels; she takes from justice what it has of
rigor to agree it with mercy, she takes from mercy what it has of remissness
to reconcile it with justice. She unites the wisdom of the serpent with the
innocence of the Dove: she stifles particular interests, to favor the public
good, and binds them so close together, Charitas vinculum perfectionis ab
Apost. appellatur.
that they forgo their own inclinations to assume the inclinations of their
Sovereign: Hence it is that Christians are wise without malice, and simple
without ignorance, that they are generous without boldness, and advised
without Cowardlinesse; that they are just without rigor, and merciful with
indulgencie; they have the perfections of Philosophers, and want their Errors,
they taste their pleasures, not their miseries, and Possessing Charity; they
enjoy all the other virtues which hold in Fee of her Crown.

The third Discourse.
That Vain Glory is the soul of the Virtue of Infidels.

It Is a strange yet a true thing that the pride of Man was twin in birth to his
misery, and that he began to be proud as soon as he was miserable. Amidst his
greatness he was humble, whilst he commanded over all Creatures he obeyed
God, and his Empier was grounded upon his submission; Hinc enim delectavit quod
dictum est eritis sicut Dii, quod melius esse possent summo veroqut principio
cobaerendo per obedientiam, non suum sibi existendo principium per superbiam.
Dii enim creati non suae virtute, sed Dei very parti cipatione sunt Dii. Plus
autem appetendo, homo minus est, qui dum sibi sufficere delegit, abillo qui ei
vere sufficit defecit, Aug. li. 14. de Civit. cap. 13.
but when his disobedience had caused his unhappiness, ambition seized him,
and forgetting that he was a slave to the Devil, he pretended to the
Sovereignty of the whole world. To effect this his design, he tried many means
as unjust, as shameful: for through a high piece of folly he would shake off
the yoke of obedience, which he owed to God; live in a sinful Liberty, and
follow no Laws, but those of his will. Having laid the first ground work of his
Rebellion, he endeavored to frame it into a Tyranny, and having shaken off his
Sovereign he strove to get Subjects. He used Art to make himself be beloved,
and violence to cause himself to be feared, he made his equals his slaves,
under pretense of preserving or defending them; he oppressed their Liberty, and
turned his false protection, into a true Tyranny; hence did proceed the first
usurpations, which getting authority in process of time, became at last
legitimate: for pride was the original thereof, and the desire of government
took away the equality, which nature had placed amongst men. Those who liked
not this way took another road, being possessed by vain glory, they endeavored to
practice virtue; that they might win glory, and studied to Nullam virtus aliam
mercedem laborum periculorumque (...) si^erat pra^r ban^ laudis and gloria: qua
quidem detract^ quid est, quod in hoc tam exiguo vitae curriculo tantis nos in
laboribus exerceamus. Cicer. pro Archia Po^ta.
do gallant Actions, only that they might be praised. Their way of Command was
not so rigorous, but it was not much less haughty than the other; for they
pretended to rise by merit, and mildly to enforce men to submit themselves to
their guidance; whatsoever they did by this motive could not be innocent, and
whatsoever virtue they exercised by this principle had only a deceitful
appearance of virtue. Vain Glory was the soul of all their designs; did they
defend their Country, did they conduct their Subjects, did they fight their
Enemies? 'twas rather out of the love of Glory, than of Justice. Let them be as
careful as they pleased to hide their intentions, they were always clearly
discerned by their actions or their words; their thoughts might be discovered
without Tortures, and whilst the name of Justice was in their mouths, nothing
but vain glory was observed to be in their hearts; they did publicly affirm,
that to make a kingdom happy, Florent civitates si Philosophi imperant aut
Imperatores philosophantur. Jul. Capitol.
a Philosopher must either be the King, or the King a Philosopher, they boasted
that they had withdrawn men from out of Forests, that they had enclosed them
within Towns; and by giving them Laws, they had taught them Civility. They
governed a while with mildnes, but when one went about to blame their
government, or to reform it, they had recourse to violence; and the same vain
Glory which made them assume the Scepter to command, obliged them to take up
Arms to defend it. Thus did Philosophers become Tyrants, and Pride which had
used cunning to establish her self, used Force to perserve her self.

This truth appeared in the greatest part of Monarchies, but shone the clearest
in the Roman Commonwealth; and we may affirm, the more she affected virtue,
the more was she Subject to vain Glory; Haec sunt duo illa libertas and
cupiditas laudis humanae quae ad facta compulere miranda Romanos. Aug. lib. 5.
de Civit. c. 12.
for those who shall examine her proceedings may observe, that all her most
Glorious Actions had no other motive, than a desire of preserving her liberty,
of acquiring Glory, or of increasing her authority. When Romulus his valor
Numa's Piety, and Tullies wisdom, had Founded the Roman Common wealth, she
thought not so much upon extending her limits, as in defending them, she never
declared war against her Enemies, but when she saw her self in danger of being
oppressed. She fought for her Altars and for her houses, and her first commanders
had no other spur to egg them on to virtue, than a desire to live, or die in
liberty. When all Italy was under their Laws, when those who would not be their
friends, were become their Subjects, they suffered themselves to be tickled
with the desire of Glory; and those who had no other thought but to be free,
began to covet Fame and Glory. This ambitious Passion being very powerful,
made them undertake a thousand gallant Actions; and we must confess the Roman
Commonwealth, was never more fruitful in virtue than when most desirous of a
glory; her Citizens embraced all occasions which promised them Primo magis
ambitio, quam avari^ia ^nimos homi^um exercebat, quod tainen vitiu^ propius
virtute erat. Aug. l. 5. de civit. cap. 12.
Honor, not being yet so corrupted, they valued their duty., and thought the
nearest way to win reputation was to render justice to all men, to keep their
words to their enemies, to despise riches and value virtue; with these fair
maxims, they blinded all men's eyes; their alliance was sought after, and men
thought they must be subject to this Republique, if they would be free.

They notwithstanding, who took upon themselves the trouble of examining their
virtues* found that vain glory was their only motive thereunto, and that if
they had withstood vice, 'twas only that they might win Hoc insitum ^buisse
^nos etiam Deorum apud ill^s aedes i^dicant, (...) vir^tis and ^noris pr^ Di^
ha^es qu^ da^tur a Deo. U^de intelligi potest quem finem volebant esse
vi^tutis. August. lib. 5. de Civit. cap. 12
glory: They confess it themselves by their superstitions, and by building the
Temple of Virtue near to that of Glory, they did sufficiently witness that
Honor was the end, and recompense of all their Actions. To say truth, there is
nothing famous in their history, which relisheth not of vain glory, it appears
so evidently therein, as their very Historians cannot disguise it, when they
praise their virtue, they discover the motive, and are enforced to impute that
to the de^e of glory, which ought to be atributed to the desire of justice.
When Virgil makes Q^ no^ (...) ^bi pos^et (...). Au^st. l. 5. de C v* (...)*
cap. 2^.
Brutus his Panegyricke, f Vicit a^or patri^ laudumque immensa cupido. Vi^l.
and when he uses all his eloquence and skill to excuse his Parricide, he
gives no other reason than the love of his Country, and his desire of praise,
he makes us see by this only example; that Murders were permitted, provided
they were glorious, and that there was no Father in Rome, that was not ready to
sacrifice his own son to augment his rep^tation. If Camillus deliver his
Country from whence he was banis^t. 'twas (...) A^is (...) di^tem. illie (...)
^esti civis habere non ^ote rat. Id^m ^d.
because he could not live elsewhere more gloriously; If he assist his
fellow-Citizens, it is because his glory may be inhaunced by their ingratitude,
and that by re-stablishing the Republique, he may improve his power. If Reg^s
keep his word, which he had past to the Carthaginians, and if he enter himself
prisoner again it is only that he may acquire honor by the loss, and to let all
the world see, that he who had been slave to Carthage, could no longer be a
Citizen of Rome. If Pompie Cae^ (...) (...) ex^ bellum que no^ exoptavit, (...)
vi^tus ^re po^et ^ugust. ^x Sallust* l^b. 5 civi^. cap. 12.
cleared the Sea of Pirates, if Eur^pe seemed not to him a Theater large enough
to show his valor in; if after having Conquered Spain, he in^rencheth upon the
liberty of Asia, if he carry war into all the parts of the world, it is to merit
the name great; it is to equal the faults of Mari^ and Scilla, and to ^fface
the glory which they had got in oppressing the Republique. If Caesar march in
Catelines steps, if he happily end what the other had unjustly undertaken,
Postquam lux^ ^tque (...) civitas corrupta est^ ^rsus, R^spublica s^i
magnit^dine, Imperatorum atque Magistratuum vitia sustenta^t. Salust. in
C^tilin.
if seeing no more enemies worthy of his anger, he sets upon his Citizens; if
being no more able to suffer an equal, he will have all to be his slaves; if
by one and the same fault he viol^e both the Laws of Nature and of Nations, if
amongst so many vices, he mingle some illustrious virtues, it is only that he
may win reputation, and that by giving some color to his Tyranny, he may march
in the head of Caesar's, and give a beginning to the most famous Empire of the
world. For as manners were corrupted in Rome, and that particular interest
prevailed over the public, the Romans, who labored only after glory, began
to labor after government; these who thought only to enlarge the State,
b^hought themselves how to usurpt it, and being weary of obeying Senators, they
would command over slaves.

It Is true that when their greatness was once confirmed, they changed their
love of glory in the like of voluptuousness, they preserved their power, only
to satisfy their pleasure, they gave over doing of gallant Actions, because
flattery gave the same praises to their crimes, as vain glory gave to the
virtues of their Ancestors; and they troubled themselves no more with making
new conquests, because the best part of the world obeyed them; thus their
virtue ceased to blossom, when vain glory ceased to inanimatein them, when they
knew they could win reputation by their Un^e intelligi p^est quem f^em vo^ant
esse virtutis, and quo eam referebant: etiam qui boni erant ad hon^rem
scili^et: Nam ^ali (...) ^am quamvis honorem habere cupere^t, quem ^alis ^tibus
co^tur adipi^. Aug. lib. 5. de civi^. cap. 12.
debaucheries, they neglected the glorious labors, which had made their
forefathers famous. This change mak^s it evident that the Romans strove not
after virtue for her own sake, and that they fell into the same fault as they
do, who seek her for pleasures sake: for though Honorbe more Noble than
pleasure* and ambition seem to be more generous than intemperance, yet are they
both equally prejudicial to virtue, if wantonness so^ten the heart and abase
it, Ambition puffs it up, and makes it insolent, if voluptuousness be brutish,
ambition is cruel, and if pleasure master the senses, ambition Tyrannizeth over
the mind, but the greatest disorder which she causes is, that those who are
possessed by her, abandon virtue when she no longer promises them either glory
or pleasure, for the ambitious contemn obscure virtues which delight in
solitariness and silence; the volupruous fear such virtues as are a^re, and
which either swim in blood, or bathe themselves in tears; by a consequence as
vexatious as necessary, they both of them adore vice when it is mixed with glory
or with pleasure, they have not strength enough to defend themselves against a
pleasing or glorious sin, they have not light enough to distinguish between
good and bad: and they have so great a Passion for honor and Pleasure, as
every thing which does bear the badges thereof seems to them worthy to be
sought after, yet this is so great a disorder as Seneca Non vis (...) e^e sine
gloria at soap just esse debe^is c^ in^amia: ^t ^unc si sap^s mal^ opinio been
parta delectat. S^nec. Epist. 113.
has observed that those who do love virtue truly, ought to lose Glory to
preserve Innocence, that like Merchants who throw their riches over board to
save their lives; they should sacrifice their reputation to their Conscience,
and not be troubled to appear Criminal, so as they be in effect virtuous.

I must confess that a Virtue so clarified, comes very nigh true n Licet a
q^ibusdam tunc ver^ and (...) putentur esse virtutes cum ad seipsas referuntur
nec propt^r al u lexpetu^tur: tunc infl^ aut superb^ sunt and ide^ non virtutes
sed vitia judicanda sunt. Aug. l. 21. de civit. cap. 25.
virtue, and that a little Grace, would have made these Philosophers Great
Saints, yet the Poison which does infect them, is so much the more dangerous,
by how much it is the more concealed; and the vanity which in-animates their
virtue is so much the more difficult to cure, for that it is more subtle and
more nice; for though they make no account of Honor, and that they seem to
despise Glory; and that satisfied with the merit of Virtue, they seek not after
the reputation which does accompany her, yet are they drunk with the esteem of
themselves, and are their own Idolaters. The less praises they receive, the
more they think they deserve, and who could read their hearts, would find
nothing there but proud and insolent thoughts; o Nec illi ab ista se
defenderunt f^ditate quicum ali^na spernant ju^ic (...) velut glori^
contemptores sibi sapi^s vid^ntur, and sibi placent. Nam little virtus; si tamen
ulla est, ali^ ^odo quo (...) dam human^ ^ditur l^udi. Neque enim ip se qui
sibi placet h^mo non est, Aug. lib. 5. de c^vit. cap. 20.
they tie themselves up to reason, and despise Divinity; they think themselves
wise, and better than Gods: and not knowing that the Angels were Rebels, they
become guilty of their faults, for as Saint Augustine says very well, all men
who stop at the Creature, and do not raise themselves up to the Creator, are
criminal.

He trifles with those things which he ought to make use of, he makes that his
only end, which is but only a means to arrive at it, and reversing all the
laws of Nature, he will find in himself the happiness which is only to be
found in God. Thus are these Philosophers proud even when they contest against
vain glory, they trample upon ordinary Pride, by a more subtle Pride; they
despise not riches, save only that they adore virtue, they loosen themselves
from the world only that they may fasten themselves to their own persons, and
they make war against their bodies, only that they may make love unto their
minds. They are not Epicureans but Stoics, p Ut non superb^at quid debet
facere levet ^culos suos ad illum qui ^abitat in coelo.
they neither love Pleasure nor Glory; yet cease not to be slaves, to both of
them: self-love is their voluptuousness, and the satisfaction which they
receive from their virtue is their vain glory, they behold not one another
without admirations and if they appear modest in their writings, their designs
are full of Pride Doubtlesly, q Non se atten^t omnis enim superbus se a^tendit,
and magnus sibi videtur: qui sibi placet stu^ ^omini placet quia ipse stultus
est qui sibi placet. Sol^ securus placet qui Deo placet. August. in Psalm. 121.
they are proud, since they take Pleasure in themselves, and they are not aware
that this Complacency is a proof of their Folly, since (as Saint Augustine
says,) every man is a fool who delights in himself, and he alone is wise who
pleases God.

To conclude this discourse by a reason of Saint Paul's, y of which Saint
Augustine shall be the Interpreter, the delight which we have in our selves is
as well a sin as the pleasure we take in others. This great Apostle does equally
condemn these two disorders, he will not have us to delight in our advantages,
the satisfaction which we take in our selves, is a science, or young shoot of
self-love, and if we q Etiam aliud est in eodem ge^ere tentationis malum quo
inva^escunt, qui sibi placent de se: qu^ vis aliis, vel plac^ceant vel
displiceant, nec placere affectent c^teris: sed sibi placentes multu^ tibi
displicent Aug. lib. 10. confess. cap. 39.
be forbidden to love our selves, we are not permitted to esteem our selves.
Saint Peter, all whose words are Oracles, Places complacency amongst the number
of sins, and condemning those who raise themselves above their deserts, he
condemns those also who take pleasure in their Virtues, and Saint Augustine
discovering the intention of these great Apostles, teaches us that there are
two sorts of Temptations; the one exterior, which being easily discovered, are
not hard to overcome; the other interior, and which lying in the bosom of our
souls, are as hard to cure as to know. Of this sort is their Temptation, who
not requiring the praises which they deserve, or who rejecting such praises as
are given them, cease not notwithstanding to be displeasing to God, because
being filled with a vain glory, so much the more dangerous, as the more
subtle, they delight in themselves, and do not raise themselves up to the
Summum Bonum; which is the fruitful Fountainhead of all true virtues. This is
the fault whereof profane Philosophers were guilty, the vain glory which
blindes the Socratesses, and the Catoes, and this is the nice Temptations,
which undid all the excellent wits of Rome and Athens. The rest which were so
very fine, were contented with the peoples applause, and demanded no other
recompense for their virtues, than triumphs and victories; Honoratisunt in
omnibu^ f^re gentibus ^mperii sui leges imposuerunt (...) gentibus: non est
quod d^ sum and very Dei justitia conquerantur, receperunt mercedem suam. Aug.
l b. 5. de civit. c. 15
and certainly those could not complain of Gods Justice, since he has changed
their desires into effects, and proportioning their recompenses to their
Actions, has crowned their fallacious virtues with a vain Honor; since he
has paid their Labors with so many conquests, and has submitted so many
people, to men that are Ambitious of Command and glory.

The fourth Discourse.
That the virtue of Infidels cannot be True.

Virtue is so beautiful as her very shadow is delightful; vices have some
sort of comeliness when they borrow her accoutrements, and we cannot forbear
praising such errors, as appear in her likelihood, We approve of prodigality
in Princes, because it counterfeits liberality; We admire boldness in
Soldiers because it has an air of valor and courage: We adore ambition in
conquerours, because it borders upon Generosity. This error would be excusable
did it not advance further; but there are some men who preferring appearances
before truths; value a glorious vice at a higher rate, than a neglected virtue.
Socrates his conference with his friends seems of a more lofty style to them
than does S. Paul's last words, and this Philosophers discoveries prevails more
with them, than the examples of our Martyrs. Hence it is that Christians admire
the virtues of Infidels that not content to make their Apologies, they make
Panegyricks in their behalf, and praise men on earth whom God punishes in
hell. Saint Austine not being able to endure this injustice, S^e cult^ very Dei
etiam quod videtur virtus esse, pecc^tum est, nec p^ere (...) Deo sine Deo
p^test: qui vero Deo non pl^cet, ^ui nisi (...) and Diabalo placet. Aug. lib.
1. 1. de voca^* Gen^. c. 7
which had its birth with the Pelagian Heresy, opposes it in a thousand parts
of his writings, and contradicting the reasons which it proffers in 'its
defense; Makes Christians confess, that the greatest part of infidels virtues,
are but glorious vices; as I am of his opinion, I will march under his colors,
and I will make use of his weapons to preserve the advantages of the Graces of
Jesus Christ, and to take away the vanity of corrupted Nature.

But to proceed by degrees we must presuppose with S. Austine, that no action
can be holy which proceeds not from Faith, according to this holy Fathers sense
a man must be faithful if he will please God, and the soul which is not
enlightened by the Divine light, cannot acquire any Christian virtues; that
which has no regard to the Summum Bonum cannot be good in this sense; and
where supreme tatis cognitio is wanting, no Divine virtue can be practiced.
Either Sine fide etiam quae videntur bona opera in peccata vertuntur, omne enim
quod non est ex fide peccatum est, Aug. li. 3. ad Bonifac. c. 5.
Grace or corrupted Nature, are the Originals of our actions; whatsover
proceeds from the former is sacred, whatsoever derives from the second is
profane: a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, nor can a bad one bring
forth good. Since humane Nature has lost her Innocence, and her Inclinations
are corrupted; unless she be amended by Quantum libet autem opera infidelium
praed^centur ejusdem* Apostoli sententiam verm novimus, and invictam: omne quod
non est ex fide peccatum est. Aug. lib. de gesti^ Pelagii cap. 14.
Grace, she remains always b^assed toward the earth; she must be raised up by
faith, if she will look up to heaven; though she see ^er disorder, she cannot
amend it, and though she be conscious of her evil, she cannot hate it, she
wants both light and strength, her wisdom is full of error; her strength is
mingled with weakness, if she have any cognizance of virtue, it is in so
confused a manner, as she cannot discern it from sin; and if she do any good,
it is so faintly, as she cannot shun evil: let her turn on what side she
please, she is always out of the way; and till she be guided by Opera quae
dicuntur ^ante fidem quamvis videantur ^ominibus laudabilia in^ia sunt. Nemo
ergo computet ^ona opera sua ^nte fidem: Ubi fides non poterit, bonum (...) non
erat. Aug. p^. in Psalm. 31.
faith, she hardly steps a step without stumbling.

If man in this unhappy condition, expose himself to the fire for Truths sake:
if he fight for his Country, if he suffer ^or Justice, he dies a Martyr to
vain glory; as he had no other end than Glory, he can look for no other
recompense; and having had no other motive than his own Interests, he cannot
shun the punishment which his injustice deserves: when the In homine ips^ nisi
praecedat fides vita b^na sequi non poterit. August. l^b. de fide and operib.
cap 7.
intentions are bad, the actions cannot be good; and when man proposes an
unlawful end unto himself, the means he uses to come thereby may be
specious, but can never be innocent. To succor a man's Country, when it is in
oppression, to assist ones Parents or friends when they are in danger, to
hazard life for the defense of Liberty, and to lose liberty to preserve
Innocence, are Bonum op^s intentio facit: intentionem fides dirigit. August.
pr^f. in Psalm* 31.
Actions which cannot be blamed at the first looking upon, and which draw
praises from all men's mouths, when they only consider them as they appear.
But when a man shall penetrate into their intentions, and shall see that
self-love is the motive thereof, that Honor is their end, and vain glory their
Original, we are bound according to Saint Never is it^que non offic i^ sed
^nibs a vi^is esse discernendas vi^tutes. Officium est autem quod faciendum
est, finis vero propter quod faciendum est. Cum itaque facit ^omo aliquid ubi
peccare non videtur, si non propter hoc facit* propter quod facere debet,
peccare covincitur* Aug. lib. 4. cont. Julian. c. 3
Austines Doctrine to condemn them, and to say that virtue and vice differ not
so much in their actions, as in their designs: the Prodigal gives alms as
well as he who is liberal, despair throws us into danger as well as valor,
Pride defends ^her self better from unchastity, than does continence her
self, and as rare exploits are wrought by vain glory, as by virtue; yet all
men will confess that these are bad actions, that their intention tarnisheth
their beauty, and that their end makes them criminal. Let Catiline overcome
voluptuousness, let him despise riches out of the love of honor, let him
assist his friends courageously, let him be as constant as Cato, let him lead
on his designs happily, let him order his Troops as wisely as did Scipio, and
fight more valiantly than Pompey: All these gallant actions will be sallied* by
his bad intentions, and you shall have reason enough to condemn him, when you
shall know that he plots the loss of his Country, and imployes all the
advantages which nature has bestowed upon him, to change the Republique into a
Tyranny; by the same reasons, we must conclude, Quicquid autem boni fit ab
homine, and non propter hoc fit propter quod fieri deber^ v^ra sapi^ pr^cipit,
et si offici^ vide^ ^onum, ipso (...) recto (...) peccatum est. Aug.
that whatsoever the Infidels have done, deserves not the name of virtue, since
the motive thereof was unjust, and the end unlawful. Let Scipio undertake the
defense of his Country, because in duty he is bound to do so; let him being
egged on with glory, or touched by compassion, pass into Africa, let him be^
Ca^ to deliver Italy, and let him defeat H^ll to revenge the loss of Cannas;
all these glorious considerations cannot excuse him, if vain glory, the peoples
applause, or selfe-complacency have been his end therein.

Man is guilty as often as he stops at the Creature, he goes (...) when he goes
not to God; and he makes an Idol of (...) qui^ b^ est D^, ut (...) sit; and in
re^ a De^ (...) magnum (...) est Natura ratio^, ut nullum sit bo^um quo (...),
nisi Deus. Aug. (...) n^tura boni, c. 7.
goodness, or virtue, when he works only through their motions. Man is so
noble, as he can have no final end, but God, into whatsoever condition sin
has reduced him, he is always bound to look upon him, though it be not in his
power to unite himself of himself to him, yet is he bound to aspire
thereunto. His Impotency does not dispense with his duty, and though he knows
not God, yet he is bound to love him. Thus were the Pagans guilty, when they
sought after nothing, but glory and pleasure* those amongst them were the more
innocent, or the less guilty, upon consulting with reason, desired only
virtue; and who despising honor, sought only how to acquit themselves of
their duty.

This Truth may seem a Paradox, and there is none who will not condemn Saint
Austine, of too much rigor, if he do not very well conceive man's greatness in
the state of innocence, and the corruption of nature in the state of sin. To
understand it well, we must know that our Nihil est magis natural quam
praeceptu^ de amando Deo, nihil tamen ad implendum magis est supernatu^e, unde
Sco^us dicit Deum esse finem naturalem hominis, licet no^ naturaliter
adipiscendum, sed supernaturaliter. Scot. in prologo. q. 1. number. 12.
disobedience has not altered Gods Design. His Commands are of force after
our rebellion, and though we have lost grace, we are not freed from our
obligations: we ought to love God above all things. Though we have lost
original righteousness* we ought to shun sin, though we have not the liberty
that Adam had, we ought to aspire after Heaven* though the Gates be shut upon
us* and we ought to have no other end upon earth, than what we had in Paradise,
though we have lost the means. Q^amvis homo n^turaliter inclinetur in finem
ultimum, non ta^en (...) ^turaliter illum cons^, sed solum (...) Grati^, and
(...) est propter ^minentiam illius finis. D. Tho.
Thus are Infidels bound to despise glory and pleasure, that they may seek out
the final end; and they fail of the^ duties, as often as they adore ver^ue, and
neglect the Divine Essence.

All the Stoics would be great S^ints if a man could love virtue, and not an
Idolater* Elysea^ Fields must be made to receive them after their death, if
Integrity could (...) make Philosophers innocent; All their Actions would (...)
recompense, if the Instructions of Morality were infallible, and the Grace of
Jesus Christ would be of no use, if reason could promise any felicity: such as
Zen^ and S^crates would reign in Paradise set a p^t, where Virtue should be
the^ Idol* where (...) should be (...)* (...) where without the Grace of
believers, or the Glory of the (...)* they should live exempt from pain* with a
heap^d up (...) contentment. The Church acknowledges b^ (...) Hell; neithr
does she acknowledge more than one Paradise; and as in the former, none but
true faults (...) punished, so in the la^ none but real virtues are
recompens^d Gratis Christ^ mort^ est, si homines (...) fide Christi (...)
veram* ad virtutem veram, ad justitiam ver^m, ad sapientia^ veram qu^cumque
ration^ perveniu^t, si per Naturam volunta^emque justitia, ergo Christus gr^tis
(...) e^: si per doctri^ ^rum (...), ergo Christus gratis (...) est. Aug. lib.
4. contra Jul. cap. 3*
who has not had Grate f^ his original, shall not have Glory for his dese^*
and who has not had God for his end, shall not have him for his happiness.
All these Actions which we so unjustly value, had no other rise but self-love:
the Stoics and Epic^raans agreed in this point, and though the one considered
virtue, the other pleasur^, they both loved man, and by several ways
endeavored the same end. For (as Fuerunt Philosophi s^culi. huj^, (...)
p^verunt ^on esse beatudinem nisi seesidum c^m vivere. I^i (...) dicti sunt.
Alii Philosophi s^perbi, quasi a carnese remov^tes; and t^tam sp^m in (...)
pos^t (...) b^num in virtute sud. Tales erant Stoici. Illi secu^dum car^ (...),
(...) (...)* (...) isti (...) illi s^cundum Deum viv^s August. Ser. 13. de
verbi^ Apostoli cap. 7.
says S. Austine) the Epicuraans were engaged in the body, and believing there
was no other happiness, than what consisted in the sense, the Pleasures of the
soul seemed Illusions to them; they thought all that was not sensible,
imaginary, and knowing no other life than the present, they expected no other
happiness. The Stoics were more haughty, and estranging themselves from their
body, that they might ement themselves the more strongly to their souls, they
despised pleasure, that they might value virtue; their chains were not the
weaker for being the more finely wrought, their Irons were not the less for
being gilded, and their servitude was not the sweeter, for being somewhat the
more Glorious. The one lived according to the flesh, the other according to the
soul, but neither the one nor the other lived according to Jesus Christ. The
Epicuraeans confined themselves within their body, the Stoics within their
soul, but neither did the one nor the other of them, forgo themselves to
fasten to the Summum Bonum.

Then to be virtuous, it is not sufficient to love Moral virtue; she cannot be
man's final end sin^ is only created for God; nor can she be a means to
acquire it, (...) Nonnunquam sane apertissima vitia aliis vitiis vincuntur
occultis quae putantur esse virtutes; in quibus regnat superbia, and quaedam
sibi placendi altitudo ^uinosa. August. lib. 21. de civit. c 16.
(...) love is her original. To ^et her forth to the life, we must say, that
in this sense she is a disguised sin, which fights against apparent mischiefs
by Hidden ones; which hurts us to heal us, and which never closes up slight
wounds, without making deeper and more dangerous ones. This ought not to seem
strange, to those who will consider that there be women who are chaste, because
they will be unchaste, who grant nothing to their husbands, that they may give
all to their Adulterers. Thus did the Infidels in their Combats; they opposed
one sin to another, they surpast Incontinancy by vain glory, and freed
themselves from injustice by Ambition* Those past for the best whose faults
were most useful to the State, men judged of virtues by their effects, as they
oft-times do of counsels by their events; and not considering their original or
their motives, they were thought virtuous who were honorable in the
Commonwealth. They praised Fabrici^ his poverty* because it was a means why
Luxury did not corrupt the most illustrious Families of Rome, They valued
Scipioes continency, because there by the insolency of the Soldiers was
suppressed, and they excused Catoes severity, because it preserved the Senates
freedom; but all these false virtues were true faults: the very best of them
was worth nothing, the beautifullest of them had their defaults, Nam licet a
quibusdam ^unc vera and honest^ putentur esse virtut^cum ad seipsas referuntur,
nec propter aliud expetun^r, etiam tunc inf^ su^t and superbae, and id^ non
virtutes sed vi^ia judicanda sunt. Aug. lib. de c. vit. 19. cap 24.
and oft-times those which we praise most, deserve most blame. It is not
impossible; but that Camillus his ambition was more violent than that of
Cateline; it may be Pompey was not more innocent than Caesar: who can tell but
that he might have prevened his Father in Laws fault, had he k Minu^ eni^
Fabricius quam Catilina p^nietur, non quia iste bonus, sed quia iste magis
malus, and min^ imp^us q^am Catilina Fabricius, non veras vi tutes habendo, sed
a veris virtutibus non plurimum deviando. August. lib. 4. cont. Julia. c. 3.
thought he might have gained as much honor, by the oppression of the
Repulique, as by her defense? It may be Scipio was no less vain than was
Marius; and if he used it more modestly, 'twas only for that he fashioned to
himself a more noble Idea of glory. In fine they were all faulty; And as S.
Austine says; Catiline was more wicked than Fabricius, but both of them were to
blame; both of them shall be punished in Hell, but Fabricius not so much as
Catiline, not for that he was better, but for that he was less ^cked, not for
that he was more solidly virtuous, but for that he came somewhat nearer True
virtue.

From all this discourse we must infer that S. Austine does not acknowledge any
moral virtues, which are not Christian; that wisdom and Fortitude, are but
weakness and blindness if they be not founded upon faith; that he who is not
upon good terms with himself, cannot be upon good terms with his neighbors;
that the wife who is faithless to God, Cum virtus sit p^dicitia (...) vitium
c^trarium est imp^* dicitia ^nesque virtutes etiam quae per corpus oper^tur,
in^ (...) habit^t, quo modo vera ratione pudic^ corpus a^eritur, qua^do a vero
Deo ips^ ^imus (...), Aug. 1. de N^pt. and* con^pisc. c 4.
cannot be faithful to her husband; and that the body cannot be chaste, when
the soul is the Devils strumpet. Let us conclude this discourse with those
gallant words of S. Jerome; which will be the less subject to suspicion, for
that he seems to reverence the virtues of the Pagans, and that he is pleased to
write their Panegyricke, to encourage the Faithful by their example. Faciamus
and nos aliquid simile huic quod dicitur. Iustus ex fide vivit; and dicamus
Castus ex fide vivit fortis ex s^de vivit adversus cos qui in Chri^um non
credentes, ^ortes and sapientes, and justos se putant esse, ut sciant nullu^
absq^ Christo vivere (...) quo omnis virtus in vitio est. Hieron. l. 2. in
Epist. ad Galat.
The just man lives by Faith, says the holy Scripture, and we say, that the
Chaste and courageous man lives by Faith. Let us apply these words to all the
virtues, let us make weapons there-out to beat the mis-beleevers and Heretics
withal, to the end that they may learn, that there is no living well out of
Jesus Christ, without whom innocence is guilty, and virtue vicious. After this
Testimony, we may long dispute the truth of this Doctrine; and what is
established by the Authority of two of the wisest Fathers of the Church, may be
believed without Error, taught without scandal, and defended without any
scruple.

The fifth Discourse.
That Wisdom without Grace is blind, weak, and Malignant.

IF the Pagans did believe that the virtues were Dieties we must not wonder if
they yielded the same Honor to Wisdom, since according to the judgment of
Philosophers she is their Sovereign. Prudentia viz^ prin^ est, reliquisque
omnibus utitur, atque i^sarum ordinam and modum tanquam oculus mentis ^tendit.
^mblic.
It Is she which does indeed conduct them in their employments, redress them in
their errors; and assists them at their needs: she wakes for the safety of the
State, and whereas other virtues have but particular uses, this has general
occupations which concern the Common good. When she goes to the Composition of
an upright man, she is called morality, when to the making of a Father to a
family, O economie, and when she makes a State Minister, or a Prince; she
assumes a more Lofty name, and is called Policy; but she is the soul of all
those Sciences, which have no other light than what she affords them, and which
differ within themselves only by the diversity of their objects, she is as
necessary in war as in Peace; and the Generals of Armies are more to be
commended for their wisdom, Si prudentia una ad ^it, ^am continu^ una cum ^a
omnes virtutes aderunt. Arist. 1. 6. Ethic. c. 3.
than for their valor. In fine, she is the Chain which links all virtues
together, which do disband as soon as she gives over guiding them. For
Fortitude without wisdom is but mere rashness; Justice which is not
accompanied with discretion, does easily degenerate into severity, even
Temporance it self, when it gives over being guided by her, becomes either too
remiss, or too rigorous. So as a man must be wise to be virtuous, and the
shortest way to come by all virtues is to get wisdom,

Amongst many Employments which are given her, the Prius quam incipias
consul^o, and ^bi consuleris mature facto opus est. Salust. in Catil.
chiefest are to consult, and to deliberate, to Judge, and resolve; to conduct
and to execute. When she has done her utmost diligence, she leaves the
success to Fortune, and confesses by this her submission, that she holds of a
Sovereign Power which disposes absolutely of all worldly affairs. Amongst so
many advantages which so Eminent a virtue does enjoy, it is not hard to observe
her defaults: and to make Politicians who do adore her, confess, that since
Original sin she is become blind, weak and malignant.

Light seems to fall to A providendo prudentia appellata est. Cicer. 1. de
legib.
wisdoms share, and that leaving Stability to Justice, Rigor to Fortitude,
and Mildness to Temperance; she reserves Perspicuity to her self, to
dissipate those darknesses which do obscure worldly things: yet is she
unfortunate in this very point, and of all Sciences which meddle with
prediction, she is the most uncertain in her conjectures. Astrology, which
seems to be wholly composed of Doubts and Errors, boasts her self of having
constant Principles, and to extract the good fortune, or bad fortune of men
from the Conjunction of Planets, and from the Aspect of those Constellations
which govern at their birth; Physic, which ought not to be more certain than
it is objects, has Prognostics, which do not often deceive it, and the
Symptoms which happen to sick folks, do presage their lives, or deaths.
Navigation has infallible rules, and though it depend upon the Element, which
is no less inconstant than furious, yet does it foresee Tempests, knows the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and dexterously makes use of the winds
Impetuosity. Si prudens fuerit animus tribu^ temporib^ dispensetur, praeterita
cogita, praesentia ordina, futura provide. Senec.
But wisdom has but feeble conjectures, which she draws from what is past,
to govern what is present, and to foresee what is to come. She boasts that
time makes her know men, but what can she observe in so false a Glass, and
what knowledge can she draw from a thing which is so unknown unto her? for
though memory be faithful to her, and that she furnish her at her need with
all the Miracles of Past Ages; though History enrich her with all her Treasure,
and present her with a thousand Examples, which may inform her of the truth;
though the senses discover unto her things present, and that these faithful
Officers make (...) but faithful reports unto her, yet cannot she by all their
assistances penetrate into the secrets that are to come. Futurity is a time
which suffers not it self to be approached; two of it is moments makes us loose
our knowledge; and the wisest Occultat little faemina Deus, and plerumque
bonorum ^sae sub diversd specie ^t. Plin. in P^eg.
Politician, unless he be a Prophet, cannot foresee the misfortunes which
Futurity threatens him: that which he has prepared for his defense, serves
most commonly for his undoing; and that which he looked upon as the groundwork
of his fortune, becomes the cause of his misfortune: oft-times the fairest
appearances produce the worst effects; sometimes he is blessed by a misfortune,
and the wave which should have swallowed his Vessel up, does oft-times happily
throw him upon the Shore. Therefore has the wisest of all Philosophers
acknowledged that Counsel Consil^i divinum est. Arist.
whereof, the best part of wisdom is composed, depends more upon fortune than
reason, and that it was rather to be ranked amongst divine things, than humane.
The body and the soul are as differing in their constitution, as in their
conduct: for the body has eyes in the face to conduct it, it sees whatsoever
is before it, and none behind it is sight, extends it self to such objects as
seek it, and not to such as shun it; but the soul contrariwise, sees things
that are behind her, and sees not things that are before her, her eyes are on
her back, not in her face; she remembers what is past, and knows not what is to
come; wisdom endeavors to fortify her sight, but she is not so happy as is
Astrology, which has found out prospective Glasses to consider the Stars: for
after having made use of her conjectures, ^o si^ium futuri ex praete^ito venit.
Senec. Epist. 83.
she is forced to confess, that she foretells things to come, only by
consideration of what is past, and that she is deceived as often as she
undertakes to judge of what is to come. Prophets are only permitted to consider
this part of time: one must be admitted into Gods Cabinet to comprehend
mysteries before they happen. The Devils themselves for all their subtle
understanding cannot divine, their predictions are as doubtful, as obscure;
they speak in hidden terms to excuse their ignorance; and the Oracles of these
proud spirits are always conceived in confused words, to the end that their
Adorers may not discover their falsehood. Man (who is not much less proud than
the Devil) persuades himself that assisted by wisdom, he may know secrets to
come, and that experience which is the Mother of this virtue, may furnish him
with conjectures, the Seris venit usus ab annis.
evidence and certainty whereof, are equally infallible: but who knows not that
experience depends on years? that a man must be conversant in affairs to come
by it, and that the Proverb of Ars longa vita brevis, ought rather to be
affirmed of the Politician, than Physician.

If wisdom be void of light, she is not much better provided of power; and if
she be-blinde a man without injuring her, may say she is yet more weak; for she
oft-times sees mischiefs which she cannot hinder. It would make for our ease,
that she were either less knowing, or more Multa bona nostra nobis nocent.
Timo^ is enim tormentum memoria redu^t ^rovidentia anticip^. Sen. ^ist. 5.
powerful; her light serves for the most part but to anticipate our miseries,
and to make us miserable before our time. Thus is our condition worse than that
of Beasts, for they shun an evil when they see it near at hand; and remember
it no longer when it is once over; but we aflict our selves both with what is
past, and with what is to come, we seem to be prejudiced by our advantages, and
that we are only unhappy in having too good a memory, and in being too wise,
the one calls back the evil when it is past, and the other goes to find it out
before it approach. What need is there in hastening our dislikes, in advancing
those evils which come always too soon, to what end do we loose the present
time for fear of the future? what good does it us to be now miserable because
we must be so hereafter? This is notwithstanding the most usual effect of
wisdom, for as she has more light then power she foresees our disasters, and
not being able to hinder them, advances our punishment.

To understand this, we must know that wisdom and power are but one and the
same thing in God, that which deliberates, is that with resolves, and that which
undertakes, is that which puts in execution. If from Divine perfections we
pass to the Divine persons we shall find that the Son, who is the wisdom of
his Father, is likewise his power, that he who is his thought, is also his
strength; he does forecast designs, and finisheth them, he forms enterprises,
and executes them, he is that Palace proceeding from Jupiters brain, which
past for the Goddess both of sciences and arms, and which was no less
recommendable for her valor, then for her wisdom: hence it is that he is
called by several names in the holy Scripture, and that he is sometime called
the Verbum Dei and brachium Dei filius passim appellatur in Scripturis.
word sometimes the arm of his Father. But in man these qualities are divided,
he who is wise is not always strong, and when he has wisely resolved, he must
borrow aid from some other virtue, to execute his resolution with courage.
Wisdom is timorous, because cold; valor bold, because hot, and as their
qualities require several tempers, they do not often times meet in one and the
same person: but say Nature should work a miracle by agreeing them, and that a
man should have as much courage as conduct, his power would never equal his
Prudentia plerumque inf^lix, quia rerum eventus ab illa non p^ndent. T^cid.
wisdom, and after having given wise Counsel, he would not be answerable for
the event; there is a Sovereigne Providence which has reserved unto it self
the disposal of all things, and which takes delight in giving bad success, to
the best resolutions, to teach us that our happiness, and unhappiness is in
the hands thereof. Politicians are surprised in their cunning: that which
happens well unto them in one affair, falls out clean otherwise, when heaven
forsakes them.

This made the Pagans say that fortune laughs at wisdom, and that to confound
our presumption, she had so ordered affairs, as that happiness and wisdom did
not always keep Company: she makes fools happy when she cannot make them wise,
and not being able to make wise men fools, she makes them unfortunate,
Disputatur an tutius sit foelicem esse quam prudentem.
whence it is that Politicians doubt whether good fortune or wisdom be the more
requisite ingredient to the composure of a puissant Prince. Wisdom is more
honorable, but good fortune is more certain, wisdom furnishes advice, but
good fortune gives the event: Wisdom comes from earth, but good fortune from
Heaven: therefore Sylla, who understood this secret very well, chose rather the
name of fortunate than of great, or wise, and was of an opinion that an Empire
favored by fortune, was better established, than one governed by wisdom. This
confession makes all Politicians despair, after having built Altars to their
Idol, Deorum beneficio omnes res praeclare and been gestae acceptae referendae
sunt. Di^nys. Halicar.
they must erect Temples to providence; and acknowledge that it is she, which
gives Scepters to shepherds, which overthrows the Thrones of the wise, which
inspires the timorous with courage, and infuseth fear into the heart of the
most hardy; which snatcheth Laurel from out the hands of the victorious to
crown the conquered therewithal. To atribute good success to humane wisdom is
to offend Divine providence, in all our enterprises we must leave much to her
guidance, and in executions we must give all to her Glory, she is jealous of
this acknowledgement, and who fails to give her this Honor, never fails to be
unfortunate. It Is said that a certain Grecian named Timothy, recounted to the
Athenians, the victories which he had gotten over their enemies, vaunted that
his victories were wrought by his wisdom, and not by fortune, that they owed
their obligation to his good guidance, and not to his good luck. Though Cum
divina Providentia consiliis and rationibus humanis non suffragatur, malo and
infoelici exitu terminantur, nam and prudentes consilium and fortes virtus
destituit. N^cephor. Gregor. lib. 7.
those insolent speeches were only uttered against an idol which could not
resent them, Divine providence forbore not to revenge her self upon this
general, not suffering him to have any good success, in any thing that he
undertook afterward; to let him know that his former good successes were not
so much the effects of wisdom as of Fortune.

Though these two qualities which accompany wisdom, are sufficient enough to
tarnish her glory, the third is much more injurious to her, for ignorance and
weakness bear their excuses with them, and there are glorious virtues which
have not much more power, nor much more light, but guile is odious, and virtue
turns to sin, when it becomes deceitful; yet this is a quality which seldom
forsakes humane wisdom, all her cunning is criminal and being often
interessed, she is almost always g Totius injustitiae nulla est capitalior,
quam little qui cum maxim fall lunt, id agunt ut boni videantur. Cicer. de
Officiis lib. 1.
unjust couznage is so natural to her, as that all her counsels are there
withal infected she approves of cheating when we may reap profit thereby; and
because by the Laws of War we are permitted to overcome our enemies, either by
stratagem, or by force, she thinks she may deal so with all men.

She disperseth her guile into all worldly commerce, be it either that
particular men end their difference by process at Law, be it that Merchants
traffic with strangers, be it that Princes treat by their Ambassadors,
wisdom fenceth her self only by cunning, and in all her employments, he who
knows best how to coozen, is the ablest man. Thus is cheating mixed with wisdom;
and those who are not guided by charity, cannot be wise unless they be
deceivers.

Though Pagan virtues be often disguised vices, which under a counterfeit beauty
hide real uglines, yet there is not any which has a nearer alliance to vice
than wisdom has. Exempt vain glory from temperance in the unbeleevers, and
Temperance shall be without blemish; and separate force from ambition, and
ambition shall be praise worthy; but wisdom is inter-mingled withal sins;
interest is her motive, injustice her original, deceit her interpreter, and
dissimulation her Counselor: she hazards innocence, to e^vade infamy, she
violates Nature to preserve a piece of Earth, and to settle her own State she
overturns that of strangers. All her right consists in might, under any color
of pretense, which her cunning may pretend unto, she takes up arms to defend
it, and thinks, that all war is just whereby she may be aggrandised, all her
Maxims are blasphemies, which give against Religion, or society; she frames
Gods, and Laws after her own Mode or fashion: she esteems whatsoever withstands
her interest to be weakness of spirit, and is firm of opinion, that the Heavens
Prudentia carnis est inimica Deo, legi enim Dei non est sabjecta, nec enim
potest. Romans 8.
must do miracles to make her tractable. In fine, in the State of corrupted
Nature, it is hard to be wise, and not a Cheater. h Est^te prudentes sicut
serpents and simplices sicu^ columbae: Quia prudentia absque simplicate
malitia est, simplicitas fine prudentia stultitia est. Hieronym. super Oseam.
It Is therefore that the Son of God, when he instructs his Disciples, never
advises them to be wise as Serpents, without obliging them to be Innocent as
Doves; because innocence without wisdom would turn to folly, and wisdom
without innocence, convert to guile. Tertullian descanting upon this passage,
says, that were it in his choice he would prefer the innocence of the Dove
before the wisdom of the Serpent, and that if he could not shun the two evils,
which accompany these two virtues, he would rather fall into that of Folly,
than that of Guile; Indeed the Scripture gives the preeminency to Innocence, as
by this comparison; for the Dove is much more pleasing than is the Serpent, she
is the Emblem of Innocence and love, she expresses her self by sighs, she
was chosen by God, in the beginning of the world for the Messenger of Peace,
and to advertise man of the Deluges decrease; in the fullness of time, she had
the honor to denote Jesus Christ, and to instruct the chiefest of all
Prophets; The Holy Christum columba designare solita est, Serpens vero tentare.
Illa a primordio divinae pacis praeco. Ille a primordio divinae imaginis
praedo. Ita facilius simplicitas sola Deum, and agnoscere poterit and
ostendere, prudentiae sola concutere potius and prodere. Tertul. advers. Valent.
Ghost has made it his mystical Image, and when he would become visible, he
took upon him the form of a Dove, but the Serpent creeps upon the earth, hides
himself in the grass, wraps himself in his own folds, and never discovers but
one part of himself; he served for an Interpreter to the evil spirit, to
express himself by, and for an officer to seduce man; this was the first
visible shape the Devil put on, and we never see this Animal, but we are
touched with some secret horror, which teaches us that the Devil is odious,
and wisdom dangerous. This is also the virtue of self-love, which endeavors
to restore man to what he has lost, which withstands Gods purposes, which
gives against the laws of his Providence and Justice, and which under a
pretense of freeing us from those miseries which afflict us, endeavors to make
in each of us a proud Tyrant of a rebellious Slave.

The sixth Discourse.
That there is no true Temperance, nor Justice amongst the Pagans.

IT is not without reason, that I join these two virtues in the same discourse,
and that I make one only Panegyric for Temperance, and for Justice; for
though all the virtues are allied, and that proceeding from the same Father,
they resemble one another, yet these two have so great a relation one to
another, as they may be termed both by one name; Justice may be termed a
Public Temperance, and Temperance a particular Justice; for Temperance does
the same thing in men, which Justice does in States; and these two virtues have
no other care than to entertain Peace in War, and Equality in the difference of
Conditions. Justice rules Monarchs, stifles Divisions in their births, makes
Princes Gracious, and Subjects obedient, she gives unto every one what belongs
unto him, she weighs men's reasons, and considers not their qualities, she
condemns Kings if they be faulty, absolves Slaves if they be innocent; she is
not to be frightened with threats, nor bribed by promises. If she commit any
fault, it is surprisall, and her intentions are so upright, as if she does any
ill, it is under the appearance of God; when she forsakes Remota itaque justitia
quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia, quia and ipsa latrocinia quid sunt nisi
parva regna? August. lib 4. de civit. cap. 4.
Kingdoms, they turn to Tyrannies, when Tyrants follow her advice, they become
lawful Kings, and when she once enters a Kingdom, she always brings plenty and
prosperity with her: Politicians do also mingle all virtues with her, and judge
that to be perfect, suffices to be just. The Roman Commonwealth had not
increased, nor preserved her self, had it not been for this virtue, she
confesses she does not so much owe her conqests to the valor of his
soldiers, as to the Justice of her Commanders; and that if she had gained
Victories by Combating, they had won Provinces by their Decrees. This is so
undoubted a truth, as Cicero in those admirable Composures of his, touching a
Commonwealth, acknowledges that a Nihil tam inimitum quam injustitia civitati,
nec omnino nisi magna justitia^geri aut stare potest Respubl. Cicer. in Laelio.
State cannot subsist without the help of this virtue, that it changes Name,
so soon as it loses Justice, and that it cease to be profitable to it is
Subjects, when it cease to be just to it is Allies. A Kingdom without Laws is
a mere Tyranny; and Aristocracy without Order, is but a Faction of the most
eminent men, and Democracy without Policy, is but a confused Popularity, which
cannot keep from falling into the hands of a Tyrant.

But though the Romans be so passionate for Justice, and that they have been
obliged by their self-Interest to reverence her, yet were not they more just
than other men, and their Republique has been more enlarged by their
injustice, then by their valor; she was borne with the Sword in her hand, and
never fore-went this warlike humor, which does not much agree with the
sweetness of Laws, her first attempt was the ravishing of the Quid enim
melius aut justius quam filias alie^ fraud spectaculi inductas non a
parentibus accipi, sed vinnt quisque poterat auferri. Aug. lib. 2. de civi^.
cap. 17.
Sabine, and she sufficiently witnessed her Conquests were Tyrannical, since
her Marriages were unjust; uder pretense of assisting her Allies, she oft-times
oppressed her Neigbours; she took Orphan Princes into her protection, to bereave
them of their Kingdoms, and being more careful of preserving her reputation
than her Conscience; she only sought for pretexts to invade her Enemies
Territories, when she had conquered all Italy, she studied how to conquer the
whole World, and that she might at the same time trouble all the parts thereof,
she sent Armies into Africa, Europe, and Asia; her Pride was not lessened by
het greatness, her increasing served only to augment her ambition: and had she
not turned her weapon upon her self, to undo her self, the world would as
yet have groaned under her Tyranny. It Is true, she did some Actions which won
her Credit, she would not vanquish by Poison, when she thought she might do it
by the Sword; she advertised Pyrrhus of his Physicians perfidiousnesse, and
rendered to* Fallisci that treacherous Pedant which had betrayed his Disciples
to her; but in both these exploits, either Caeteras cupiditates unius glori^
ingenti cupiditate presserunt. Aug. lib. 5. de civit. c. 12
Glory or Interest was the rule of her Justice; she Gloried in overcoming an
Enemy by Courtesy, whom she could not overcome by Valor; and won the hearts
of Parents by sending their Children back unto them.

She treated Kings, and the People a like favorably; for she either
presupposed some wrong done, that she might have some subject to declare war
against them; or she offered them her alliance, to engage them in servitude, or
took them from their Allies, that she might weaken them; or raised some revolts
in their States, to ruin them. Alia s^ere quae majores nostr^s magnos secerunt
quae nobis nulla sunt, domi industria, foris justum imperium. P^ ^is nos
habemus lux^riam atque av^itiam publi^e egestatem privatim opulentiam, omnia
virtutis praemia ambitio possidet. Cato in Salust. Catilina^ia.
There have been Generous Nations, who have preferred death before her Tyranny,
and who have chosen rather to make trial of her cruelty, than of her
servitude. Numantium and Carthage could never endure her Insolence: the one
burnt her houses to preserve her Inhabitants; the other broke her Treaty of
Peace to regain her liberty, either by war or death. G^ule had never submitted
to her Laws, had she not hoped to revenge herself on the Romans under Caesar's
conduct, and Germany had never submitted her neck to the yoke, if Rome had
employed nothing but her force and valor against it. In fine, this proud
Republique, which has wearied so many Poets, made so many Historians sweat,
and stained the Glory of all those Nations, whose Estates she usurped; won
more by Treaties, than by Combats; and has borne away more Victories by
wiles, than by valor. She thought those battles most honorable, which cost
least blood; and gave him the greatest Triumphs, who could vanquish without
Fighting. It Is true, her Laws were just, but so ill observed; as new ones must
be made to maintain the old ones, till the Number thereof grew so great, as she
found by experience, that a State is never sicker than when it needs so many
remedies. Wherefore St. Astine considering all the cheats which Rome had Vera
autem justitia non est* ni^ia (...) Republica cujus conditor Rect^rque Christus
est. August. lib. 2. de civit. cap. 21
used to raise her Greatness, confesses Vera autem justitia non est* ni^ia
(...) Republica cujus conditor Rect^rque Christus est. August. lib. 2. de
civit. cap. 21
that a Commonwealth cannot be just, unless it be Christian; that her Laws
cannot be holy, if Jesus Christ be not the Author of them; and that her people
cannot be happy, unless they be enlightened by Faith, and cherished by Charity.

The Romans Temperance was no truer than their Justice, and if the State were
faulty in her Policy, hi^ Subjects were as much to blame in their Guidance. For
Temperance forms men by her mildness, governs such passions as promise us
pleasure; withstands delightful Enemies, stops their fury in it is birth,
dis-abuseth the understanding which they endeavor to surprise; and as a wise
Sovereign makes use either of punishment, or reward to reduce them to their
duties; she maintains the Authority of reason by her Counsels, and he who
guides himself by her Motions, does nothing of unworthy. Ubi studium verecundi^
est, cupiditas rationi cedit, ni^ilque utile quod parum ^onestum videri potest,
ducitur. Valor. Max. l. 6. cap. 6.
She never thinks that profitable, which is not honest, and the Pleasure which
delights the senses, never pleases if it be unjust. This vertuebreeds peace in
our souls, calmes the storms of hope and desire; and does so well govern
them, as these Giddy-headed Passions, never take wing, but by her Orders. For
the temperate man can q look on beauty, without coveting i^; he possesses
riches, yet loves them not; he tastes pleasure, not surfeiting thereon; and
deals so uprightly with his body, as it is neither his slave, nor yet his
Tyrant. This virtue being solovely, steals away the hearts of her Enemies, and
makes her self be admired even by those that persecute her: the lascivious
praise her, whilst they make war against her, they wish that such women as
they have corrupted, were chaste, and that such as commit Adultery with them,
would be true unto them. We must not therefore wonder if the Romans were
ravished with her beauty, that they have praised her; and that there has been
some Commanders, who amidst the licenciousness of war, have suppressed their
Passions, that they might purchase the glorious Title of Temperantia voluptatum
alias odit atque abigit, alias dispensat, and ad sanum modum dirigit: Sci^
optimum esse modum cupitorum, non qantum v^is, sed quantum deb^as (...). S^c.
Epist.
Temperate; they thought that to overcome pain, they must overcome pleasure;
that before they fight for their Country, they must fight for reason; and that
it was not to be hoped for that he who could not resist a woman's beauty, could
defend himself against a soldiers valor. They persuaded themselves that
temperance was the first step to fortitude, and that one judged of the victory
which a Commander might get over his Enemy; by what he had won over his
sensuality. Thus great men did study this virtue early; Deb^llandae sunt in
primis voluptates, quae saeva quoque ad se ingenia r^puerunt. Senec. Epist. 51.
she was their first Apprentisage, and when the blood which boiles in the
veins, kindled in them unclean desires, they quenched the fire thereof by the
help of temperance. One of the Scipioes won more glory by vanquishing his love
than by quelling the pride of Carthage; he purchased more credit in Spain by
his Continency, then by his valor: and the quitting of a famous beauty, and
free gift of her to her sweetheart got him a whole Province, he won many
Battles, by defending himself from a Maid. And his enemies were persuaded that
their Soldiers could not overcome him, whom their Yeomen could not corrupt;
this combat is heightened above his victories, his valor is never spoken of,
without mention made of his Hac continentia ac m^nificentia Indibilis ob^gatos
Celtiberorum animos Romany (...), meritis ejus debita^ gratia^ ret^it. Valor.
Maxim. l. 4 c. 3
continency, and as often as men talk of the taking of Carthage, they add
thereunto the restitution of this Princess. All the Circumstances of this
action are so remarkable, as they are not to be omitted without injury to this
gallant man. He commanded a victorious army, to which the laws of war made all
things lawful, which were not by them forbidden: he had taken a Town by
assault, the resistance whereof had stirred up his anger; 'twas thought that to
astonish all Spain, he would have made it a cruel example, and that the blood
of the inhabitants should have been that wherewith he would have quenched the
flames which devoured their houses; that he would have made victimes of all the
Prisoners, and that if the Women's lives were preserved, it should only be to
bereave them of their Honors. In this belief they present him with a glorious
beauty, whose misfortune it was to be immured within that fatal Town: she was
unfortunate enough to move pity, but too fair, not to provoke love. The
Soldiers were persuaded that their General would suffer himself to be
vanquished in his victory, and that he would become his captives captive; they
expected to have seen him once overcome, whom they had always seen victorious.
Though they had his continency in great esteem, they did think it was not
proof good enough against so exquisite a beauty; and they could not imagine
that a man who was yet in the prime of his youth, should have power to
withstand the Allurements of so fair a Maid, who had nothing but her tears to
defend her self withal. The truth is, his eyes thought to have betrayed his
heart, and Magnam vi^ habet ad conciliandum ^spicientium amorem formae
venustas, Paul. ^ov.
he found how difficult a thing it is to behold a rare beauty, and not love it;
his passion would have persuaded him, that without injuring his greatness he
might become his captives captive; he had examples enough to excuse his fault,
flattery would have authorized it, and if he would have listened to his
Domestics, he had near triumphed over his love. Amidst this his trouble, he
endeavored to comfort her who caused his pain, and would give security to her,
who entrench upon his liberty. He understood by her, that though her fortune
had made her a Prisoner, she was by birth a Princess; that her Parents had
promised her to a young Prince, and that her Fate had cast her into the hands
of her enemies; the knowledge of these particulars, and that his Prisoner was
of so high a rank; was enough to make Scipio resolve to give her her. Liberty:
he made her Father and her husband be sought for, who came upon his word into
Carthage; every one looked for an event answerable to the passion which gave it
life: some think he will demand her in marriage, others, that he will inquire
into her birth, and see whether without offending the Glory of the Scipioes he
may take his prisoner to be his wife, some fear least he will begin his
Marriage by Murder, and secure his suit by his rivalls death: few believe that
he will betray his love, and by one and the same act of Justice, restore a
daughter to her Father, Eximae form^ virgin^ (...) adultae, and juvenis and
caelebs, and victo^ postquam comp^rit illustri loc^ natam and Indibili de^
ponsatam, accersitis parentibus and spons^ in violatam tradidit. Valor. Maxim.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
and a Mistress to her servant: this mean while, when he knew: that this
Princess was no less Nobly born then beautiful, that her Father was
Governor of a Province, and that her servant did Command an Army, he presently
delivered her into their hands, and would no longer suffer his eyes to behold a
beauty, which might invite him to do an unjust act; and to Crown this Noble
Action, Aurum quoque quod pro red^mptione puellae allatum erat sum^ae dotis
adjecit. Idem ibid.
he gave her the money which was brought him for her ransom; as part of her
portion, to the end that all Spain might know that Scipio knew as well how to
Triumph over Avarice as over Love.

I foresee I cannot condemn this Action without under-going the jealousy of
such as favor the party of the Infidels, that I shall draw either public
envy or public hatred upon me, if I shall question whether so glorious a
victory deserve the name of virtue or no, and that men will think my love to
Saint Austine has made me forgo the love of truth; yet according to his
principles we must confess, that this virtue is a sin, that not deriving from
charity, Illi Philosophi sae^uli vitium vitio, peccatumque pecca^ medicantur.
Nos amore virtutum vitia superemus. Hiero. nym. Epist. 4.
it proceeded from self love; that Scipio did but ^ence himself from one by an
other, and that his keeping himself from Incontinencie proceeded from vain
glory. Infidels are slaves to the Devil, their will is in his hands, and as
long as this cruel Tyrant does possess them, he permits them not to do any
one good Action, out of a good motive, he may suffer them to resist the
violence of Love, or the fury of Avarice; but he corrupts their intentions, and
never with draws them from one evil, but he ingageth them in another, they shun
an ill step, to fall into a precipice, and their will is so subject unto his,
as after long deliberation, they always put on the worst resolution. This
unjust Sovereign fits himself to their inclinations that he may undo them, he
advises them only to such things as he knows does please them, and when he
gives any counsel, he always considers their honor or desire, he is content
that they may practice one virtue, so as they mix a vice with it, he cares not
though they overcome love, so as they give way to vain glory, and as learned
Tertullian says, Nam invenit Diabolus quomodo homines etiam boni sectationibus
perderet, and nihil apud cum resert alios luxuria alios continentia occidere.
Ter^ul. lib. 1. ad uxorem. cap. 5.
he cares not much whether he dam men by debauchery or by incontinencie; Thus I
doubt not but that 'twas ambition which kept Scipio chaste, that it was the
sweetness of glory which charmed the like of Pleasure, and that in so
difficult an Action 'twas reputation which he proposed unto himself for
recompense. All Conquerours were of his Humor, they left the Pillage of the
enemy to their Soldiers, they parted the Provinces which they won amongst
their Domestics, they made their slaves Sovereigns, and of all the advantages
which they got by their victories they only reserved glory to themselves. This
man feared to lose his reputation by losing his Liberty, he was ashamed to
suffer himself to be taken by his Captive, and he would leave no shameful
marks of his defeats, where he had left such glorious proofs of his victories.
Vain glory was the soul of his virtue, his pride increased whilst his
incontinencie decreased, and Scipio was a slave to ambition, whilst he
commanded over uncleanness.

That which has been said of the continency of this General of an Army; may
be affirmed of Lucretia's Chastity with this of difference, that hers, being
accompanied with Murder, can admit of no excuse, nor ought in any wise to be
praised. For though her death seem to be generous, and that the Romans who look
upon her as the beginning of their liberty, would have it to pass for the
Noblest sacrifice which was ever offered up to chastity; yet did it deserve
punishment in a State well policed. And they might have revenged themselves of
living Dux Roman^ Pudicitiae Lucretia ferro se interemit, ^ausamque, t^ (...)
inter^tu, i^prium consulare pro regio permutandi populo Romano praebuit. Valor.
Max. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Lucretia, upon the body of Lucretia being dead. They would disguise the crime,
and make it seem a virtue; not considering the unjustnesse thereof, they looked
only upon the public interest, and since this Murder had driven the
Tarquins from Rome, they had ground enough to make thereon a Panegyricke; they
therefore place Lucretia in the head, or first file of all Chaste Women, they
blame Fortune; for having immurde so stout a soul in so weak a body, they
excuse the sin by the effects thereof, and cannot blame a murder which was the
rise of the Roman Commonwealth. They justify her Chastity by her death, they
excuse her death by her Chastity, and maintain that as she preserved her
Chastity in a forced Adultery, she did not violate Justice in a voluntary
Self-murder. But truly I find that Saint Austine has so justly blamed her
as that she is not justly to be defended; and that he has made a Dilemma, to
which the sub^llest Philosophers cannot answer. Whence it is (says he) Quid
hoc est quod i^ ^am gravi^s vindicatur, quae adulterium non admisit, i will (...)
pulsus est, hac summo (...) est supplicia. August. ^e Civit lib. 1. c. 19.
that he who has committed the sin, is not as severely punished, as she that
suffered it, or on whom it was committed? the one did lose his Country, the
other lost her life. If you exempt her from the unchastnesse because she was
violated, how will you exempt her from injustice, since she was the death of an
Innocent? Si non est illa impudicitia qua invita comp^imitur, non est haec
justitia qua casta p^itur. Idem ibid.
your Roman Laws, Papp^al to you, which will not have the guilty to be
condemned unheard, what would you say if the crime were in a mooted case put to
you, and what sentence would you give, if it were made evident unto you that
she that suffered death was not guilty, but Innocent? would you not severely
punish such a piece of injustice? yet this is Lucretias case; cruel Lucretia,
has killed chaste Lucretia, whom Tarquin had violated but not corrupted. Give
judgment according to Evidence; and if you think you cannot punish her because
she is dead; praise her not because she was a Murderess. For if to excuse her
Murder, you wrong her chastity, and if you think she kill her self to expiate
the pleasure she conceived in that sin, it is not Cur intersect^icem (...) and
innocentis tanta praedicatione laudatis. Idem ibid.
Tarquin that is only guilty, Lucretia was as faulty as he: takeheed what
judgment you give upon this occasion; these faults are so linkt together, as
they are not to be parted; by taking from the Adultery, you add to the
Murder, and by excusing the Murder, you aggravate the Adultery: you can find
no outlet from this Labyrinth; and you know not how to answer to this Dilemma
which I propose unto you. Si adultera cur laudata? si pudica cur eccisa. Idem.
ibid.
If she were unchaste why do you praise her? And if she were chaste, why did she
kill her self? If you would rather acquit her of Adultery, than of Murder,
confess at least that it was not so much the love of Chastity; as the
apprehension of dishonor which made her take up a dagger: This Roman Lady, and
consequently haughty, was more careful of preserving her glory, than her
Innocence, she feared least she might be thought guilty of some fault, if she
should outlive the outrage that was done her; and thought she might be judged
to be confederate with Tarquin, should she not take vengeance on her self:
Christian Women, who have had the like misfortune, Foeminae Christianae non in
se vitae sunt crimen alienum ne aliorum sceleribus adderent sua. August. ib^d.
have not imitated her despair, they have not punished the faults of others in
themselves; nor committed Homicide, to revenge a Rape: The witness of their
Conscience, was the glory of their Chastity; and it sufficed them that God who
is the searcher of hearts, knew their Intentions; and shutting up all their
virtue in their obedience, they went not about to violate Gods Laws, to save
themselves from the calumny of men. Thus are all the virtues of the Pagans
nothing but Pride; their Justice; be it either slack, or severe, is interessed:
Their Continency is vain glorious, and their courage, has in it more of
despair then of Fortitude.

The seventh Discourse.
That the Fortitude of Pagans, is but weakness, or vanity.

Though all Virtues be delightful, and that they have sufficent charms to
make them appear amiable even to their Enemies, g Nonnefortitudo optabilis est,
atqui pericula co^teminit and provocat. Pu^errima par^ejus maxim que mi
rabilis illa est, non cedereignibus, obviam i^e vulneribus: interdum tela ne
vitare quidem, se^ pectore excipere. Senec. Epist. 67.
we must confess that Fortitude bears most of luster with it, and that
severity which does accompany it, does not detract any thing from it is beauty.
Justice is reverenced even by her persecutours; Tyrants are afraid of her
shadow, and after having bootlesly employed violence for their defense, they
have been fain to have recourse to Justice for their preservation: wisdom is
adored by all Politicians, a man must have lost his wits not to value her, if
she be not esteemed by fools, she is admired by wisemen; all sorts of people
confess that she is as necessary for the Government of private Houses, as of
States. All parts of Morality take her for their Guide; and without the
assistance of this Virtue, they can neither make an honest man, a Statesman,
nor a Father of a Family. Temperance is beloved by all men, her Enemies respect
her, in those that love her, they confess that pleasures can neither be
innocent, nor yet delightful, when she is absent; and that pleasure without
temperance is the punishment of the unchaste. But certainly all the Virtues hide
their heads, when Fortitude displayes it is beauties. These Stars are eclipsed,
when the other Sun appears; and people cease from looking upon Justice in
Princes, prudence in Politicians, and Temperance in Philosophers, when they
consider the courage of the unfortunately Innocent.

Though this Illustrious Virtue be sincere, and that the pain wherewith she is
assailed make her unquiet, yet has she allurements which win her more admirers
than the other have lovers: There are but few that look after her, but all
admire her, and that because persecution must precede courage, every one is
content to reverence a virtue, which must cost so dear to come by; she
in-nobles such as possess her, she comforts the condition of slaves, heightens
the Majesty of Sovereigns, augments the beauty of women, and of all the
ornaments which adorn either the mind, or the body, there is none more
Majesticall than Fortitude; if we will believe Philosophers, there is nothing
on earth more worthy of Gods looking on, Non sunt ista quae possint Deorum in
se vultum convertere, sed puerilia and humanae oblecta menta levitatis. ^cce
spectaculum dignum ad quod respiciat intentus operi suo Deus. Ecce par De^
dignum vir sortis, cum male sort una compositus. Se nec. de Provid. cap. 2.
than a man who withstands sorrow and misfortune; he despises all that Glory
which dazels us; the pride of our Houses is the mark at which his Thunderbolts
are aimed; the Magnificence of our Palaces, are but the Spoils of Quarries, or
of Forests; those Pyramides which add to the wonders of the world, are but
heaps of stones, torn from out the bowels of the earth; these Armies which
make whole Provinces to groan, either by reason of their numbers, or their
disorders, these great bodies which pour forth blood from out al their veins
to re-fill those rivers, which they have drained, are but swarms of Bees,
which decide their differences by fighting: and God looks upon the Glory of
Kings, as wise men do upon a Stage Play; but he delights to look upon a noble
minded man, who grapples with sorrow, who sees his riches borne away without
any agitation of spirit, and who in loss of honor, life, or liberty,
preserves his courage.

If the earth produce nothing which may make God stay to look upon it, and if
generous actions merit not that God should busy himself about them, yet must
we confess that they are approved of by all people; and that men do more
admire a Philosopher who suffers death patiently, than a Monarch who governs
his State with Justice. He through his constancy triumphs over whatsoever the
world has of most furious; since he overcomes pain, he may well vanquish
pleasure; since he despises death, he may laugh at fortune; and since, he
fears not the threats of Kings, he may well enough sense himself against their
promises: he tramples under foot all those pleasures which we seek after, and
all the pains and sorrows which we apprehend: the greatness of the danger
incourageth him to battle, Avid^ est p^culi virtus, and quo ten^ non quid
passura sit cogitat, quoniam and quod passura est gloriae pars est. Sen^. de
P^ovid. cap. 4.
the more difficulty he foresees, the more glory he hopes for; he values not
that much, which cost him but little; he tries himself when fortune spares
him, and to keep himself in breath, he makes Enemies, when he meets with
none. Past ages have produced men, who have not changed countenance amidst
Tortures; their Executioners could not wrest moans from out their months, nor
make them confess so much as by a sigh the pains which they endured; there
have been some, who to triumph over Tyrants, have laughed amidst their
punishments: such has been their constancy, as that Joy did not abandon them
even in that condition: their courage seemed to make them insensible; and that
by being accustomed to torments, they were grown familiar to them. Thus did
Scevola defy Tarquin the proud, his whole hand mist him, and his burning hand
struck him with astonishment: he escaped the Princes anger by preventing it,
he pierced his heart, whose body he could not hurt; and Tarquin judging of the
Fortitude of all Romans, by that of Scevola, he feared to have those men for
his Enemies, who feared not the fire. But not to add to this discourse by
examples, it may suffice to listen unto the reason of Philosophers, and to
acknowledge with them, what advantages Fortitude has over all other virtues.

Man began to be unhappy, when once he became criminal, his subjects became
his enemies, the Elements declared war against him, and those elements which
went to his composure, divided themselves, that they might alter his temper,
and shorten his life: Pain and pleasure agreed together for his undoing, life
and death were reconciled to make him suffer. Moral Philosophy, found out
virtues to succor him, and every one of these faithful Allies undertook to
defeat an Enemy: wisdom undertook to prevent far distant mischiefs, and by
her address to avoid them: Justice looks upon her to end all the differences
which self-love; and Interest should breed amongst men. Temperance charged her
self with ruling voluptuousness, and with hindering such pleasing Enemies from
seducing reason: and Et quod omn^ ^iment, and quod omnes optan^ calcat fortitu^
Senec. Epist. 48
Fortitude, as most courageous of all the rest, undertook to fight against
pain, and to overcome death. This cruel Enemy to Mankind defying the power
thereof, took a hundred shapes upon him, to astonish the others constancy, he
called in Tortures, and sickness to his aid, he invented Gallowses, and
Wheels, he extended Racks, incensed Lions, and Bears, armed the Elements to
satisfy his cruelty, and made torments, and punishments, of whatsoever nature
had produced for our use. All these virtues were siezed on by astonishment:
when they saw so many Monsters conspire man's ruin, wisdom confessed, she
wanted address to mollify them: Justice professed, she had not sufficient
Authority to suppress them; and Temperance protested; she wanted vigor to
restrain them: Only Fortitude promised to withstand them: and though she saw
her self, forsaken by her Sisters, she resolved to charge upon them: wisdom
offered her her light, Cum aliquis tormenta soriter patitu omnibus virtutibus
utitur, cum una in promptu sit, and maxim appareat sortitudo, cujus perpessio,
and tolerantia ra mi sunt. Illic est prudentia sine qua nullum initur
consilium, illic est constantia que dejici loco non potest, illic est
individuus ille comitatus virtutum. Quid quid boneste sit una virtus facit, sed
de consilii sententia. Senec. Epi. 67.
Justice her severity, and Temperance her moderation. With these weak Forces
she enters the pitched Field; where she had for assistance hope, and boldness.
The former inhartned her by her promises, the second promised ^lesse, but
performed more; for she discovered unto her the weakness of her Enemies, and
taught her on what part she might assail them. Fortitude, thus assisted,
engaged her self upon all occasions; she received as many blows as she gave,
she mingled her blood with the blood of her enemies; she past all her life in
this exercise, and if she took any ease after a fight, 'twas only to prepare
her self against those that were to ensue. By all this discourse, it is easily
seen, that the designs of Fortitude are much greater than those of all the
other virtues, and that it is not without reason that they yield the Honor to
her, since they dare not appear upon such occasions of Combats as she does,
and bears away the victory.

Though Fortitude be thus beautiful in Idea, yet is she but weak amongst the
Pagans, and covers true blemishes under deceitful appearances; for as in them
Sine dono Dei nec virtutes possunt appeti vel haberi, nec earum similitudines
quae sunt vitia virtu'es imitantia devitari. August. lib. 3. de vita conte up
l. c. 1.
she cannot have charity, for her original, she derives oft-times from
self-love, and inherits all her Fathers weaknesses; it is her own Glory she
must seek, since she is ignorant of Gods Glory; it is anger which must give her
heat, revenge which must provoke her, and vain glory, which must in-animate
her, since it is not Faith that does assist her. All these passions mixed
together, make up the greatest part of her greatness; and when one shall
examine her intentions, or motives, he shall find that her noblest exploits,
are but magnificall sins. All those men who in ancient times have been esteemed
courageous, have contemned only pain to purchase Fortitudinem Gentilium
mundana cupiditas, sortitudinem Christianorum Dei Charitas facit Council.
Arausic. can. 17
Glory, they have given their life for a little smoke, and in so unjust a
battering have sufficiently shown, that their Fortitude, was not real, since
she wanted Justice, and wisdom. In effect, their most glorious Actions have
their defaults, their valor is nothing but despair, and all that the Roman
Eloquence calls courage, is but Pusillanimity. Certainly Cato was the wise man
of Rome, he held there the same Rank which Socrates did amongst the Athenians;
his death goes for the chiefest testimony of his courage; and Historians never
speak thereof, without highly praising it; he had fruitlesly endeavored to
appease the Civil Wars, he sided, which the Commonwealth, whilst every one
took part either with Caesar, or I am non ag^tur deliberate, olim pessum data
est: quaeritur utrum Caesar an Pompeius possideat Rempublicam. Sen. Epist. 14.
Pompey; he remained free, whilst every one had chosen a Master, he assisted
the dying Commonwealth with his counsel and his weapons; he opposed his
courage to Fortune, and if this blind hus-wife could have seen his merit, she
would have been inamored thereof. After having given all these Testmonies of
his affection to his Country, what less could he do, then secure his own
Liberty by his death, and dip that Innocent sword in his blood, which the Cato
quae excat habet, una manu latam libertati viam faciet. Ferrum istud etiam
civili bello purum and innoxiu^ libertatem quam patriae non potuit, Catoni
dabit. Sen. de Provid. c. 2.
civil wars could not defile? he therefore considerately prepares himself for
this blow, he dissembles his design to cousen his friends, he spent the night
either in reading or taking rest, he encourages himself to die, by the thought
of Immortality; when he was well persuaded, he would go see what he had
believed, and by a generous blow, free his soul from the prison of her body:
his hand did not serve his courage faithfully, his Friends, who came into his
succor, bound up his wounds, and endeavored to alter his design; he seemed
to approve of their reasons, so to free himself from their Importunities: but
when he was alone, he tore off his apparel, opened his wounds and ended that
with his hands, which he had begun with his sword. Fortune would prolong his
death to try his constancy, and this Tragedy seemed so pleasing to him, as he
endeavored to spin it out, that he might the longer taste the pleasure
thereof. Liquet mihi cum magno spectasse gaudio deos, cum ille vir acerri^ sui
vindex gladium sacro pectori infigit, dum viscera spargit, and illam
sanctiffimam animam manu educit. Senec. Ibid.
Seneca complains, that Eloquence is not happy enough to make Panegyrickes
upon this death. He prefers it before all the battles of Conquerours, he calls
all the Gods to witness it, he leaves us in doubt, whether Cato be not more
Glorious then his Jupiter; he is troubled that his age knew him not, Complains
that the Common wealth, which should have raised him above Caesar and Pompey,
has placed him beneath Vatimus and Clodius; and to erect a stately Trophye to
this vanquisher of fear and Death, he says, that Cato, and Liberty died both
on a day, and were buried in one and the same Tomb.

Yet a man need not to be much enlightened, to observe the defaults of a so
well disguised death; for if Cato be to be praised for having killed himself,
all those that did survive him deserve to be blamed. 'Twas weakness in Cicero
to have recourse to Caesar's clemency; 'twas either Folly or Fearfulness in
him, not to despair of the Republiques welfare, and yet to reserve himself to
raise her up after her Fall. But not to make use of so weak a reason to condemn
him; who sees not that pride had a greater share in this Action than Courage?
Who does not think that Cato was prouder than Caesar, and that it was not
integrity, but want of Courage which put the Poneyard in his hand? Who knows
not that it was rather weakness, than Constancy that made him die? had he had
courage enough to have under-gone adversity, he would never have had recourse
to despair; he wanted patience in his misfortune, and if he could have endured
Caesar's victories, Non fuit in Catone honestis turpia prae cavens, sed
infirmitas adversa non sustinens: Nam si turpe erat sub victoria Caesaris
vivere, cur author hujus turpitudinis Pater filio fuit, quem de Caesa ris
benignitate omnia sperare proecepit. Aug. lib. 1. de civit. c. 23.
he had not Committed Self-murder; For if he thought it shame, to beg his life
of his enemies, wherefore did he Counsel his Son to do it? If he thought death
so glorious, wherefore did he dissuade his friends from it. If he thought the
Quantum filium amavit Cato, tantum gloriae Caesaris invidit, ne sibi
parceretur, aut ut aliquid nos mitius dicamus, erubuit. Idem Ibidem.
Commonwealth might be restored by their Counsels, wherefore did he deny her
his? and if he advised every one to seek for mercy from the Conqueror,
wherefore did he by his error prevent it? What ever mischief threatens us, we
must never fly to despair, though the decree be pronounced, the Scaffold set
up, and that all things assure us we must die, we must not play the Hangmans
part, nor hasten our death to free us from misery. This is to make our selves
Ministers of our enemies cruelty, to excuse their fault by preventing it, and
to commit Parricide, to exempt them from man slaughter.

Socrates, who was not better instructed than Cato, was more generous, because
more Patient; he might have freed himself from Poison by a sword, and by
fasting five or six days have acquitted himself from his Enemies violence: yet
he spent a whole Month in Prison, he affords death leisure to employ all its
horrors to try his constancy, he thought he was to give way to the Laws of
his Country, and not to refuse his last instructions to his friends, they
entreating for them. If this Pagan Philosopher thought he ought not to attempt
any thing against his own life, because he was in the hands of justice, no man
can with reason make himself away: for from the first moment of his birth he is
subject to the Laws of God, and unless he will do an unjust act, he must wait,
till he that put him into the world take him from thence; to hasten our death,
is to entrench upon his rights, to kill our selves, is Hoc dicimus hoc
asserimus, hoc modis omnibus approbamus, neminem spontaneam mortem sibi inferit
debere, velut fugiendo molestias temporales, ne incidat in perpetuas. August.
lib. 1. de civit. c^p. 26
to overthrow his workmanship; and to bereave him of the least of his Subjects,
is to attempt against his Sovereignty. In this case we have less power over
our selves, than over others; for we may kill an enemy in our own defense, but
it is not lawful to shun his fury, by preventing it. We must wait till the
same Judge, which has pronounced the decree of our Death, make it be executed;
and it belongs to one and the same Power, either to show favor or Justice to
the guilty. All those stately words which flatter our vain Glory, and do
encourage our despair, do not excuse our fault, when we attempt upon our own
lives. Nature teaches us sufficiently by those tacit instructions which she
gives us, that if it be treachery to abandon a place which a Prince has
committed to our charge, it is perfidiousnesse to forgo the body, which God has
given us the guidance of; and which he has joined so straightly to our soul,
as that it is a part of our selves. In fine; no reason can justify despair:
the number of our enemies, the evils of the present life, the Good of the
Future, the cruelty of sicknesses, rigor of servitude, sweetness of liberty,
strength of Temptations, nor the very fear of sin, are not considerations
sufficient to make us hasten our death; it is always poorness of De Catonis
facto quid potisstmum dicam, nisi quod amici ejus etiam docti quidam viri qui
hoc fieri prudentius dissuadebant, imbecillior is quam for tioris animi esse
censuerunt. Aug. li. 1. de civit. c. 23
spirit, not to be able to suffer the evil which we will shun by Homicide,
Pride has less part in this crime then weakness, and whatsoever praise the
desperate man expects for his attempt, wise men will always believe, that if
he had courage enough to bear the miseries of life, he would never have had
recourse to so cowardly a remedy. All the Fortitude of Philosophers is then but
mere cowardice, those wounds which despair and impatience have made them give
themselves, deserve more blame then they have received praise; a man cannot
approve of their fault without becoming guilty thereof, and when Seneca imploys
his weak reasons to excuse Catoes murder, he lets us see, that he knew not
wherein greatness of courage consisted, since he made it consist in an action,
which is more familiar to women, then men; to slaves then to free persons; and
to weak than to strong spirits.

The eigth Discourse.
That Friendship without Grace is always interessed.

IF the virtue of Pagans have her stains, we must not wonder if their
Friendship have her defaults: sin has corrupted the best things, and her
malice has left almost nothing in man, Omnibus amicaes est qui sibi, sed solum
sibi qui Deo est.
which does not deserve reproach or punishment: since a sinner is upon bad
terms with God, he cannot be upon good terms with himself, nor with his
Neighbor. If he love himself, it is in excess, and if he love another, it is for
interest; his will being in the power of his enemy, he can hardly make good
use of it; whatsoever he does, he is in danger of sinning; his love is not much
more Innocent than is his hatred, and be it that he loves his friends, or hates
his enemies, it is with so little justice, as he stands always in need of
pardon, profane Philosophy prefers Friendship before virtue; she gives her
such praises, as taste of Flattery; and if we will believe her reasons, she
will persuade us, that the joint uniting of Hearts, is the greatest contentment
which man can partake of on Earth. It Is the knot of Society, without which
States cannot be preserved, nor Families maintained.

Nature made this project in production of woman, whom she drew from the rib of
man, to the end, that the resemblance and equality which she placed between
them might oblige them to Quis est amicior quam frater fratri? aut quem alienum
fidum invenies fituis host is fuer is? Salust. in Juguitha.
love one another; she renews this in brothers, who proceed from the same
Original, and who are shaped in the same womb, to the end, that all things may
invite them to love. Virtue endeavors to make this good more universal, and
seeing that nature did not give all men brethren, she would give them Friends;
and repair their loss with usury. For though brothers proceed from the same
stem, they are not always of the same Humor; they differ often more in their
Inclinations, then in their Countenances: but say there were any thing of
resemblance in their humors, the dividing of Estates divides hearts; and
Interest, (which has to do every where) does many times ruin their best
intelligence. But Amicitia pares facit aut invenit.
Friendship (more powerful than Nature) makes a pa^ty between those whom she
will unite; the unity of hearts, is that which makes all things common, and the
words Thine, and Mine, which sets division between Brethren, cannot do the like
between Friends. Nature leaves us no choice, in her alliances, we are engaged
before we be capable of choice; and she oft-times makes us love a Monster,
because he is our Brother; but friendship gives us a freedom of choice, she
permits us to take the best, and we are only to blame our own folly, if in the
liberty she leaves us, we make choice of one for a friend, who deserves not our
affection. Our Brethren are the workmanship of nature, she did not advise with
us, when she gave them life; and not having the care of producing them, we
delight not in preserving them. Amicitia vinculum nulla ex part sanguinis
viribus inferius. Hoc etiam certius and exploratius, quia illud nascendi sors
fortuitum op^, hoc uniuscujusque solido judicio incoacta voluntas coutrabit
Valor. Maxim. lib. 4 cap. 7.
But our friends are the children of our will; we formed them, when we chose
them; we think our selves concernedin their loss, because we have labored in
the acquiring of them. And as Mothers expose themselves for their Children,
because they are their workmanship, so men expose themselves for their friends,
because they are their Productions.

But not to spend more time in observing the advantages which friendship has
over and above nature; we must confess, there is nothing in the world which
ought not to give place to friendship: Law, which preserves Estates, which
punishes vice, defends virtue, is not equal to her, neither for antiquity,
nor power. Punishments nor rewards were never ordained' till Si regnaret inter
homines amicitia, lex aut nulla esset, autsuper flua^ Plato
friendship began to cool; whilst she continued in full vigor, the use of
laws was useless, and the Politiques do confess, that States are better
governed by good Intelligence amongst Subjects, than by Ordinances of Princes:
the latter reform only the mouth, or the hand; impede only bad actions, or
insolent speeches: but the former reformes the heart, and gliding into the
will, guides desires, and regulates thoughts. The Law ends differences, but
friendship reconciles enemies; the law inhibits injuries, but friendship
advises good offices. In fine, the law is requifite to the commencement or
initiation of a good man, but friendship is required to his accomplishment; and
by her advice renders him perfect.

She is also of use to all sorts of Conditions, and that man lives not, that
needs not a friend. A friend is needful to old men, to assist them, to young
men, to guide them; to the miserable, to comfort them, to the ignorant, to
instruct them; and to Kings themselves, to increase their felicity. For though
their condition seem to be raised above that of all other men, and that amidst
the abundance of riches, and honors, wherewith they are environed, there
remains nothing for them to wish for, yet ought they to make friends, and
endeavor a delight, which agrees as well with Greatness, as with Innocence.
Friendship is the best of all exterior Goods, and 'twere unjust that Kings who
possess whatsoever else is of good, should not possess this; Friendship
obliges us rather to give, than to receive; Etiam beat us devet am' cos habere
I, quia bonorum externorum maximum amicitia, deinde ami^i potius dare quam
accipere, quod beatudini non repugnat: absurdum, quoque beatum sacere
solitarium, homo enim est civtle animal. Arist. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 9.
and Kings are in a condition wherein liberality is their principal virtue. In
fine, happy Princes ought not to be solitary, and I know not whether any one of
them would accept of their felicity, at the rate of living solitarily:
Therefore greatness does not forbid friendship to Sovereigns, that which
seems to keep them aloof off from this virtue, draws them nearer to it; and
their power is never more pleasing, than when employed in succouring the
miserable, or in making men happy. Neither do we see any Prince who has not
his Favorite. Sine amic is omnis cogitatio, esset taedium, omnis operatio
labor, omnis terra peregriuatio, omnis vita tormentum, fi^e quo^um solatio
vivere esset mori. Caffiodor^ in Epist.
The proudest Monarchs of the world, grow weary of commanding, they find more
content in a friend, than in a slave; and how brutish soever their nature be,
they are well content to have one, to whom they may un-bosome themselves.
Tiberius loved Sejanus; and had not this Favorite become his Rival, it may be
he never had decreed his death. Nero could not fence himself from friendship;
the sweetness of this virtue, vanquished that Monsters cruelty; and whilst he
quenched the flames of Rome, by the blood of Christians, he had some Confidents,
whom he called friends. This Infidel Prince, whose subjects were all slaves,
and in whose Empire the desire of liberty was a fault, wanted not Favorites
whom he loved; he plays with those he ought to destroy, he makes those the
objects of his love, who ought to be the objects of his fury; a certain
Captive, had power over the Tyrant, and under the assurance of friendship gave
laws to him, who gave laws to the greatest part of the world.

Though these reasons do mightily inhance the merit of Friendship, yet must we
conclude in Saint Austines Principles. That the Friendship of Pagans is
defective, and does not deserve the praises that are given it. For if we take
Aristotle for our Arbitratour, friendship ought to be established upon
self-love, and to love his Est ille sui amantissimus qui partem id am quae in
homine dominari debet amat. Itaque virum bonum sui amantissimum esse oportet.
Arist. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 8
Neighbor well, a man must love himself well. He who prefers the pleasures of
the body, before those of the mind, who hazards his honor to preserve his
riches, and who injures his conscience, to increase his reputation, cannot be a
good friend to others, because he is his own Enemy; and who wants virtue,
cannot have friendship. Moral Philosophy with all her precepts, cannot reform
a disorder, which since the loss of original righteousness, makes up one
part of our selves: the unrighteousness thereof has past into our nature, and
as we cannot without grace be upon good terms with our self, neither can we
without her be upon good terms with others. We either give them too much, or
not enough; we cannot keep that just measure, which makes friendship
reasonable, we turn a virtue into a passion; or to speak trulier, we make an
innocent action criminal; and the same self-love which puts us on ill terms
with our selves, puts us upon the like with our Neighbors; we love his
errors, whilst we think to love his perfections; we excuse his sins, in stead
of condemning them, and we oft-times become guilty of his faults, for having
approved them. Blosius confesses he would have burnt Blosius nec silentio
honesto nec prudenti sermon, salutem suam, ne qua ex part i^foelicis amicitia
memoriam desereret, tueri voluit. Valor. Maxim. l. 4. c. 7
Jupiters Temple, if Gracchus had commanded him so to do; he thought Justice
ought to give place to friendship, that his friend should be dearer to him than
his God, and that whatsoever he did through affection, could not render him
faulty. It may be 'twas for this cause, that Aristotle blaming friendship,
whilst he thought to praise her, said, that her perfection consisted in her
excess; and that far differing from common virtues, which do consist in
mediocrity; she was never more admirable, than when most excessive: That a man
might give too much, but not love too much; that one might have too much
courage, but not too much love; that a man might be too wise, but not too
loving; yet this excess is vicious, and experience teaches us, that
Commonwealths have no more dangerous Enemies, than those who are ready to do
or suffer any thing for their friends. Therefore it is that the same Amicus
Plato, amicus Socrates, sed megis amica verit^. Aristot.
Philosopher prescribing bounds to friendship, did publicly profess, that
truth was dearer to him than Plato: and that when he could not accord these
two, he forewent his friend to maintain his Mistress. Hence it is, that
Politicians calling in Religion to the succor of Morality, have affirmed, that
affection ought to give way to Piety, and that she ceased to be just, when she
profaned altars.

Those Loquatur ^nc Graeciae, nefondi Thefea Pyrrho in amoribus subscribentem,
Di it is se patrisregnis commisisse: Vani est illudre narrare, stult^se credere.
Valor Maxim. lib. 4. cap. 7.
notwithstanding that are of this opinion, have not forborne to set a value
upon faulty friendship: and Antiquity does hardly reverence any friends, whose
friendships has not been prejudicial either to the State, or to Religion.
Pilades and Orestes were of intelligence only to revenge themselves. Theseus
and Pirithoiis kept friendship only to satisfy their unchaste desires:
Lentulus and Cethegus were faithful to Catiline, only that they might be
perfidious to their Country. But what else could one expect than faults, from
those who had no piety? what friendship could one hope from those who wanted
the first of virtues? and how could they have bin faithful to their friends,
since they were unfaithful to their Gods? if they have loved any one even till
death, Non est vera amicitia nisi cum eam tu agglutinas inter inhaerentes tibi,
charitate diffusa in caedibus nostris per Spiritum sanctum qui datus est nobis,
Aug. lib. 4. Conses. cap. 4.
it has been out of vain glory: and if they loved them whilst they were
alive, to has been for Interest: the sinner for the most part loves none but
himself; and though this irregulate love be both his fault, and his
punishment, yet he therein finds his delight, and his glory: nothing can
divert him from his own Interest, when he thinks to free himself from
himself, he fasteneth himself closer to himself; and if he love his friends,
it is that he may love himself in more places than one, and in more persons; if
he part with his heart, it is that he may receive it back again with the like of
others; his love is but usury, wherein he hazards little to gain much; it is an
Sed cum volunt homines per dominationem tenereca quae amant, saefe ab ipsis
tenentur, and rerum mortalium servi fiunt, dum imperite Domini esse deside
rant. Aug. lib. de mo^ib. Ecclesia cap. 23.
invention of self-love, which seeks to satisfy it self in others; it is a
trick of humane pride, which makes man abase himself only that he may grow
the greater, which advises him to engage his liberty, only that he may
bereave others of theirs; and which makes him make friends, only that he may
have slaves, or such as love him. What glorious name soever one attributes to
friendship, she has no other designs than these, when she is led on by
self-love; and whatsoever language the Infidels have held, these have been
their only motives, when they have lost either life, or liberty, for their
friends; if they were silent amidst tortures, and if the cruelty thereof could
not compel them to discover their associates, 'twas either for that they
valued friendship more than life, or that they thought treachery worse than
death: if they would not outlive their friends, 'twas to free themselves from
sorrow and solitariness; and if for their delivery, they exposed themselves to
Tyrants, 'twas for that their words bound them to it, and that they thought
they should be no losers in an occasion, wherein, though with loss of life,
they won honor. Qui pro amico perit, vitam amico praebet, sibi gloriam parit.
Aristoteles.
And to say truth, Aristotle has well observed, that he who dies for his
friend loves himself better then his friend; and that in an Action which seems
to violate Nature, he does nothing which self-love may not advise him to, since
that by suffering death, he labors after glory, and that by erecting a
sacrifice unto his love, he buildes a Trophy to his Memory.

The example of Damon and Pythias may confirm this Truth; They had been brought
up in Pythagoras his school, the conformity of their humors, and opinions had
so straightly united their souls, that death it self could not part them. The
Tyrant Dionysius, to whom virtue was an Enemy, condems one of these faithful
friends to his last sufferings; he finds that his occasions engage him to make
a voyage, the Tyrant, who would add mirth to cruelty, permits him so to do;
provided he find out Bail who may take his place, and who will be bound to
die for him, if he defer his return: Pythias accepts of this Condition, and
entering into Prison, wishes that the day of Execution drew nigh, that he might
deliver his friend; the fatal hour being come, and Damon not yet appearing,
Pythias is led to punishment, he rejoices at his happiness, whilst the people
are afflicted at his misfortune: he excites the Hangman to make have, and fears
death less then his friends return; and without excusing his delay, or
suspicion of his fidelity, he commends Fortune, which keeps his friend from
making good his word: at this very moment Damon arrives quite out of breath, he
presses through the crowde, presents himself before the Tyrant and the
Executioner, and calls for his bail in: Pithias pleades the hour is past,
that Damon having failed in his assignment is no more liable to death: and that
it is he (Pythias) that Admiratus amborum animum Tyran^us supplicium fidei rem
sit, insuperque eos rogavit, ^se in societatem amicitiae reciperent. Valor.
Maxim. lib. 4. cap. 7.
must end what he had begun. This strife makes the Hangman stay his hand,
moves wonder in the people, and softens the Tyrant, who for their fidelity
revokes his Decree, desires to be admitted into their society: and this
monster, who had never studied any thing, but to make himself to be feared,
ravished to see this Miracle, wishes to be beloved.

It cannot be denied but that this was a rare example, and that in this mutual
correspondancy the height of friendship is seen; for it was of power to inspire
the contempt of death, Hae sane vires amicitiae mortis contemptum ingenerare,
vitae dulcedinem extinguere, crudelitatem mansue facere, odium in amorem conver
tere, poenam beneficio p^sare potuerunt. Idem ibid.
to cancel the love of life, to mollify cruelty, to change rage into
mildness, and to turn the pain of punishment, to a glorious recompense; but who
does not also see, that this contestation might rather proceed from vain Glory,
then love? who thinks not that each of these loved themselves better than their
companion? since leaving life to him, he would keep Glory to himself? who will
not confess, that in this dispute there was more of Ambition then fidelity?
and who will not acknowledge, that so gallant an adventure might have been
wished for by men not so well known to one another? and between whom there was
not so great a friendship, as between Damon and Pythias?

But we must not wonder if friendship be faulty amongst the Pagans, since she
is not always innocent amongst Christians, and since interest, which gives
against the designs of Charity, keeps her from enlarging her self, and does
unjustly confine her self between two parties; for we suffer our selves to be
persuaded by Philosophy, that common friendship cannot be real, that he who
loves many, loves none, and that who does so readily engage himself, does
disingage himself with as much as Ease. Yet the Son of God binds us to love
all Christians as our brothers, he will have his body and blood, to be the bond
of all the faithful, and that his chiefest Vnus est Pater vester vos autem
omnes fratres estis. Matthew. c. 23.
mysteries tend only to the uniting of them together: his pleasure was, that
we should all have one and the same Father, to the end, we might have one and
the same inheritance; he ordained but one Baptism, to the end, that our birth
might be alike; and that the difference of Conditions being banished from out
his Church; reciprocal love might not by mistake be diminished; he gave us but
one head, to the end, we might be inanimated by the same spirit, and that the
conformity of our opinions might be the preservation of our friendship: he has
Omnes uno pane participamus. Apostolus Paul.
left us his body in the Eucharist, to the end we might have one and the same
food; and that being converted to himself we should be obliged to love one
another, as being his members; he has caused us to be born in one and the same
Church; to the end that we might have but one Mother upon earth, as we have but
one Father in Heaven; he has promised us one and the same Paradise, to the
end, we might have one and the same Country; and that being so straightly
united in time, we may not be separated in Eternity; yet all these powerful
means cannot keep friendship amongst Christians; self love derides them, the
division of wealth divides their wills; every one prefers his interest before
Charity; the Common people end their differences by suite at Law, Gentlemen by
Duels, and Princes by Battails; Cum sit inter vos zelus and contentio nonne
carnales estis, and secundum hominem ambulatis. 1. Corinthians. 3.
Men defend their right either by cunning, or by force; not considering that
Jesus Christ lives in our enemies, we kill them to revenge our selves, and
commit murder, to cancel an injury.

But though we should be more charitable, we cannot shun being unfortunate; for
sin has so corrupted our nature, and Divine Justice has so severely punished
sins, as the life of man is rather a succession of miseries, then of years: man
cannot live long without much suffering, if his body be in health, his mind is
sick, if his wealth be not exposed to injustice, his Innocence is exposed to
Calumny: if he fence himself from one misfortune, he is assayed by another: and
he learns to his own cost, that long life is but a long punishment. And Quanto
plures amicos and in pluribus locis habemus, tanto longius latiusque metuimus,
ne quid it is contingat mali de tantis malorum aggeribus hujus saeculi. August.
li. 19. de Civit. cap. 8.
then again whosoever engages himself in friendship, obliges himself to new
displeasures: as he lives in two bodies, he suffers in two places, and adds
his friends miseries to his own, if he have many friends, Fortune has more to
lay hold off in him: and as afflictions are more common than blessings, he must
resolve to be often miserable.

Those deceive themselves who esteem friendship a consolation to the afflicted:
to give her her due name, she ought to be termed the torment of the fortunate,
Amici in rebus prosperis cupide studio seque vocandi, in adversis timide.
Parcissime enim mala sunt amicis impertienda, ex quo illud, satis est miserum
esse me. Aristoteles lib. 9. Moral. c. 11.
because she has made evil Common between those who mutually love, and since
she makes a man suffer in his friends misfortune, though otherwise he himself
should be in a happy condition: she augments the number of the miserable, under
pretense of diminishing it: she turns a single Malady into a contagion: she
inlargeth displeasures under color of easing them, and by an ingenious Cruelty
she finds a means to hurt many, in endeavoring to heal one.

Therefore do the unfortunate fear having friends, when they are uninteressed,
they love not that their malady should be contagious, it suffices them that
they are miserable without making others so: they are as covetuous of their
Pains, as they have been prodigal of their pleasures; they think not
themselves freed of their miseries by laying them upon their friends; they shun
company for fear of infecting them; knowing that solitariness is the abode of
the afflicted, they forsake the world, and hold for certain that an unfortunate
man becomes faulty, when he wishes for Companions in his misery.

Be it confessed that friendship is very fantastic, and that she imprintes
strange opinions in men; for if they be Just, they Sive te torqueri lacbrymis
nu^ quam desinentibus amicus tuus cupit indignus hoc affectu non est, sive non
vu^t, dolorem inutilem dimitte, nec impius amicus sic sublevari debet, nec pius
sic velit. Senec. ad Polybium cap. 24.
ought not to desire that their friends contentment should be disquieted by
their misfortunes; they are unworthy of their Compassion, if they too eagerly
desire it; they deserve not to be bemoned if they exact tears; they are Tyrants
and Hang-men if they will have their friends to be their Martyrs; and that for
having partaken in their Prosperity; they should do the like in their
Adversity: notwithstanding it is true, that Friendship never appears but in
Affliction. It Is misfortune In prosperitate incerta est amicitia: nescitur enim
utrum persona an soelicitas diligatur. Isidor lib. 3 de sum. bono.
that tries Friends, their friendship is approved of when Fortune frowns: we
must be Miserable, to know that we are beloved; we cannot get this assurance
without the Loss of our Felicity, and as long as Fortune favors us, we dare
not build upon our friends Fidelities. Heaven therefore is the true harbor of
Friendship: it is there that our Love divides it self without fear of Jealousy,
and waxes not weak: it is there that we shall have so many Friends as God makes
blessed Saints: it is there that without trying them by our Misfortunes, we
shall be assured of their good-wills: it is there that reading their Hearts, and
seeing their Thoughts, we shall no longer run the hazard of being abused by
Words: it is there that without fear of adding to our misfortunes by the
increase of our Friends, we shall enjoy all good, and fear no evil: it is there
that living for ever together, we shall no longer fear to be separated by Death
or absence. Finally it is there that being perfectly united to God, we shall see
our selves in his Light, and love our selves in his Goodness.

The ninth Discourse.
That the Uncertainty and Obscurity of Knowledge is derived from sin.

IT must be confessed that man is very unfortunate in becoming guilty, since his
perfections, and his defects are almost equally fatal to him. Natura bonis
suis male vtitur, and unde se defendi existimat accusatur. Prosp. contra
Collator. ca. 22
His virtues are false, and his vices true; his most glorious actions do
oft-times derive from so bad an original, as they are not to be praised
without injuring in some sort both grace and reason. His ignorance does not
always excuse his sin, and his knowledge does not always enhance his virtue.
The more he is knowing, the more guilty is he, as Saint Paul says, He
withholds the truth in unrighteousness; and his light is intermixed with so
much darkness, that it may lead him out of the way, and cannot conduct him.
This is notwithstanding man's most violent passion: desire of knowledge is born
with him, and if it makes not his difference, it is one of his chiefest
Proprieties. For Beasts are wrought on by ambition, they fight for glory; and
as if that were the only reward of their victory, they pardon their enemies,
after they have beaten them: they are tormented with love and jealousy; Lions
can endure no rivalls, and if they want rewards to honor fidelity, they want
not chastisements to punish Adultery. Desire of life is not much less violent
in beasts, than in men; the same instinct which animates Tigres to seek out
prey for their nourishment, makes Stags hide themselves in woods for their
preservation. Nature teaches them remedies for their evils, and this common
mother furnishes them with herbs to cure them: the apprehension of death
encourages the most timorous; when they are bereft of all hope of safety, they
turn their fear to fury; and to shun danger, throw themselves headlong into
it. But the desire of knowledge is peculiar to man, and there is no cruelty,
which he uses not to content his curiosity. He rips open the bowels of the
earth, to know the secrets thereof; he melts metals, to discover their
essences; he descends to the bottom of the Sea, to learn the wonders thereof;
he turns the world upside down, to know it: under pretense of succouring those
that live, he dissects those that are dead: Medicus Herophilus aut lae^ius
sexcentos. execuit, ut naturam scrutaretur, od^it ut nosset. Tertull de anima.
and seeks out the causes of their maladies, that he may find out remedies for
them. This passion is much augmented by the esteem which it has won in the
world; for nothing is more honored than knowledge: the Devil gave it credit in
the earthly Paradise, and by the praises which he gave it, made our first
Parents long after it: their children imitated them in their error, and
consecrated their watchings to the atchieving of so rich a fleece. Greatest
honors have been conferred upon the most knowing men; and if those which have
freed their Country from the Insolence of Tyrants, have past for Heroes, those
who have found out Arts, and who have defended men either from ignorance, or
from necessity, have had Temples and Altars erected to them; in so much as the
Devil kept his word, which his gave our first Parents; when Eritis sicut Dii
scientes bonum and malum, Genesis cap. 3.
to seduce them, he would persuade them their knowledge would make them Gods:
and his promise, though false, has been in some sort accomplished by peoples
simplicity, who have adored knowing men. For it must be confessed, that the
monuments of our minds are more durable than those of our hands; and that
Sciences have much better fenced themselves against the injuries of time, than
the stateliest Edifices of Antiquity.

Aristotle's Philosophy has had her admirers in all Ages; this gallant man had
more Disciples since his death, than during his life; and there have been
greater disputes had to maintain his Doctrine, than the most famous Conqueror
has given Battles to enlarge his Territories. Homers Verses are still read
with respect, men admire his invention, reverence his defects, and labor
almost as much to understand his Conceits, as to understand Oracles: some men
pass whole nights in perusing his works, who glory to be a dead man's
Interpreter, who enrich themselves at the cost of a poor man, and Part tamen
meliore mei super alta perennis astra serar nomenque erit indelebile nostrum.
Perque omnia saecula fama, si quid habens very vatum praesagia vivam. Ovid.
Metamor. l. 15.
boast themselves of enlightening all men's understandings, by explicating the
words of a blind man; since his time all Empires have been dissipated: Rome
has seen her self twice or thrice buried under her own ruins; her Republique
has been turned to a Monarchy, and her Monarchy has divided it self into as
many parts, as there are Kingdoms in the world. Men know not where the
capital Cities of Media, and Persia, were situated; it is disputed in what
parts of the World, Thebes and Memphis were built; their high walls, large
circuits, and number of Inhabitants have not been able to preserve the memory
thereof: these works of great Kings have not been able to defend themselves
against Time, and these miracles of Art have either been ruined by the Sword,
or devoured by fire: but Homers works live yet; Troy was never so beautiful in
Asia, as in his Verses; if he could not keep it from being burnt, he has kept
it from being forgotten. The Grecian Achilles, and Hector of Troy, never won so
much renown by their valor, as by his praises. This only example makes it
evident, that Knowledge has the upper-hand of Courage, and that the labors of
the brain are more durable than the Conquests of Kings; yet has knowledge her
defaults, since the state of sin, and there is no knowledge so certain, which
admits not of doubts; none so profitable, which is not discommodious, nor none
so good, which is not bad.

True knowledge ought to have two qualities; Evidence, and Certainty:
Philosophorum alii mibi non profuturum scientiam traedunt, alii spem omnis
scientiae eripiunt, alii non praeferunt lumen per quod acies dirigatur ad
verum, alii oculos mihi effodinnt. Senec. Epist. 88.
the first without the second occasioneth Opinion, the second without the
first, produces Faith. Therefore it is that all Sciences boast to possess these
two advantages, and employ all their power to persuade us, that they are
evident, and assured; but the means they make use of to prove this, contradicts
their design, and makes their doubts and obscurities equally appear. For they
draw their light either from Time, Authority, or Experience: Time is the father
of truth, but is also oft-times the murderer thereof, according to the
Rabbines; it is the witness of all things, but it suffers corruption; and the
depositions thereof are as obscure, as doubtful: all knowing men complain,
that life is short, the way to knowledge long; and that it were requisite to
spend whole Ages in the School of Time, to become learned. It Is only permitted
to Damons, who are ancient as the world, to profit under a Master, that
discovers his secrets only to such, as through their own industry observe them.

Authority is grounded upon the worth of those who have gone before us: their
antiquity gives them credit, we think them abler than our selves, only because
they are older; and we dare nor oppose their opinions, because they are no
longer able to defend them; they only rule, because they live no longer; and
if they bear away the victory, it is because they are without the danger of the
fight. Their Maxims serves us for Oracles, their wills serve us for laws, and
they may say, as Kings, This is our Pleasure. Death which destroys the power
of Sovereigns, establishes the Tyranny of Philosophers, and these men who live
no longer, have yet credit enough to triumph over our liberty. Yet is their
antiquity a proof of their ignorance: since they have seen less then we, they
should in reason know less; and since they lived in the first Ages, they could
not have made sufficient observations to discern the truth. That which we call
the worlds Antiquity, Antiquitas mundi suventus saeculi. Bac.
was but it is Infancy; men, not being able to advantage themselves by the
labor of their Ancestors, did live in profound ignorance, and left the glory
of finding out truth, to the care of those that should succeed them.

Experience is grounded upon the Senses, and has all her good from their
reports: but all men know these Messengers are unfaithful, that they are
corrupted by objects, that the soul which is by them advised, is oft-times
deceived; and that nature has given her an inward light, to free her self
from their Superchery: they mistake themselves daily in their own operations;
and if we will believe these blind guides, we shall be always engaged in
error. The Sun appears greater at his rising, than at Noonday; the Heavens
seem to meet with the earth at the Level of the Horizon; and men think a long
walk narrower in the extremities thereof, than in the middle. Si protagorae
credo, nihil in rerum natura est nisi dubium nisi Nausiphani, hoc unum certum
est nihil esse co ti, si Parmenidi nihil est prater unum: si Zenoni ne unum
quidem. Tota rerum natura umb^a est aut inanis aut fa^ax. Senec. Epist. 88.
Wherefore the wisest Philosophers, knowing the vanity of the Senses, have
confessed the like of Sciences; and being pressed by Truth it self, have been
forced to acknowledge, that that there was nothing certain in them, but their
uncertainty; nor any thing evident, but their obscurity. The modestest among
them have boasted to know nothing, but that they knew nothing; and to have
learnt by their study, that man's greatest knowledge was but a Depth of
ignorance.

The uncertainty thereof is accompanied with uselessenesse, and let her promise
what she pleases, she teaches us things which are rather curious, than
profitable. Science is not vain only, because she is proud, but because she is
given to lying: for she makes those that court her hope for miracles; and to
hear her servants, or her slaves speak, you would think that were a remedy for
all evils, and a means to come by all virtues: but if we will examine all the
miseries of men, we shall not find any one that may be lessened by knowledge.
Sin has reduced them to a condition wherein both good and bad, are equally
dangerous to them: some apprehend death Vis scire quid Philosophia promittat
generi humano? consilium Atium mors vocat, alium paupertas urit, alium divitiae
vel alienae vel suae torquent, hunc homines male habent, illum Dii. Quid mihi
lusoria proponis? non est ^ocandi locus, ad miseros advocatus es. Senec. Epist.
48.
which threatens them, some complain of poverty wherewith they are afflicted,
some are slaves to their riches, and wonders that plenty should bereave them of
liberty: this man dreads ill fortune, that man is glutted with good: some are
persecuted on earth, some punished from heaven. All these stand in need of help
in their differing conditions, and are in danger of shipwreck, unless they be
assisted by a favorable and gracious hand. Knowledge boasted that she would
succor them, and men abused by her promises, sided with her under this
confidence; but after they had listened to her instructions, they found she
abounded more in light, then in heat, and more in vanity, then in power. To say
truth, she busieth her self in enlightening the understanding, not being able
to heat the will; and in stead of instructing things useful, she is content to
vent curiosities. Not being able to accord the Elements within our bodies, nor
yet the passions in our souls, she busieth her self in sorting voices, and in
forming an agreeable harmony out of differing Tones; not being able to
withstand vices, nor irregular inclinations, she undertakes to fight against
wilde-beasts, or enemies; to get the victory where the danger exceeds the
honor; and to bear away Triumph, where injustice and fortune have a greater
share then courage or wisdom. Doces me quomodo voces confonent, fac potius
quomodo animus meus secum consonat. Metiri me docet Geometres lati fundia,
potius doceat quomodo metiar quantum homini satis est. Numerare docet me
Arithmetica and avaritiae accommodare digitos, potius doceat nihil ad rem
pertinere istas computationes. Sen^c. (...) Epist. 88.


When she saw she could not observe the wonders of nature, she applied her
self to consider the Debauchments; and passing by her goodliest operations,
either in silence, or oblivion, she entertained men with her disorders only,
or with her diversions. For all Sciences which are now in request, and wherein
great men do glory, teach nothing but ridiculous things, and fill their
disciples minds with naught but smoke, and wind. Were it not better that
Astrology should teach us the way to heaven, than uselesly to teach us the
Number of the Stars, the Influence of Planets, and Motions of the Spears? Were
it not to be wished, that Arithmetic, which teaches to calculate immense
sums should teach us to bound our own desires, and not to set by riches? were
it not to be desired, that the Mathematics, in stead of instructing us how to
besiege Towns, and not to defend them, should show us how to preserve our own
liberty, and how to keep us from the Tyranny of sin?

If in fine, Sciences were rational, would they not rather endeavor to make
men Virtuous, than Knowing? and if they were not slaves to Curiosity, would
they not labor more to regulate the will, than to satisfy the understanding?
and yet the chiefest of Philosophers, after having in all his writings Scire
aut nihil, aut parum confert ad virtutem. Aristot. Doctrina quidem politiora,
sed non meliora fiunt ingenia. Tertull.
made the Panegyric of knowledge, after having offered Incense to this Idol,
and after having purchased her as many Adorers, as he had Disciples,
confesses, that she is of no use to virtue; and that though she may make men
more Learned, yet she cannot make them Better. In effect the most knowing men
have not always been the most virtuous; and those who have Written best, are
not those that have lived best. Seneca's life agrees not with his writings; the
counsels which he gives to Nero in Tacitus are not like those which he gives
him in his books of anger, and clemency; he is much more generous in his
epistles to Lucilius, then in his consolation to Polybius: and his natural
questions taste much more of Philosophy, then that bloody invective which he
wrote after the death of Claudius: these two pieces discover his nature, which
in the other he sought to disguise: when he sets forth virtue to the life, and
gives her so many charms to make her Lovely, me thinks I seek a Black-more
painting a fair Woman, or a corrupt Lawyer pleading an Honest cause. Socrates
and Plato, though they were the most learned of their age, were not the most
virtuous; their actions require rather Apologies than Panegyricks: if they
condemn rather ambition, it is to authorize uncleanness; if they contemned the
love of Women, 'twas thought 'twas to authorize the like of young men; and that
if quenched impure flames, 'twas to kindle Hellish ones. Epicurus and Zeno
breathed forth nothing but either Pleasure, or vain glory; if the one wage war
with vice, it is only to purchase Glory, and if the other suppress his
Passions, it is only that he may enjoy the more Rest, and that he may adore
Pleasure in the temple of virtue. Thus is knowledge unprofitable; and to reap
any advantage by her instructions, Addite scientiae charitatem, and erit utilis
scientia. Augu.
a man must ask counsel of Charity. For to what end is it that we know what is
good, if our bad inclinations keep us from doing it? and what advantage shall
we receive from a science, which can neither withstand vice, nor defend virtue?
We know, that we ought to be ayding to our Parents Scis pro patria pugnandum,
dissuadebit timor: scis pro amicis desudandum esse, sed deliciae ve^abunt.
Nihil ergo proderit dare praecepta, nisi prius amoveris obstantia praceptis.
Senec. Epist. 95.
in their miseries; but Avarice keeps us from being so: we know, that we ought
to fight for our Country; but fear keeps us from doing so; we know, that we
ought to incommodiate our selves, to serve our friends; but pleasures divert us
from it: we know, that we should prefer Honor before pleasure, and innocence
before both; but ambition and delight will not permit us so to do: so as it is
to no purpose to advise us, unless the Obstacles which oppose themselves to
that advise be removed, and unless the will be heated at the same time that
the understanding is enlightened.

But that which is yet more grievous, and which obliges all men to confess,
that Knowledge is corrupted by sin, is, that she is an enemy to virtue, and
that under pretense of defending her, she wageth war against her. The Roman
Commonwealth did never flourish more then in the Melius suisset non didicisse
scientiam, postquam docti pro dierunt, boni esse desierunt.
first Ages, wherein she was content to know, that she was to honor her Gods,
guide her People, assist her Allies, and to fight her enemies: she lost her
integrity when she would increase her knowledge: Pleasures entered Rome,
together with foreign sciences, and from the time that once the Romans began
to dispute concerning virtue, they ceased to practice her: the Greeks revenged
themselves on them by their Philosophers; not being able to overcome them by
Arms, they found a means how to corrupt them by their conferences; and giving
them Learning, they bereft them of Justice, whereby they had won so much over
all the people of the world. Athens was more learned than Lacedaemon, but
Lacedaemon was more virtuous than Athens; Virtue triumphed over Eloquence, and
this Town which was wholly composed of Philosophers and Orators, was brought to
serve the other which abounded in ignorance. Experience teaches, that
knowledge does abate courage; that in polishing the understanding, she weakens
it; and that in teaching how to speak well, she makes us forget how to do well.
The Turks owe their valor totally to their ignorance; and if any Innocence
remain amongst the Barbarians, it is because they have not yet been acquainted
with the mischief of knowledge.

Wisdom her self is not reconciled to her: these two Sisters, which
Philosophers boast to have united, cannot agree together in any extraordinary
degree. It seems impossible for a man to be both Learned and wise; Multae
literae te ad insaniam adduxerunt; loquitur ex sententia communi. Act. Apost.
Learning does puzzle the brain as well as vain glory; as excessive fortunes
make us lose our Judgments, much knowledge makes us lose our reason: Study
dries the Brain, great contestations of mind alter man's Temper, and it
oftentimes falls out, that both the Soul and the Body are weakened through an
extreme desire of knowledge. The most dangerous folly is not Stupid; that which
is occasioned by Ignorance, is easily remedied; but that which is occasioned
through Study, makes both Physician and Patient despair; in fine, knowledge is
the learned man's punishment; she is more boundless then ambition, Qui addit
scientiam, addit and laborem. Ecclesiast 1. cap. Dedit hanc pessimam
occupationem hominibus. Ecclesiast. 1. cap.
all her desires are out of Order, the more she possesses, the more she
wishes for; the Richer she is, the Poorer she esteems her self; and framing
daily new designs, she makes those that love her confess, that she is a
vexatious occupation, which God has given them only for their Chastisement:
that he who adds New-lights to what has formerly been known, adds more
Pains to former Troubles; and that who labors after more knowledge, labors
to make himself more Miserable.

It were to be wished, that as God has taken immortality from us, to shorten our
Misery; he had likewise deprived us of profane knowledge, to lessen our
sufferings: and then we should have found, that ignorance and death, are rather
Favors, then punishments. A man must become ignorant, to become Faithful.
Vain Philosophy is an Obstacle to our belief: it is easier to convert an Ignorant
man than a Philosopher, and humbleness of mind, which serves for the
foundation of Christian virtues, has no more mortal enemy, than the vanity of
Philosophy. Scientia inflat, videte ne quis vos decipiat per Philosophiam and
inanem fallaciam. ad Coloss. 2. cap.
The great Apostle of the Gentiles declares war against it in his writings, he
cannot endure the pride which does accompany it, he despises the false lights,
which puzzle the understanding, but do not enlighten it; though he was taught
at feet of Gamaliel, he boasts of his ignorance, and he teaches all the
faithful, that he knows nothing but Jesus Christ crucified. It is enough to
know, that Haec tota scientia hominis est scire, quia nihil est per se, and
quoniam quidquid est, ex Deo est. and propter Deum est. August. in Psalm. 70.
man can do nothing of himself; and that as he holds all whatsoever he is, and
whatsoever he has, from the Goodness of God, he is bound to employ it to his
Glory.

The tenth Discourse.
That Eloquence is an Enemy to Reason, Truth and Religion.

AS Eloquence is the Mistress of handsome language, as she makes the
Panegyricks of Princes, vaunts her self to put a valuation upon virtue, and to
reward her for all the glorious troubles she undergoes, so has she not been
wanting in giving unto her self those praises which she thinks are due unto
her, and to employ all her cunning in making her worth appear. For if we will
believe her, she boasts that no power equals hers, and that without use of fire
or sword, she has the power of persuading the opinioned, of reducing Rebels,
and of obliging wicked men to side with virtue. An ego falso scripsi cedant
armatogae, etc. qui togat^ armatos, and pace bellum oppressi. Audes eloquentiam
ut vitium nihi obiier^? C^c. in Salust.
She thinks her profession no less illustrious than that of Arms, that
Demosthenes, and Cicero, may weigh in the scales with Alexander and Caesar, and
that if there were one Hercules, who by his valor overcame monsters, there was
another who prevailed over men by reason; she imagines she may be serviceable
to Religion; that Christ himself in the plainness of his discourse did not
neglect adornments, that after having astonished sinners by his Miracles, he
convinced them by his words, and that the people, being overcome by the Power
of his Nunquam sic loguutus est homo.
Doctrine, confessed, that no man ever spoke like him. In fine; if she express
her self by the mouths of her Orators, we are bound to believe, that
whatsoever is atributed to Philosophy or to Justice, is only the work of
Eloquence. Eloquentiae multae urbes su^t constitutae, plurima bella exsti^cta
fortissimae societutes sanctissimae ami^itiae comparatae. Cicer. lib. 1. de
art. Rhetor.
For they say, that 'twas she that withdrew men from deserts, who reduced them
too within Towns, who prescribed laws unto them, who kept innocence from
calumny and oppression, and who changed Tyrannies into lawful Kingly
Government. To hear them speak; you would think that virtue were banished from
off the earth, had not Eloquence taken her into her protection, and that there
should be no longer peace in Kingdoms, did not she by her dexterity appease
seditions? But without listening any longer to her unjust praises, I pretend to
make her partakers confess, that since she became a slave to sin, she injures
by one and the same excess, Truth, Reason, and Religion.

It Is hard to say, whether Cunning be the father of Eloquence, or Eloquence be
the mother of cunning, but it is easily to discern, that each of them assist
other, in the bearing down of truth. Both of them being ingenious in extremity;
they dissemble their meanings, and hide their hatred under the appearance of
love: they speak on their enemies behalf, and the one of them seems to employ
his wiles, the other her Figures and Tropes, only to make truth appear the
more pleasing: yet under pretense of serving her, they injure her; and under
color of establishing her power, they destroy her Empire. For this virtue,
worth adoration, despises deckings; she knows her beauty is never more
ravishing, Veritas sermo est simplex. Ammian. Marcel. lib. 14.
than when most neglected; she rejects borrowed luster; and paint being a kin
to falsehood, she approves not of the use thereof. She suspects any thing that
may deceive, her language is plain, her apparel modest, and were it not for
fear of those unchaste ones, who profane even holy things with their looks,
she would throw away the veil that covers her, and show her self stark naked
to (...) her lovers.

As all her glory consists in her naked plainness, so does also her strength;
the very sight of her is sufficient to make her be beloved; she very well
knows, that they that know her cannot oppose her, nor yet defend themselves
from her. Magna est vis veritatis quae contra omnium ingenia calliditatem,
solertiam, contra fictas hominum insidias facile se per seipsam defendit. Sen.
Epist.
She has no greater passion than sweetly to insinuate, her self into men's
minds, and by her light to dissipate the obscurity of falsehood: she very well
knows that men do naturally reverence her, and that unless they be foolish,
they be never unfaithful to her. Therefore no humane help is of use to her,
and this powerful Princess needs no soldiers to re-possesse her self of her
State, nor to reduce her Rebels to obedience. Her very sight is sufficient to
make her be obeyed, her presence stifles rebellion, and as soon as she appears,
she awakens respect and love, in her Subjects hearts. But if the malice of the
Age were such, as should make her seek for partners to defend her; certainly
she would never implore aid from Orators: They are too full of Quircks to
please her, and she loves plain dealing too well to approve of their cunning.
All the Tropes and Figures, which they make use of in their discourses,
Rhet^ica ^stigii quo^ genus, quo d^tur homines, ex parvis magna, and ex mag^is
parva facere. Erasm. l. 8. Apoph^.
are but so many disguised falsehoods; they cannot speak without lying; and all
the inventions which they borrow from Rhetoric, are but undertakings against
truth.

But least I may be accused of falling into an error, which I find fault
with, I will examine the figures, and make such as make use of them, confess,
that they are only to be termed pleasing falsehoods. The Metaphora, which is so
frequent with them, and wherewithal they heighten their style, to raise up the
meannesse of their cogitations, is it not an Imposture? and does not Eloquence
abuse her Auditors, when she will persuade them, that the fields are thirsty,
that the drops of deware pearls, flowers in meadows are stars, and the
murmuring of waters music? if thus much license be to be allowed, who cannot
say, that little birds are Angels of the Forests? that Whales are living
rocks, or ships with souls? that the Sea is a moving earth, and fountain
water, liquid Crystal? Non possunt aedificari haec mendacia, sine de^litione
v^ritatis. Tertull. lib. 2. in Marcion. cap. 1.
who can imagine that truth needs such cunning to defend her self, that men
are only wrought upon by such raving, and that a man cannot please, unless he
be ridiculous? Ironia is no truer, and if it deserve any pardon, it is because
it is less serious; for it disguiseth not it is falsehood, but openly protests
against being believed; it gives it self the lie by it is accent, terms not a
man innocent, save only that he may be thought guilty; 'twould think it self
too silly, should it call all things by their names, and would not think it
self sufficintly bitter, should it not know how to cover a real reproach
under a false praise.

Are not Allegories impertinent? when to un-weary men's minds, they abuse them,
and say one thing when they think another? they will persuade us, that a Ship
is a Commonwealth, Tempests, the State Affairs wherewith it is troubled, and
Mariners, the lead men that govern it. May not a man with the same
affrontednesse affirm, that open Countries are Kingdoms, that the Mountains,
are their Kings, little hills their Magistrates, and Valleys their Subjects:
must not a man have lost his wits to have made use of these figures, and had
not one better hold his peace, than speak a language which the common sort of
people understand not, In hoc omnis Hperbole extenditur, ut ad verum me^da ^io
ve^iat, itaque qui dixit, Qui cand^re niv^s anteirent, qui cursibus auras, quod
non poterat fieri, dixitut crede^tur quantum plurtmum posset Nunquam tantum
sperat Hyperbole qu^tum aud^t, sed incredibilia offirmat, ut ad credibilia
perven^at. Senec. de benefic. lib. 7. cap. 23.
and which wise men despise; but an Hyperbole is the more unsufferable, for
it is insolency, and seeming seriousness: Common expressions seem poor to it;
it cannot endure any thing that is ordinary, but affects extravagancy to hide
it is baseness; it heightens nothing with (...) exaggeration, tells no truth
un-mingled with falsehood, and by a^just punishment, loses credit, through
coveting too much* belief. 'Twill make snow black, to make a woman's face seem
fair, tarnish the verdue of the rose, to exalt the freshness of her
complexition, Victoriosam lo quacitatem victus cupiditate vendebam diligentibus
vanitatem. and quaerentibus mendacium socius eorum Aug. lib. 4. Confess. c. 2.
and darken the Sun, to give luster to her eyes. This figure is not to be
excused, but by acknowledging that it is conscious of it is own rashness; that
it dares more than it hopes for; that it is of the humor of those, who lie
often, and who think themselves happy enough, if they can but persuade the
Auditors to believe part of what they say. An Antithesis is not so bold as an
Hyperbole, though more affected; all it is cunning is but a continual play or
Maigame, it opposes the subjects which it treats of, (...) because it knows
not how to enlarge them; it hop^s always, because it can neither run nor walk
softly; it leanes upon all it meets withal, because it cannot sustain it
self; and it is seldom ingenious, save only for it is sterility sake. In fine,
that may be said of all figures, which Seneca says of an Hyperbole; they lead
us to truth by falsehood; they cosen us to please us, and to instruct us do
seduce us. If this cunning be blameless, I know no couzenage, which may not
admit of excuse; men will kill men to make them live, will put out their eyes
to clear their sight, and will throw them into slavery, to set them at liberty.

There have been some who would have had painting inhibited, because it abuses
the senses, and because by the rules of the Optics, it extends open Countries
the end whereof we cannot arrive unto, sinks valleys: so as we cannot discover
their bottom, and raises up Mountains to the height whereof we cannot attain,
But eloquence being more deceitful, deserves a greater punishment; and she
should as well be forbidden coming within the barand Pulpit, as painting was
forbidden the Court of Arropagus, Since she heightens mean things, enlarges
what has no substance; and to make her power be admired; makes Faustina a
Lucretia, Tiberius an Augustus, and Fredigonda a Clotilda. It must then be
confessed, that eloquence is the workman-ship of sin, Placuit mi^ s^btrare
ministerium linguae ^ae nundinis loquacitatis, ne ulterius pueri meditantes non
legem tuam non pace^ tuam, sed infanias mendaces and bella forensia mercarentur
ex ore meo arma furori suo: August. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 2.
that men have sought out these figures only to disguise falsehood; and they
began not to be eloquent, till they began to be sinful. Innocence would not
peradventure have spoken this language; and if we meet with some such like
Oratory sometimes in the holy Scripture, I imagine it is, that the Scripture may
accommodate it self to our custom, and to imitate the goodness of God; who
puts on our passions when he will treat with us.

If truth complain of Rhetoric, reason has as much cause so to do; and who
shall consider, what ill offices she has received from her, will find, that
she should never implore her aid: for though this Sovereign be not always at
peace, within her Territories, and that her Subjects do sometimes despise her
authority, Eloquence is not sincere enough to re-invest her in her power, and
it oft-times falls out, that whilst she thinks to stifle disorder, she
augments it. For Reason has nothing to fear in her Empire, but the error of
her understanding, the obstinacy of the will, the revolt of passions, and the
unfaithfulness of the senses; let her prevent these disorders, and she may be
sure to reign peaceably. For what concerns the understanding, it needs no
Rhetoric to persuade it, itcareth not for Veritas si^e ornamentis ad
persuandendum potenti^r.
ornaments, truth is as pleasing to it in the mouth of a Philosopher, as of an
Orator; the less truth is expatiated, the more force does the understanding
find in her; and the less she has of Art, the more does it reverence her
power. As for the will, it is so free, as nothing can force it; grace alone
has power to ravish (...)* and only God can sway it without using violence.
The passions must be calmed by dexterity; he is a wise Pilot, who can sail
long upon their Sea without suffering shipwreck. And as for the senses; they
must be won by fair means, and they must be loosened from objects to be
submitted to reason.

Eloquence boasts, that in this point, she has great advantage over
Philosophers: the Cadence of her periods smooths the senses; she imitates
music, and makes use of the voice of Orators, to inchant the ears; Eloquentia
est idoncoru^ verborum and sententiarum ad pronuntiati^ accomodati^* continens
vocis vultus, gestus moderationem cum venusta^e. Cicer. in Rheto.
the gesture of their bodies, their studied actions, and all those graces which
accompany Pronunciation, steal away the heart by the eyes, and work wonders
upon the will: Figures raise passions, draw tears, encourages Auditors to
choler, and put weapons into their hands to revenge themselves of their
Enemies. But I find that all the means which Eloquence attempts, are extremely
dangerous, and that the remedies which she applies, are worse than the malady
which she would cure. For thinking to flatter the senses, she engages them in
voluptuousness; whilst she would divert them from, she accustometh them to
delight; and though her design be innocent, yet cease it not to produce ill
effects. For as often as a pleasing Orator defends an ill cause, and that he
imployes all his good parts in favor of injustice; the senses, which seek
only after content, suffer themselves to be borne away by his cunning; and
making interressed reports to the understanding, they engage it in their
revolt. Thus is a pleasing falsehood better entertained than truth; and virtue
is less valued than vice, if she appear more austere.

Eloquence is not more fortunate in taming passions, then in charming senses:
for though she be acquainted with the secret of kindling and allaying choler,
of setting love and hatred on fire, of abusing hope, and sweetning despair, yet
has she this of misfortune, that as she lays one passion asleep, she awakens
another; and be it for want of dexterity, Invenit no his malus orator remedia
saepe periculis peiara. Senec. Tragic.
or for her diffidence of her own strength, she never sets upon vengeance,
unless she be assisted by ambition; she meddles not with love, without
exciting hatred, and quels not hope, without raising fear. Thus she hurts us,
to cure us; and her remedies are worse than our diseases. She imitates those
bad Physicians, who debauch the stomach, to refresh the bowels; and who undo
one part, to preserve another; for not weighing the danger, she oft-times
awakens cruelty in a Tyrant, to encourage him against an Enemy; she excites
ambition in a Conqueror, to incline him to clemency; and hazards a whole
Kingdom to save a guilty person. Men blamea Prince, who to revenge himself of
his Subjects, puts weapons into the Rebels hands, and and who under color of
stifling a commencing sedition, strengthens a party, which justles out his
Authority; yet this is the order observed by Eloquence in her Orations; and
expearience teaches us, that to overcome a passon which opposes her designs,
she will not fear to awaken another which will entrench upon the public
Liberty. Cicero flatters Cesars vain glory, to obtain Marcellus his pardon, he
propounds glory to him, to divert him from rigor: yet Cum aff^ctus repercussit
affectum: a^t metus aut cupidit^s aliquid impe^vit non rationis tun^ ben^io
quicvit, se^ affectum infid^ and mala pace. ^enec. li. 1. de li^ cap. 8.
sees not that to extinguish the fire of his choler, he kindles the life of
his ambition; which was to set his Country on fire. Who will not then
confess, that eloquence is an enemy to reason? that she dis-joynts an Empire,
in stead of settling it? and that she adds to the number of passions, under
pretense of apeasing them?

Her other designs are not more just, and she deals not more mildly with
liberty than with reason; for though she always vaunt to take her side, and to
defend her against such enemies as war against her, I find she is the first
that charge on her, and that there is no difference between an Orator and a
Tyrant. They take several ways, but their Armies are alike, ^yrrani and orator
is (...) est discrimen, nisi quod ille corporibus, hic animis imperat.
and their manner of government is equally violent; Tyrants make use of fire
and sword, to astonish their Subjects, and Orators employ anger and revenge,
to seduce their Auditors. Tyrants forge chains to keep them in, that resist
them; and Orators frame discourses which violate the will of those that listen
to them. Tyrants make themselves be feared, because they cannot make themselves
be beloved; and Orators make themselves be beloved, though they know very well
how to make themselves be feared: Tyrants affright us, when they cannot win us
by fair means, and Orators deceive us, when their persuasions fall them. In
fine, Tyrants butcher our bodies, and Orators tyrannize over our minds. I
think not the Republique of Syracusa, much more unhappy under the Tyranny of
Dionysius, then was the Commonwealth of Athens, whilst she languished under
the eloquence of Do^sthenes. There are some Philosophers of my opinion, and
Cicero himself does not differ much from it, since he confesses, that an old
man hearing the great Pericles make an Oratition; after that he had formerly
heard the Tyrant Pisistrates, cried out aloud, that he had never seen two men
more like, and that he did no less dread the ones eloquence, than the others
cruelty: in effect, he was not in the wrong; for the event showed, Quid enim
inter Pilistratum and Periclem interfuit, nisi quod ille armatus, hic sine
a^mis, tyrannidem gessit. Cicer. 3. de orat.
that there was no difference between Pisistrates, and Pericles, save that the
one exercised Tyranny with his weapons, and the other with his Rhetoric.

Eloquence being so dangerous, and her Empire so violent, we must not wonder,
if Jesus Christ, whose design was to win the world by fair means, would not
have his Apostles make use thereof; he chose ignorant men to confute
Philosophers, and to make his power be admired, his will was, that their
simplicity should triumph over rhetoric. They were inspired with the gift of
tongues in a moment, and the same spirit which did wonders by their hands, made
known his oracles by their mouths: but Heaven which made them so learned,
would never make them eloquent; they spoke before the Kings of the earth,
without any loftiness of style; they discoursed without adornments before the
Judges of Areopagus, they preached without figures before the Senate of Non
con^ertit Deus Piscatorem per oratorem sed oratorem per piscatorem. August.
Rome, and yet they submitted the pride of Rome, and the eloquence of Athens to
the simplicity of the Gospel. I must spend the rest of this discourse in the
recital of this wonder, and to confute Rhetoricks vain glory, I must exalt the
humility of Religion.

Never did any design equal that of Jesus Christ, when he sent his Apostles
into the world; he meditated the conquest of the world, the overthrowing of
superstition, the ruin of Idols, and the devils defeat; to effect this
enterprise, Philosophers must be convinced Orators persuaded, Monarchies
vanquished. To bring this so high a design to an happy end, one would think,
that he must raise Aristotle, Demosthenes, and Alexander from their graves; he
notwithstanding vouchsafes to look upon a dozen fishermen, and to encourage
them to combat, and to overcome so many enemies, he forbids them to bear
Arms, to meditate for reasons, or to study speeches: and to the end, that the
whole glory of so great a work might be attributed to his power, Eloquia
Apostolorum tanta and tam nova persuadentium quae dicebant mira s^erunt, non
ver ba. Aug. lib. de Civit. cap. 5.
he will have the humility of his Disciples beat down the pride of Tyrants, he
will have their ignorance confound the learning of Philosophers, and their
simplicity to triumph over the eloquence of Orators. If their discourse were
plain, their writings were not more aptly couched. Hardly did they write
correctedly, their most usual Figures are Barbarismes, they neglect ornament,
plainness appears in all their Epistles; and we have much ado to believe,
that those who spoke such indifferent language, should miraculously have
received the gifts of tongues; yet does the beauty of their doctrine ravish us,
we are astonished with the depth of those mysteries, which they explain, and
their words bear so great a sense with them, as we are not troubled to fore-goe
Aristotle's Politics; to read Saint Paul's Epistles.

Since the Apostles are the Masters of the Church, and that their examples are
our instructions; I advise Preachers to imitate their plainness, to affect
their lowlines, to despise eloquence, and to implore aid from that Spirit
which wins hearts without the pomp of words, and ravish the will without the
ornament of language. Rhetoric is a profane art, and preaching is a sacred
exercise; vanity has need of cunning to sustain her, but the Gospel is
maintained by truth: those who preach it with most setting off, are not those
whose preaching works Nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum, nec
inquisitione, adjiciamus, nec Rhetorica, post Evangelium. Tertull. de
praescriptionib. cap. 3.
most affect, of as many Prea^chers as God has given to his Church, I see but
Chrysostom whose eloquence he has blessed, all the rest have drawn their
power from the humility of the cross, the meanest of them have been the most
beneficial those who have wrought the greatest conversions, have often times
abounded more in Piety then in learning, and more in zeal, than in eloquence.
If I give not the same counsel to the faithful, as I do to Preachers; it is not
that I do not approve of those who would imitate the Apostles simplicity, and
that I condemn those who would imitate the Orators vainglory, but nature being
faulty, we must not wonder if her language be corrupted; and since the Son of
God tolerates the impurity of our sins, we must not think it strange, if he
bear with the vanity of our words, till being gotten into the liberty of his
Children, he frees us from the tyranny of sin and from the slavery of eloquence.

OF THE CORRUPTION OF MAN'S BODY BY SIN: The Fourth Treatise:
The First Discourse.
Of the Excellencies of Man's Body.

Virtue being surrounded with enemies, and besieged on all sides by vices, she
cannot Est virtus habitus animi judicio susceptus in mediocritate positus.
Aristoteles. l. 2. Ethic. cap. 6.
stray aside without the hazard of falling into their hands, and of losing all
those advantages which render her glorious. If Justice punish a fault
rigorously, her zeal passes for severity; if she countenance evil by suffering
it, she is accused of indulgency: if valor throw her self upon a danger, which
she cannot shun, men esteem her rash; if she shun occasions, when her duty
calls upon her, she is blamed of fearfulness; and by a strange destiny, she
that was a professed enemy to fear, grows to love her, and becomes her slave.
Truth is not more fortunate then virtue; for she is environed with errors,
which surprise her if she go out of the way; and if she listen to them, bereave
her of her purity: she is seduced by falsehood, if wisdom and faith assist her
not; the desire of combat engages in danger, and her covering to overcome,
makes her ofttimes lose the victory. Fear is often more fatal to her than is
her own courage; for whilst she avoides one enemy, she falls upon another; and
thinking to shun an ill step or two, she falls into a precipice. This
misfortune may be observed upon a thousand occasions, but particularly in what
concerns the body of man: for some seeing the unrulinesse thereof, could not
believe that it was the workmanship of God; and falling insensibly into an
Error, persuaded themselves, that the Devil was the author thereof: some
others, thinking to withstand this heresy, fall into another, and considering,
the beauties of the body, thought that it still retained its first purity, that
the faults thereof were perfections, and that all the motions thereof might be
represt by free will, without grace. The Catholic truth walks in the midst
between these two errors; condemning the Manichees, she acknowledges that
man's body is made by God enlivened by his breath, and fastened to the soul by
invisible chains, to make one and the same whole: condemning the Pelagians,
she confesses that man's body has lost its innocence; that sin reigns in the
members thereof, that it infecteth the soul which inanimates it, and that the
well fare thereof, which begins in Baptism, will not be accomplished till the
last general resurrection. Thus God is the Author thereof, and it is a mark of
'its Deus carnis author, Christus carnis Redemptor est. Tertull de resur. c^rn.
Goodness; Jesus Christ is the redeemer thereof, and it is a mark of it is
corruption. I therefore am obliged to part this subject into two discourses,
the first of which shall contain the bodies plea, the other its condemnation.

Though the body be the least part of man, and that it be Common to him with
beasts, yet has it advantages which make it sufficiently known, that it is
destined to be the organ of an immortal soul. For the members thereof are so
artificially formed, as we cannot judge whether they be more useful or more
pleasing; their number causes no confusion, their difference augments their
beauty, and their proportion gives the last touch to the work which they all
together make up. All of them have their particular employments, they mutually
assist one another, without intrenching one upon another; they hold such
intelligence as their good and bad is common: the tongue serves for interpreter
to the whole body, the eyes serve it for a guide, the hands for its servants,
the ears for informers, and the legs for supporters. Some of them are in
perpetual motion, and never rest, Action is their life, and rest their death:
whilst the eyes are lulled asleep, the ears closed up, and whilst the feet
and hands lie fallow, the heart is always in action; it seems that nature
intended to make it her chief piece of workmanship, and that she employed all
her industry to render it admirable.

It Is the first part of man that lives, and the last that dies; it is so Cor
paruum est and magna cupit: vix ad unius milui refectionem sufficere posset and
totus mundus ei non sufficit. Hugo. li. 3. de anin. a.
little; as 'twill not suffice to give a Kite a meal; and yet so great, as the
whole world cannot satisfy it: nothing but his immensity that made it, can
fill the infinite capacity thereof. All passions derive from it, as from their
springhead; it is this that causes love and hatred? it is this that shuns what
it hates for fear, and draws near to what it loves through desire. It Is lodged
like a King in the midst of its subjects; it gives its orders, without
departing from its Throne; its motions are the rules of our health, and as soon
as it is assailed, we are sick: its least hurts are mortal: Nature, which
knows the worth and the weakness thereof, has endued all its subjects with a
secret inclination to expose themselves for its defense, the hands put by the
blows that are made at it; and knowing that their welfare consists in the
preservation thereof, they hazard themselves to save it from danger. To reward
this their service, this Sovereigne is so vigilant, as he never takes rest; he
labors always for the weal-publick, and whilst the senses are asleep, he is
busied in moving the Arteries, in forming the Spirits, and in distributing them
about all the parts of the Body. The Brains finish this work, and giving it
its last perfection, dispose it to the noblest operations of the soul. This
work cease not, though men sleep; though the Soul take some refreshment,
these two parts of the Body are always in action; and when they cease to move,
they cease to live. All these live in so full a peace, as the difference of
their temper is not able to disturb it: Cold accords there with heat,
moystnesse is there no longer an enemy to dryness; and the elements which
cannot tolerate one another in the World, conspire together in man, for his
bodies preservation. If any disorder happen, it is occasioned by foreign heat,
the natural Subjects never trouble the States tranquillity: they are so
straightly joined by their Interests, as nothing can befall the one which the
other does not resent; the pain of one part is the sickness of the whole body:
Sipatiatur oculus omnia dolebunt, omnia ^essabunt. Quid ventrem ocule mordes:
quid pedes remora. is: quid manus vincis? quia innexa natura, sunt omnia,
modequeineffabili compatiuntur. Chrysostom.
and if the foot be hurt, the tongue complains, the heart sighs, the eyes
weep, the head bows to consider the evil, and the arms extend themselves to
apply remedy.

If their love be so rare, their obedience is no less remarkable; for they
force their own inclinations to observe the orders of the will; and their
fidelity is so ready, as the command is no sooner imposed, then obeyed: at
their Sovereigns bare motion, the hands strive to be acting, the tongue
explains his intentions, the eyes express his thoughts, and the ears execute
his designs. The will finds out so much submission in the faculties of the
soul, as in the parts of the body; she is oft-times divided by her desires,
and opposed by her own inclinations; sheis a rebel to her self, and cannot
comprehend how one and the same object can cause horror and love in her at the
same time: but she never commands her body without being obeyed, and unless
passions make a mutiny in it, or that it be disordered by sickness, it fulfils
her orders with as much readiness, as faithfulness.

She likewise undertakes nothing without the assistance of this faithful
companion, Nunquam anima sine carne est quamdiu in carne est, nibil non cum
illa agit sine qua non est. Tertul. de resur. carn.
she stands in need of his aid in her noblest operations; and though she be a
mere spirit, she can neither discourse, nor reason, but by the interposition of
the body: if she will form thoughts, she must consult with the imagination;
and if she will explain them, she is forced to make use either of tongue, or
hand: Volutet aliquid anima vultus operatur indicium: facies intentionum omnium
speculum est. Tertul. de resur. carn.
she has no strong agitations which appear not in the eyes, and when she is
disquieted by any violent passion, it is soon seen in the face. A man must be
very vigilant to hinder the commerce between the body and the soul; the rules
of discretion, and all art of policy, which re-commends dissimulation to
Sovereigns, cannot keep their countenances from discovering their designs, nor
their eyes from betraying their wills: the soul conceales nothing from this
her faithful confident; he that could well study the changes which appear in
the face, might infallibly know the alterations of the mind; and without
needing to wish as that ridiculous Pagan did, one might read in the forehead,
the hearts most secret thoughts. If Physiognomie be a Science, she has no
certainty but what she draws from the connection which nature has placed
between the soul and the body; all her observations are grounded upon the
noblest part of the body; if all be true that is said of her, as soon as she
sees the face, she knows the humor; and without or Charms or Magic, she
knows their intentions, whose Lineaments she observes. Though I dare not
acknowledge all this, and that I have much a do to believe that a Physiognomist
can discover the designs of a wise Minister of State, by looking him in the
face, and that without racking a malefactor, he may read his fault in his
eyes; it suffices me to know that this Science is grounded upon the commerce
between the soul and the body, and that she draws her conjectures from the
straight union that is between them.

As the Soul does not form any design, wherein the body is not a complice;
so does she taste no contentment, wherein the body does not share a part: if
Quem enim natura usum, quem mundi fructum, quem elementorum sa porem non per
carnem anima depascitur? per quam omni instrumento sensuum fult^ est. Tert. de
resur. carn.
she enjoy the beauties of nature, it is by the Senses; if she see the Azure of
the Sky, the light of the stars; if she discover the extent of Fields, the
fertility of valleys; if she hear the fall of Rivers, the music of Birds, if
she judge of the Gloss or Sent of Lillies, or Roses; it is by the benefit
either of the sight, hearing, or smelling. It seems the world was made for the
bodies diversion, and that all those pleasing parts which go to the composure
thereof, have only been made to delight the senses; the Sun is of no use to
the glorified Spirits, and all the brightness of that goodly Constellation
cannot light the Angels; those noble Intelligences have a spiritual world
wherewith they are possessed, and ravished: they find their happiness in God,
and all that we wonder at in the world, affords them no delight. Materia is
requisite to tasting the pleasures of sensible nature; such contentments
presuppose a low condition, and it is common with Beasts to partake of such
diversions. It Is notwithstanding one of the bodies least advantages, that the
world should be made for it is use; and that this chief piece of Gods
workmanship is destined either for it is service, or it is delight.

Jesus Christ followed his Fathers steps; and when he came upon earth, he would
have the body to be the object of his mercy, and of his power; though he
labored for the conversion of sinners, his greatest miracles were wrought for
the healing of the sick; and the body being man's weakest part, he thought he
was to treat it with most mildness, and to furnish it with as many remedies,
as sin has procured it maladies. Sometimes he cleansed it of the leprosy,
Nativitate reformata regeneratione coe^esti carnem ab omni vexatione restitu^t,
leprosam emaculat, coe^ perlumi^t paralyticam redintegrat, daemoniatam expiat,
mortuam expiat, mortuam resuscitat. Tert. de carne Christi cap. 3.
and restored to it is former purity; sometimes he freed it from blindness, and
restored unto it the noblest of it is senses; sometimes cured it of the Palsy,
and restored it to the use of it is Members: sometimes he withdrew it from the
Grave, and reunited it to it is soul, contrary to the hope of nature; sometimes
he freed it from the Tyranny of Devils, and re-establisht it in it is former
freedoms.

Neither did he neglect it in the institution of the Sacraments; for though
they were chiefly ordained for the souls sanctification, and that these
admirable Channels pour grace into the soul, yet are they applied upon the
body before they produce their effects in the will; and they respect jointly
the two parts which go to man's composure. Caro abluitur ut anima emacu^etur,
carovngitur ut anima consecretur, raro signatur, ut anima muniatur, caro
corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur ut anima de Deosaginetur. Tertu. de
resur. car. ca. 6.
The body is washed in water, to the end that the soul may be purified; the
body is marked with the Figure of the Cross, to the end that the soul may be
fortified; the body receives the unction, to the end that the soul may be
consecrated; the body receives the imposition of hands, to the end that the
soul may receive Grace; and the body eats the flesh and blood of Christ
Jesus, to the end that the soul may be thereby nourished: Thus does not
religion destroy nature, and in her highest mysteries the provides for the
souls safety, by means of the body. Nulla omuino anima salutem potest adipisci
nisidum in carne est adeo caro s^lutis cardo est Tertull. ibid.
This maxim is so true, as that all Divinity confesses, that the soul can no
longer merit, when she is once parted from the body; whilst they are together
in company, their grace may be augmented; and whatsoever virtues they have
acquired, they may yet acquire more, but when once death has divided them, and
that the body losing 't's luster, is reduced either to ashes, or to worms; the
soul can no longer increase her merit, and in that condition she is only
capable of punishment, or of reward.

Having so many obligations to her body, she cannot forget them, nay even in
the state of Glory, where all her designs ought to be satisfied, she wishes
to be reunited to her body, as that wherein her entire felicity consists.
For though she reign with Angels, that she behold the divine Essence, and that
she enjoy a happiness, to which even wishes cannot add, yet has has she a
passion for her body, and all the good she does possess cannot take from her
the desire, nor memory thereof; though she has made trial of it is revolts;
though this friendly enemy has ofttimes persecuted her, and that she has
desired death to be freed from the Tyranny thereof, yet does she languish after
it, and contrary to their humor who have recovered liberty, yet she longs for
that which did engage her in servitude. Though the body be reduced to dust,
though it cause pity in it is Enemies, and though it cause horror in those to
whom it was so lovely, she forbeares not to desire it, and to expect the
resurrection with Impatience, that her body may partake of the bliss which she
enjoyes.

And it is not without much justice that she bears so much love to her body,
since she owes the greatest part of her advantages unto it, and that she has
hardly any virtue, or light, which she has not acquired by the assistance of
the senses. The soul is ignorant when first infused into the body; the
knowledge which the Platonists attribute unto her, is but a mere capacity of
apprehending. If she will be entrusted, she must be advised either by her eyes,
or by her ears, she must consult with these Masters, if she will free her
self from ignorance. How noble soever she be by birth, Arts per carnem,
studia ingenii per carnem, atque adeo totum vivere animae carnis est, ut non
vivere animae nil aliud sit, quam a carne divertere. Tertull. de resurr. carn.
cap. 6.
she has but weak conjectures of truth, if these faithful officers should
fail her; and should she be engaged in a body which should have no use of
senses, she would be plunged in eternal darkness. Sight and hearing are the
Organs destined to knowledge, and he who is borne deaf and blind, is destined
to live and die ignorant.

As the soul receives these advantages by the body, so does she distribute
them by the bodies assistance, and does not express her thoughts but by the
mouth of her Interpreter: she gives with the tongue, what she has received by
the ear; and as she is rich only by means of the senses, so is she by them
only liberal. She observes the different qualities of objects by the eyes,
she judges of the diversity of sounds by the ears; she comprehends men's
intentions by their discourse, Sermo de organo carnis est. Tertul. de resur.
carnis ibid.
she makes hers known by the tongue, and this miraculous part of the body
frames words which draw her thoughts unto the life: If those who are absent
cannot understand her, she has recourse to the hand, which draws her dictates
upon paper: and which makes that appear to the eyes, which the tongue could not
make the ears comprehend. Thus the soul acts only by the body, and all
Sciences by which we are either instructed or persuaded, are as well the work
of the senses, as of the soul.

Virtue it self owes her birth to the meanest part of man, and were he not
made of flesh and blood, he could offer no sacrifice to God, neither could he
satisfy divine Justice by his repentance. The Virginitas qu^que and viduitas,
and modest^ in occulto matrimonii dissimulatio de bonis carnis Deo adolentur.
Tertull. de resur. car. ibid.
purity which equals him with Angls, is not wholly spiritual; if be borne in
heaven, it is bred upon earth; and if it begin in the soul, it ends in the body.
Fasting and silence keep the flesh under to purify the soul, and if man had
not a tongue and mouth, he could neither praise God in silence, nor honor him
by self-affliction. Martyrdom, which is the utmost of charity, and the highest
degree of perfection, is consummated only in the flesh; mere spirits cannot be
a prey to wild beasts, and a soul which has put off her body cannot overcome
Tyrants, nor triumph over Executioners. Mortallity is requisite to Martyrdom,
and if the Angels be somewhat more than we men, because they cannot die, they
are in some sort less, because they cannot suffer: death is the trial of our
love, and as often as we lose our lives in Christ's quarrel, we strike terror
into devils, and fill Angels with admiration.

In fine, the honor which God receives on earth, proceeds from the body. It Is
the body which is his Priest and Victime; it is the body which bears his
imprinted characters in it is face; it is the body which commands on earth, and
which playing the part of Gods Lieutenant, finds obedience amongst the
Elements, and mildness amongst savage beasts. It Is the body which fights for
the Glory of the Son of God, and which defends his Interest to the face of
Tyrants, and which sings his praises amidst the Flames. It Is the body which
being made by his hands, and in-livened by his breath, has the honor to be
his workmanship, and his Temple. Absit ut Deus manuum suarum operam, ingenii
sui curam adflatus sui vaginam, molitionis suae reginam, liberalitatis suae
haeredem, religionis suae sacerdotem testimonii sui militem, Christi sui
sororem in ate^num destinet interitum. Tertul. de resur. car. cap. 7.
It Is the body which is the object of his love, and of his care; which sees
the Sun surround the world to lighten it, fruits bud to nourish it, flowers
spring up to recreate it, and whole nature labors for it is pleasure, or
service. In fine, it is the body which is offered up upon Altars, which fights
in persecutions, which praises God in prosperity, which blesses him in
afflictions, which honors him in death, which in the Grave expects his
promises, which will rise again at the end of the World, and which will reign
for ever in Heaven.

The second Discourse.
Of the miseries of the Body in General.

THe evils which we receive from the body are so great, as that al Philosophy
is nothing but an invective Corpus hoc animi pondus, acpoena est p^ae mente
illo urgetur, in vincu^s est nisi accessit Philosophia. Senec. Epi. 65.
against this enemy of our repose. If we believe the Platonists, it is a prison
wherein the Soul is enclosed to expiate the sins which she has committed in
Heaven. If we will listen to the Academicks, it is a grave wherein the Soul is
buried, and where being more dead than alive, she cannot make use of all those
perfections which she has received from Nature. Non aliter aspicio corpus quam
ut vinculum aliquod libertati meae circundatum. Idem ibid.
If we trust the Stoics, it is a disobedient slave, which opposes it self to
all the souls desires, and which being born to obey, has no so great passion
as to command, it is a subject which aspires to Tyranny, and which forces its
legitimate sovereign to forgo both honor, and virtue, and to embrace
voluptuousness. If we will give ear to the Peripateticks, who come nearest the
truth, it is the least part of Man, which being given him to serve the soul,
crosses all her designs, and hinders the execution of her noblest enterprises.
Hence it is, that all Philosophers do what in them lies, to have no commerce
with the body, and wish for death or old age, to the end that the one may
weaken this Domestic enemy, and that the other may free them from it.

Christian Religion, which marches in the midst of errors with assurance,
confesses, that the body is as well the workmanship of God as the soul is, and
though it be not altogether so noble, it cease not to be destined to the same
happiness. But as slaves are punished for their masters, and as children
sometimes bear the punishment of their fathers sins, the body has been punished
for the soul, and from the time it became confederate in her crime, it partook
in her punishment. Though the soul be the more guilty, the body is the more
unfortunate; and of the two parts which go to the composure of man, the most
innocent seems to be the most miserable. For to boot that it is subject to
pain by reason of the elements bad intelligence, Nos gestamus la queum
nostrumnobiscum, circumferimus inimic um carnem nostram loquor de peccato
natam, de peccato nutritam, corrupiam nimis de ipsa origin, sed multo amplius
de prava consuetudine vitia^am. Gre. in. Moral.
that it undergoes sicknesses whereby the health thereof is prejudiced, that it
cannot be cured but by troublesome remedies, that the fear of death be a
punishment which lasts as long as its life, it is notwithstanding occasion of
the most sins whereof the soul is guilty; and this Sovereign thinks she
should be innocent, if she were not fastened to so guilty a Party.

To disintangle all these things, we must know, that when the soul lost her
privileges, the body lost likewise its advantages; Nihil inerat quod carnem
anim u mue hominis foeliciter in paradiso vivent is offenderet. August. 14. de
civi. Dei. c. 10.
for the same grace w^ made the soul pleasing to God, made the body subject to
the soul, and the same innocence which preserved the sovereign from sin,
warranted the slave from death: But when once man became guilty, he became
unfortunate; and when once he lost original righteousness, he therewith lost
all the dependencies thereupon; Error and blindness slid into the
understanding, malice glided into the will; and by a consequence, which Divine
Justice made necessary, illusion crept into the senses, sickness altered man's
temper, pain disquieted his rest, and death sho tened his life. These
punishments are so irksome as each of them deserves a discourse; and not to
enter upon a subject which I should handle more at large, it shall suffice me
for the present to make it manifest, that though the body be the Souls slave,
since sin it is become her Tyrant, and that it neither tastes of contentment,
nor suffers sorrow wherein it shares not with her.

Pain is a sensible evil, and were not the Soul engaged in the body, she
without the least commotion would behold the most grievous punishments; but
nature having composed man of these two different parts, the bodies pain, is
the Souls punishment, their good and their bad are common between them, the
more noble suffers with the more ignoble, and by a strange misfortune, the soul
which needs no nourishment, fears famine; she who is spiritual, fears pain,
Non ^nim cum animus ad corp^ declinat, corpus efficitur, sed tamen defective,
appetitu quodammodo corpora scit. August. l. secund. cap. 10.
and she who is immortal apprehends death; she is afflicted with whatsoever
hurts the body, and as if her love had changed her Essence, she seems to be
become Corporeal. By a sequel as shameful as necessary, she takes her part
of all the bodies pleasures; she shapes desires, unnecessitated, she follows
the inclmations of its senses, and forgoing truth and virtue, wherein all her
innocent delights ought to consist, she rellisheth the flowers with the
smelling, she tastes meat with the Palate, she hears Music with the ears, and
sees the diversity of colors with the eyes. Being thus become sensual, she
is not to be loosened from the body, she forgets her natural advantages, by
neglecting them, she forgoes commerce with spirits to treat with beasts; the
fear she has of death, makes her doubt her immortallity; the love she has to
pleasure, makes her despise virtue, and to engage her self too far in her
slaves interest, she learns new crimes, whereof she was before innocent.

For although the soul be not impeaceable, and that her will be not so
constant in what is good, but that she may be unfortunately parted from it, yet
is she not capable of all sorts of crimes; she may be seduced by falsehood,
blown up by vain glory, abased by sadness, and gnawn by envy, but she should
be exempt from such sins, as she is persuaded unto by the senses, if she were
dis-ingaged from the body. Mere spirits are not scorcht with unchaste flames;
devils are not unchaste, Ideo immundi spiritus Daemones appellantur quia se
authors vita sceleste immundeque testantur. August. lib. 2. de Civit. cap. 26.
save only for that they counsel us to impurity: They are pleased with this
vice, only because Jesus Christ is thereby injured, and our souls would find
no trouble in being chaste, did they not love unchaste bodies: drunkenness,
the vapors whereof cloud reason, is not so much a sin of the soul, as of the
body; did not the soul swim in the blood, the body would never be drowned in
wine; Ebrietas subversio sensus, tempestas linguae, procella corporis,
naufragium castitatis. August.
and the greatest drunkard of the world would forgo his love to this sin, if
death had un-robd him of his body; a man must partake much more of a beast,
than of an Angel, if he fall into this disorder; and men who make more use of
their souls, then of their bodies, are not much subject to this infamous
Irregularity. Gluttony (which may be termed the sister or the mother of
drunkenness) lodges neither in the will, nor in the understanding, it makes
it is abode in the body; the palate which tastes viands, the stomach which
disgests them, are it is faithful officers; if it make any use of the
understanding, Cor habet in ventre gulosus, lasciuus in libidine, cupidus in
lucro. Hieron. in Matthew.
it is for the service of the belly; and if it reason at any time, it is but to
find out new sauces, which may awaken appetite. Covetousness, though it
contest with ambition, and be insatiable, is rather a sin of the senses, than
of the soul; for this illustrious Captive, makes not so many wishes for her
self, as for the body which she inanimates: Glory and virtue are the only
objects of her desires; when she labors to get riches, or to seek out
pleasure, she fits her self to the humor of her slave, and acts more through
complacency, than inclination, or necessity; it is the body which needs the
light of the constellations to light it, the fruits of the earth to nourish
it, the skins of beasts to cloth it, and all the beauties of nature for it is
diversion.

All Artslabour only for the service thereof; Omnes istae arts, quibus aut
excitatur civitas aut strepit, corporis negotium gerunt: cui omnia olim t^nquam
serco praes^abantur, nunc tanquam Domino parantur. Senec. Epist. 90.
though they be the work of the understanding, they be the bodies servants; and
set those aside which have affinity with sciences, all the rest labor only to
entertain the senses; some cut out clothes to cover us, others raise houses for
us to lodge in; some till the earth to nourish us, others seek for pearl in the
bottom of the sea, and diamonds in the bowels of the earth for our adornment;
if the soul become ingenious in inventing things which are superfluous, and of
no use, she is there unto solicited by reason of the bodies need, and she
forgoes all these cares as soon as she is got out of prison. The Rebel Angels
never fought to divide the riches of the earth, the division of Provinces, or
Kingdoms, did never move ambition in them, the beauty of women never caused in
them loose desires, nor did ever any of those sins which arise from flesh and
blood, tempt those haughty spirits. The greatest part of our excess derives
from the body; if we were parted from it, we should either become innocent; or
if in that condition we should have either ambition, or avarice, their motive
and object would be altered. The greatest Conquerours have no motions which are
not common to them with Lions; Lovers jealousy is not more noble then is that
of Bulls; and the husbandry of the Avaritious is not more just then is that of
Owls, and Ants: if men be more to blame then beasts, it is because their soul
complies with their bodies, and that she makes use of her advantages, to supply
her slaves necessities. But the mischief takes it is original from the body;
and as the woman tempted man after she had been seduced by the devil, the
flesh tempts the spirit after having been solicited by objects which flatter
the senses.

I very well know that in the State of Innocence, the soul was first guilty,
and that the body being subject to reason could not excite the first seditions;
it was obedient to it is Sovereign, and as long as the soul was subject to God,
the body was subject to the soul; but when once the soul rebelled against her
God, her body scorned to be commanded by her. And as man's fault had been a
revolt, his punishment was a rebellion also. All our mischief arises from the
bad intelligence which is held between the two parts, whereof we are composed;
he who could appease their differences, might remedy our sins; and if the body
did no longer rebel against the soul, we should have reason to hope, that the
soul would no longer rebel against God.

To understand this truth, Sub hoc peccali (...) demer gu^tur parvuli, qui sine
remedio baptismi moriuntur: habent enim originale peccatum non per animam sed
per carnem utique contra ctum, animaeque resusum. Carni namque ita anima
unitar, ut cum carne sit una persona. Aug. lib. de spiritu and anima cap. 41.
which seems at first to gainsay the rules of humane reasons, you must know,
that Generation is the way by which Adams sin is transmitted into our souls,
should not inherit the bodies sin, nor misery. From this impure, and fruitful
springhead do all our misfortunes derive; the blindness which clouds our
understanding, draws it is obscurity from the body; falsehood, and vanity enter
our souls by the gate of our senses; and if sins end in the will, they begin
in the imagination. Love glides into the heart by the eyes; he who could be
blind, might easily be chaste; if calumny be formed in the heart, it is dealt
abroad by the tongue; and what in the thought was but the malady of one
particular man, becomes by discourse the contagion of a whole Town. Desiderii
sui veneno mensebria, corpus contumeli is applicat and junctis complexibus ambo
in mortiferas suavitatis ^si obdormiunt. Cyprian. in prolo. de ope^i.
cardinalib. Christi.
Conceptions are spread abroad by words, and faults are multiplied by
communication; if those who are dumb, conceive envy, they cannot show it by
detraction; and if they express it by signs, it is either the hands, or eyes,
which makes them guilty: our soul is not infected with falsehood, or heresy,
save by our most refined sense; these two poisons are taken in by the care, not
by the mouth: And as faith and truth enter the soul by hearing, their mortal
enemies make their passage by the same way: a man must stop his ears, and shut
his eyes if he will keep his heart pure. It were to be wished, that men were
blind, that so they might not see the beauty which inchants them; and that
women were deaf, that they might not hear the praises which seduce them. Caro
officina est sp^tus, us, qui in e^ and per came quaecumque affectaver it,
perag^t and ^onsummat. Idem ibid.
In fine, the world abuses us only by our senses; it is pernicious Maxims get
into our souls by our ears, the vanities thereof corrupt our wills by our
eyes; and all those objects, whose different beauties do be witch us, make no
impression in our soul, but by our body. We should be invulnerable, were we
spiritual; and of a thousand temptations which we have, we should hardly be
troubled with one, were we not engaged in Materia.

To complete our misfortune, we love our enemy, the bad offices he does us
cannot diminish our love. All the Maxims of Religion cannot persuade us to
revenge; and though this motion of the mind be so pleasing to the injured, it
seems severe unto us, when we are invited to punish our body. Our passion for
this unfaithful one, Nemo umquam carnem suam odio habuit sed nutrit and sovet
eam. Ephesians. c. 5.
is not extinguished by death. The damned preserves it amidst the flames;
though they know their pains shall be increased by the resurrection of their
body; they cannot choose but desire it. In hell hope triumphs over fear and
pain; and this cruel enemy has so many charms, as though he be reduced to
dust, yet does he cause love in the soul which did inanimate him. The
remembrance of the injuries which the soul has received from the body, and
the fear of pain which she expects from thence, is not able to stifle this
desire. She hopes for the day of Judgment, where she must be condemned; though
she know her punishment will be increased by her reunion with her body; she
cannot but desire it with impatience, and places the delay thereof in the
number of her sufferings. So as we are bound to conclude, that if the body be
the cause of sin during life, it will be the punishment thereof after death;
and that if it has made the soul guilty upon earth, 'twill make her unhappy
in hell.

The third Discourse.
Of the Infidelity of the Senses.

NAture being so intermingled with sin, as that the one is the production of
God; the other the work of man; the praises which we give to the former, are
always mingled with Invectives made against the latter; and we cannot value the
beauty of nature, unless we blame the outrages which Os homini sublime dedit
caelumque tueri jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus. Ovid. 1.
Metamorph.
she has received from sin; the figure of man's body is an evident sign of his
Makers wisdom. The Lineaments of his face binds us to admire the power of the
hand which has formed them, and the disposal of the parts thereof, draw no
less praises from our mouths, than the like of the universe. But the disorder
which we see in man's Temperature, the opposition of those Elements which go to
his composure, and that general revolt which has shed it self throughout all
his members, obliges us to detest sin, which is the cause thereof. We must
argue in the same sort concerning our senses, and confess, that as their use
deserves estimation, their irregularity deserves blame.

They are admirable in their structure, and were they not common to us with
beasts, we might be permitted to glory in them. The operation of the noblest of
them is so subtle, as that the soul, as divine as she is, can hardly
comprehend it; she admireth these Masterpieces of nature, though she have so
great a share in their miracles, yet knows she not how they are done; and
thinks strange that she should contribute to wonders which she cannot conceive.
For the soul inanimates the senses, and this spiritual form, is a created
Divinity which sees by the eyes, hears by the ears, and expresses it self
by the mouth. But if the senses have their perfections, they have also their
defects; and if the soul receive any service by them, she is by them likewise
much injured. They are the gates of falsehood and error, vanity slides into our
souls, by their means; they are exposed to illusions; the objects wherewith
they are pleased corrupt them; and being once corrupted by delight, they make
no true reports unto the soul. Nature has endowed us with them, that we might
know God by things visible, and to raise us up to consider the beauty of the
Creator by the like of his works; these deceitful Guides do notwithstanding
abuse us, and solicited either by delight, or interest, make Idols unto
themselves of all the creatures, and lead us to adore sensible and perishable
Gods. Misi nuntios meos sensus omnes exteriores ut quarerent te, and non
inveni, quia mate quaerebam. August. soliloq cap. 31.
Saint Augustine confesses, that he never went astray in his belief, save
when he would follow them; and that he never engaged himself in error, save
when he gave belief to their advise; he sought out God with his eyes, he would
have touched him with his hands, and thought to have found him in the world,
whom he carried about with him in his heart. He gave commission to all his
senses to find him out, but these ignorant messengers could learn him nothing;
and he found not his God, because he knew not how rightly to seek for him.

Their ignorance would be excusable, were it not accompanied with injustice;
but these evil Counselors grow insolent in chiding us, after they have
abused us, and make violence succeed superchery; they tyrannize over our souls,
after having seduced them, and make the Sovereign take laws from his slaves.
According to the Government of the Universe, Inferior things are alwas subject
to their superior: as the earth is less noble than the Heavens, it is also
lower; it receives their influences, thereof with respect, and all the fruit it
bears, raise themselves up toward the stars, to witness that it is
fruitfulness derives from their Influences. In Civil Government, women are
subject unto their husbands, and slaves obey their Masters; in Politic, the
people hold of their Sovereign, and the Kings will, is the Subjects laws; but
in man this order is reverst by an irregularity, which can be nothing but the
punishment of sin: his soul depends upon his body; and in her noblest
operations, she is obliged to be advised by the senses. Her condition is so
unhappy, as she seems almost enforced to believe the ignorant, to follow the
blind, and to obey Rebels. A man would blame a State, where fools should
command over wise men, where children should prescribe laws to the Ancient, and
where women should have dominion over their husbands; yet corrupted nature is
engaged in this disorder; and since our first Fathers sin, the senses are the
souls Counselors, and this faint-hearted Sovereign, renouncing her lawful
authority, receives orders from her slaves.

Their tyranny has occasioned another, more cruel, and more dangerous; for as
they are subject to the devils illusions, they fight under his colors, and
become accessory to all his wicked designs: he Diabolus posuit in comestione
gulam, in generatione luxuriam, in conversatione invidiam, in gub^rnatione
auaritiam, posuit malus cogitationes in cord, malas loqu^tionesin ore, pravas
dispositiones in membris. Aug. in sermon.
has wonall our senses over to him since sin; the noblest are most trusty to
him, and he has so corrupted them, as one must either be very wise, or very
fortunate to defend himself from them. He has put slandering in the tongue,
uncleanness in the eyes, error in the ears, revenge in the heart, and pride
in the head: He has dispersed disobedience amongst the passions, revolt amongst
the members, and infidelity amongst all the senses. If we speak, he sollicits
us to speak wrongfully; if we hear, he engages us in error; if we look, he
strikes us in love; if we think upon our injuries, he incites us to revenge;
and if we consider our advantages, he makes us vain glorious. Thus are our
senses the Executours of his fury, the parts of our body are confederate in his
faultiness, and the members which nature has given us to defend our selves,
are the weapons which he makes use of to fight against us. But lest I may be
accused of adding to our mis fortune to excuse our sin; I will consider the
senses in particular, and after having observed their advantages, I will
consider their defects.

If the eye be not the Noblest, it is at least the most beautiful of all our
senses; and if it be not most useful, it is at least the most delightful.
Nature imployes nine Months in forming it, it is one of the parts of the Body
she begins the soonest, and ends the last: it is a Master piece of workmanship,
wherein her power, and Tenuibus multisque membran^eos Natura comyosu^t callosis
contra frigoratunicis quas subinde purificant lach^ymationum falivis. Plin.
lib. 11. ca. 37.
her dexterity are equally to be admired: She mingles conrraries so warily
there; as waters are there observed to agree with flames; they are the rises of
fire and of tears, which cause deluges, and inflammations: All passions are
there seen in their glory; sorrow and joy make it their chiefest Theater, and
when the heart burns with love or with hatred; it darteth out Thunder and
lightning by the eyes: their greatness is rather a prodigy than a wonder; for
they enclose the Adeo oculis absoluta vis specult, ut tam parva^lla pupilla
totam imaginem reddat hominis. Idem ib^d.
Heavens with all the stars therein, the sea with all her rocks, and earth with
all its mountains, the several species of all these objects lodge there
without confusion, and Nature is amazed to see her whole Image, in so small a
looking glass. All their parts are of so nice a composition, as they are
undiscernable; the nerves which convey the sight are smaller than the hairs of
the head, the thin filmes which covers them, are more transparent then
Crystal, and the waters which are enclosed in their receptacles, are so calm,
as no storm can trouble them: Nature, which governs her love according to the
merit of her works, has given them so many guards, as their excellency is
easily judged by her care in preserving them. Omnibus oculis membrana vitri
modo tran slacida obtenditur. Palpebras Natura dedit ce^ vallum quoddam visus,
and prominens munim^ntum contra occursantia animalia aut (...) fortu^
i^cidentia. Idem ib^d.
For to boot that the hairs on the eyelids, are as many bristled points which
defend them; that the eyebrows, are arches which cover them, that the
eyelids, are vails which hide them; the hands are employed to save them, and
their Chief exercise, when in the dark, is to guard these sons, which guide us
in the day time. They are so sudden in their operation as it holds of the
Nature of lightning; they raise themselves up to the heavens, and descend to
the depths in a moment, they find out things furthest of without weariness,
and by an ordinary miracle they join themselves to them, without disjoyning
themselves from the body: They serve for an Interpreter to those that cannot
speak, they express thoughts which the understanding dares not trust the
tongue withal, they are so happy in their expressions as savadge men
understand them, and they are so powerful in their persuasions, as they
oft-times obtain more by their looks, then the mouth can do by words.

But assuredly it must be confessed, that their bad exceeds their good, and their
defaults their advantages. For the greatest sins commence by the sight, love
has no force with those that are blind; though he be blinde-folded, his looks
make his greatest Conquest; and the arrows which he shoots proceed rather from
his eyes then from his quiver: Visus longius prospicit and momento facit quod
aures tempore: prius enim coruscatio cernitur quam audiatur. Marsil. Ficin. in
convivi. Platon.
The subtilty of this sense serves only to make it the more guilty; it commits
faults where it is not, and being more subtle then thunder, it scorcheth People
without touching them, it meditates adulteries before the heart conceives
them, and in all unchaste sins, it is always first faulty; most men would be
innocent, if they were blind; and without seeking so many remedies against
love, want of sight would serve the turn: Impudicus oculus impudici cordis est
nuntius. Hierony.
The Soul having a more Noble residence in the eyes, then in the other senses,
she shapes no wishes which she expresses not by them; nor conceives she any
design, wherein they are not Accomplices.

Every part of the body is capable of some crime, and since our loss of
innocence, we have no part in us which is not able to irritate Gods justice:
But yet we have this of comfort in our misfortune that their mischief is
bounded; and that by a fortunate disability, they can commit but one sort of
sin. The hand is only guilty of Murders and Theft, the tongue of blasphemy and
calumny, the ear of hearing, error, and falsehood, and the mouth of excess in
eating and drinking: but the eye is guilty of all crimes, it sees no object
wherewith it is not tempted, and all sins which can kill our Souls, can seduce
our light; Odit Dominus oculos sublimes. Proverb. 6.
pride seems to have established its Throne there, and lying is not more
natural to the tongue, then vainglory to the eyes As they have the art of
speaking, they have also the cunning of mis-speaking, their very looks without
the help of wor^s sufficiently witness their despisal: Slothfulness reigns
there no less then obloquie; though they be so active, they cease not to be
slothful, drowsinesse assails them to make us sleep, they are sooner shut then
the ears, and experience teaches us, that we hear words when we see no
objects: Anger is seen to break forth there in fury, Lightnings and Thunders
burst forth from thence as messengers of revenge, and this violent passion
makes not much more havoc in the heart, than in the eyes: Like avarice, they
are insatiable, that which has been pleasing to them, causes their pain, and
their punishments arise from whence their desires did first derive. Envy sins
more by the eyes than by the hands, though she be made to pass for blind, she
looks upon her neighbors happiness with repining, and should she have lost
use of sight, she would have found a remedy for the greatest part of her
torments. Uncleanness Irritamenta sunt vitiorum oculi, duces scelerum, huic
adulterium oculi ministrant, huic domum quam concupiscat.
lights her Torches at the eyes to consume the heart; she would be weak, were
she not assisted by these faithful officers; she undertakes nothing but by
their looks, and before she imployes the hand to write, or the mouth to speak,
she has already made use of the eyes to express her designs. In fine, the
eye is so guilty, as the wise Man finds nothing more pernicious, Nequius oculo
quid est creatum? Ecclesiast. cap. 31.
he wishes to be blind that he might purchase innocence; and he leaves in
dispute, whether Pestilence and War, or the sight, be cause of greater Mischief.

As hearing contends with it for worth, so may it do for wickedness; and it
must be granted that the good and bad which we receive thereby, are equally
considerab^e; it is the sense which is most peculiar to the understanding, and
which Nature and Religion seems to have addicted to the knowledge of the
Highest Truths: Nature makes Auditus cui hominum primo negatus est, huic and
sermonis usu^ ablatus, nec sunt naturaliter surdi ut non iidem sint and muti
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 69.
use thereof to learn sciences; she knows general things only by the ears;
and those who are deaf remain Ignorant much longer than those that are blind.
Religion makes use of it to insinuate faith into the soul, of all our senses
it is the only one which is faithful to her; all the rest withstand faith, and
meet with difficulties which offend them: Hearing is more credulous, and more
rational, its affinity with the understanding, makes it capable of the wonders
of Christianity; and the great Apostle Fides ex auditu. Romans 10.
confesses, that Faith enters the Soul by the ears: Passions themselves are
obedient to it, and these unruly Subjects which countenance the Empire of
reason, obey the Empire of the care, it is by it that Commanders encourage their
Soldiers to Battle, it is by it that Orators oppease incensed people, it is by it
that Philosophers persuade their Disciples; it is by it that Politicians instruct
Princes, and make Conquerours undertake gallant actions; eloquence, which works
such wonders in the world, owes all her might to hearing; she languisheth upon
paper; when by the eyes she glides into the Soul, she loses half her force,
but she bereaves us of our liberty where she insinuates her self by the ears:
and a man must be either stupid or opinionated, if he resist reasons which are
pleasingly conveyed into the understanding by handsome discourse.

Est in aure imo memory locus quem tangeares at Iamur. Plin. l. 11. cap. 45.
For all the praises are given to a sense so requisite to science and Religion,
it cease not to have it is faults; and to bear the characters of sin. It is a
slave to superstition, and error; it makes heretics, as well as true
believers, and it is the part by which the Serpents persuasions entered our first
mothers soul. The poison which is poured in by the ear, is much more
dangerous than that which is taken in by the mouth; and the soul is more
easily corrupted by hearing, than by seeing. All virtues are endangered when
set upon in this place, and there is not one of them, which is not extremely
threatened, when the vice which is it is enemy, will make it come forth by the
part by which it entered; it is by it, that idle discourse undertakes chastity;
it is by it, that error triumphs over truth; it is by it, that calumny
oppresses innocence; it is by it, that blasphemy does spread abroad it is
contagion; it is in fine, by it, that the devil drives out Jesus Christ, and
possesses himself of the Throne which he had raised up in our hearts. So as
it is not without good reason, that the Sepi aures tuas spinis, and linguam
nequam noli audire and ori tuo facito ostia, and seras auribus tuis. Eccles. 28.
wise man counsels us to hedge in our ears with thorns, and carefully to
lock up a gate, by which falsehood, heresy, and impiety do confusedly get into
our souls: And it is not without cause that we declare, that if the whole body
be infected by sin, the ear is the part most dangerously corrupted.

The fourth Discourse.
That the Passions are fickle, or wild.

IF man were a mere spirit, he should have no passions, nor should his rest be
ever troubled by these motions of the sensible soul. Angels Sanoti Angeli and
sieve ira puniunt, and sine miseriae compassione subveniunt, and tamenistarum
nomina passionum consuetudine loquu tion's humana etiam in eos usurpantur,
propter quandam operum similitudinem non pro^ter effect onum (...) mitatem.
Aug. lib 9. de Civit, De^ cap. 5.
which have no commerce with flesh and blood, have one of these changes; if
they desire any thing that is good, they languish not for it; if they punish a
fault, they are not transported with choler; and if they assist us in our
misery, they are not touched with compassion: whence I conclude, that passions
proceed from the souls marriage with the body; and that it is as natural for
a man to hope, and fear, to love and hate, to rejoice, and to be sorry, as to
eat and drink, or to wake and sleep.

Since nature does nothing without a reason, man reapes some advantage by his
passions, and meets with a thousand occasions, wherein Amor est delectatio
cordis per desiderium currens and requiescens per gaudium. August. lib. de
substantia dilectionis. cap. 1. and 2.
he may make good use of them. Desire is the souls course, and she seems to
command this nimble heeled passion, to put her in possession of what she loves.
Hope comes in to the succor of desire, and promises her such good success,
as she resolves to make her way through all difficulties, which oppose her
designs. If hope meet with more opposition then she imagined, she calls in
courage to her aid, which by her valor purchases her the enjoyment of what
she had long wished for. Such passions as are opposite to these, serves the
soul to keep aloof from what she apprehends. Fear is her flight; she does her
utmost to keep her enemy off; though she be timorous, she mingleth her self
with hope to effect her designs; and imployes boldness to overcome such
dangers as threaten her; if her strength be too weak, she falls insensibly into
despair; and giving way to grief, does of necessity become unhappy. Sometimes
she assumes courage in her disasters; solicited by hatred, animated by desire,
and encouraged by despair, she gets the better of the enemy which possesses
her; and finds by experience, that sometimes to be happy, a man must have been
miserable.

These passions have so much affinity with virtue, Irasci peccantiut
corrigatur, contristari pro afflicto ut liberetur, timere periclitantine
pereat, nescio utrum quisquam sana consideratione reprebendat. August. li 9. de
Civit. cap. 9.
as let but never so little care be taken in husbanding them, they may become
virtuous. Fear is serviceable to wisdom; wise men are always timorous; good
success always their apprehension, and prosperity which makes others insolent,
makes Politicians modest; The Tragedian makes Agamemnon, from the ruin of Troy
apprehend the like of Sparta; his victory causes his diffidency, and the Poet,
who will make this Prince a perfect Politician, seems to have grafted his
wisdom only upon fear. Audacity is a natural fortitude, a man must be
courageous to be valiant; this virtue is no less a work of nature, than of
morality; and unless a man's constitution contribute toward his generosity,
Philosophy with all her counsel, will hardly make him seek out an honorable
death. That which is said of Poets, ought to be affirmed of all virtuous men;
as these cannot be famous in their profession, unless they be borne of that
heat which is the soul of Poesy, these cannot be valiant, unless they be born
with that generous heat, which desplseth dangers, and which boasts in the
loss of life, when glory is won thereby. Anger does somewhat resemble justice,
the one and the other of them will punish faults; and if the former be not
better regulated in the revenge which she takes for injuries, it is because she
is blind, and that self-love whereby she is guided, makes her commit excess.
Contristati est is secundum Deum, quo enim secundum Deum tristitia est
poenitentiam ad salutem stabilem operatur. 2. ad Corinth. cap. 7. Vtilis nobis
una re tantum tristitia judicanda est cum hanc vel poenitentia delictorum, vel
desiderio perfection is accenst, vel futurae beatitudinis contemplatione
concipimus. Cassiodor. li. 9. c. 20.
Sorrow and grief are happy servants to repentance; they mixed their tears
together to bewail one and the same sin, and the contrition of a guilty person
is the joint work of nature and grace: As to be faithful, a man must be
rational, so to be penitent, a man must be afflicted; and God will have
passion to conspire with reason in repentance, to the end that the two parts
whereof man is composed may satisfy justice. In fine, all the motions of the
sensitive soul seem so addicted to good, as some of them cannot forgo it is
party; pity is always praiseworthy, and the compassion of another evil,
which she imprints in the heart, is so just, that the very Barbarians cannot
condemn it; the indignation which we conceive for the misery of the good, and
for the prosperity of the wicked, is a natural justice which has not yet met
with a censure rigid enough to blame it. The shame which makes us blush at our
advantages, or our defaults, does look so like modesty, as their Interests are
inseparable; she serves for an ornament to virtue, and for an expiation to sin;
be it that her Father be infamous, or her mother glorious, the daughter is
always equally honorable; and if a man be too blame in having committed sin,
he is to be praised in witnessing his shame, for having committed it.

But let Philosophers be as careful as she pleases in praising of our
passions, they have lost their innocence, since nature has lost her purity.
The justest of them are irregular, and those which seem to side with virtue,
are slaves to sin; their first motions are out of our power; let us take what
care we can to reduce them to their duty; they get on wing without our leave;
they are subjects to whom rebellion is natural, Quemadmodum ratione null lum
animal obtemper at siferum sit. Natura enim eorum est surdasuadenti, i^a non
sequuntur affectus, non audiunt quantalicunque sint. Sense. Ep. 86.
wild beasts which are never tamed, and faithless soldiers which fight
oftener in the behalf of vice, than of virtue. The Saints think themselves
happy, when after much ado, they can overcome one of these domestic Enemies;
their life is not long enough to assubject them totally; and when they think to
have overcome them, they find, that like Anteus in the Fable, they draw
strength from their weakness, and courage from their defeats: there is no
passion in man which does not set upon some virtues; oft-times they conspire
together to fight against them. They reconcile their own differences, that they
may ruin them; and as the Elements use violence upon their qualities, to
preserve nature; these force their inclinations to destroy her. Their peace is
more fatal to us than war; and we know not, that whether they be more to be
dreaded when they adopt themselves to our humors, or when they oppose our
desires. The best of them (the state considered wherein they are put by sin)
are almost always irregular, the most innocent of them seem to be somewhat
criminal; and those which men mix with the virtues, have always some affinity
with vice: the greatest part of their motions are violent, unless they be
reformed to grace; and whatsoever advantage morality may promise unto her self
by them, she finds by her experience, that it is never good sporting with a
wild beast, though it appear never so tame. Natural pity is almost always
unjust; she considers the pain, but not the offense; Misericordia non causam
sed fortunam spectat, lacbrymis nocentissimorum movetur quae si liceret
carcerem effringeret. Senec. 2. de Clement. cap. 5.
she would break open prison, to let murderers loose; and guilty men cease to
be odious to her, if once they become miserable. Indignation is not much more
just than pity; she complains of the prosperity of the wicked, and of the good
man's adversity, only because she knows not that riches and honors are not the
true rewards of virtue; and that shame and poverty are not the true punishments
of sin. She is only severe because she is blind; she would not condemn the
secrets of Gods providence, if she were conversant with the laws of justice,
and o Plures pudore peccandi quam bona voluntate prohibit is abstinent. Senec.
Epist. 83.
mercy. Shame is always mixed with sin; if sin be not the cause thereof, it is
the occasion: And of as many guilty people as seem shameful, there are but few
which do not more fear the dishonor than the offense. It is very hard in the
condition whereunto sin has reduced us, for the passions to be serviceable to
us without grace; since nature is become our punishment, they are become our
executioners; they serve for Ministers to Gods Justice, to revenge his
goodness upon our offenses; they must be subject to charity, if we will reap
any profit by them; and if the greatest part of men's virtues be sins without
faith, the greatest part of their passions are disorders without grace; they
are not to be safely guided by morality without Religion, their unrulinesse
surpasses her address; and as there are certain storms which pass the Pilots
skill, there are revolts in man which exceed reason.

They say that Bees have some shadow of Policy in their Government; they choose
a King whose will they reverence, they fight for his Glory, and show as much
courage in War, as industry in Peace. They suck the juice of flowers without
tarnishing their Colors, they rob Gardens without disaraying them, and with
the same sting wherewith they fight against their enemies, they make their
hives and gather their honey. Rege incolumi men's omnibus una, amisso rupere
fidem. V^g. Georgie.
This handsome order endures no longer then does their Kings life; for as soon
as he is dead they give over working, betake themselves to parties, conspire
one against another, and having no King to keep them within their bounds, they
divide their state. Whilst innocence made reason ruled in Man, the passions
were peaceable, all their motions were regular: anger committed no injustice,
all its Decrees were equitable, and the measure of the offense was always the
rule of punishment; hatred set only upon sin; and love betook himself wholly
to virtue; every passion plotted the public good: but since original
righteousness has forsaken Reason, and that man, being but half himself, has
ceased to be the perfect Image of God, his passions have despised his Empire,
his Subjects have revolted, and losing the respect which he ought to God, he
has lost the authority which he had in his own person.

Profane Philosophy, which saw the effects of a cause, whereof she was
ignorant, sought for a remedy, though without success: She laughed at those,
who would destroy the passions, as knowing that they were natural to men; she
invented some virtues to guide them; and forming unto her self a Continency to
moderate pleasures a fortitude to withstand sorrow, a wisdom to regulate
accidents, and a Justice to decide the differentes between the Body and the
Soul, she thought to have quieted all their disorder, and to have revived
innocence in the world; but when she saw how weak these virtues were, despair
made her arm mutineeres, to suppress one Passion by another, and to oppose
hope to fear, choler to remissness, and sorrow to joy. This remedy proved
worse than the disease; it increased the number of the Rebels Affectus tam m^
minist^i sa^t quam duces, quas numquam ^atio com prime repossi^, n^ parc^ illis
si ^e que (...), ut ^e metum, (...) S^uce. 1. de l^a cap. 9.
whom it would have lessened; and weakened reasons authority, whichit would
have established. All these different means unprofitably employed are
sufficient proofs of our passions Malignity; and after all the means used by
Philosophy, it must be confessed, that the motions of our Soul are disordered by
sin; that to make virtues of them, their nature must be almost totally altered,
and that unassisted by Grace they are more dangerous mischiefs than either
Pestilence or Famine.

One of them is sufficient to destroy a whole Province, a Monarchs anger is the
ruin of a State, and that which causes suites at Law between particular men,
kindles War between Princes. Ambition has changed the face of the world a
hundred times, the Deluge has not made such waste therein, as has the pride
and vain glory of Conquerors; the marks of their Hoc vero quid aliud quis
dixerit quam insaniam, circumferre pericula, and ruere in igno^os, i^atum sine
injuria, occurrentia devastantem and ferarum more occidere qu^m non oderis
Senec. quaest. natural. lib. 5. cap. 18.
g^eatnes are for the most part fatal; they build Towns upon the ruins of
such as they have beaten down: their conquests do often times begin with violence
and injustice; virtue has seldom been the reward of their victory, he who has
been most foolhardy has oft-times been most fortunate; the whole world
dreaded Alexanders ambition, and one only man, has or caused fear in all men.
The desire of glory made him swim in his Enemies blood; this passion was
augmented by good success, victory engaged him in new Battails; the more
fortunate he was, the more was he insolent; had not death stopped the course of
his conquests, he would have made all Nature groan: Asia Europe and Africa
would have had but one and the same Tyrant; and his Subjects ruin would have
been the only proof of his authority. Adams fault never appeared more than in
Alexander; we should not believe that our father aspired to make himself God,
if this his Son had not imitated him; and we should hardly believe that man in
the state of innocence had any proud desires, had not this Prince had insolent
thoughts in the state of sin. The world seemed too little to his ambition, his
Vanity thought Usurpation lawful, and he was so blinded with passion as that
he thought it no the every to plunder a kingdom, or Murder to Defeat an Army.

By all this discourse it is easy to infer, that the passions are rebels which
are partial in their siding with sin, and which are never so much assubjected
to the Soul, but that they are always ready to obviate her Power, and ruin
her authority: They are like the Praetorian Soldiers, who made merry with
their Princes heads, who made and unmade their Sovereignes, only in reference
to their own interest; who gave the Empire to those, who offered most for it,
and who made no election which began not with murder: for these heady giddy
Subjects have no other motion than either their own pleasure or proffit; they
obey not reason, save only when they like her commands, and to reap any profit
by them, they must be won either by threats or promises; they help us, only
in hurting us; they do rather occasion the exercising our virtue, then assist
the practice thereof; and as if they were of the devils humor, they advance
our welfare only, in laboring our loss; their assistance is almost always
pernicious; they must be used as the Poets say Aeolus used the winds; threats
must be used with the orders which we give them; They are like those horses in
the chariot of the sun in Ovid; they must be be roughly dealt withal before
they reduced; and their Nature must be changed, ere their violence be overcome.
Anger turns to fury when not moderated; desire and hope go astray when not
regulated; Audacity grows rash, when not held in; and sorrow turns to despair,
when not sweetened; so as all passions instruct us, that Nature is corrupted by
sin; and that to assubject them to reason, a Man must guide himself by the
motions of Grace.

The fifth Discourse.
That the health of Man is prejudiced by sickness.

AMongst a thousand differences which distinguish Christian Grace from
original righteousness, one of the chiefest is, that the former sanctifies
the Souls only, and the other did sanctify the whole man, and wrought
admirable effects in his body. For in the profession of Christianity, the
senses are yet Subject to the Illusions of the Devil, objects do yet move the
passions; and reason is often surprised by their motions. The Sacraments do not
warrant us from death, and the remedies which Jesus Christ has left unto his
Church do not cure our sicknesses. But in the state of innocence, original
righteousness was a plentiful springhead which dispersed abroad its rivulets
into both the parts which go to the composure of man. For it brought fidelity
to the senses, obedience to the passions, and peace to the Elements; hence it
was, that man preserving his advantages, (...) in hoc corpore mo^tali incipit
^otare. August.
was exempt from sickness and death: The seasons not being yet irregular,
nothing could alter his temper, and his humors being uncorrupted, nothing
could have prejudiced his health: But with the loss of his innocence, he lost
all his privileges and he was no sooner sinful, but he began to be sick.

This is so constant a truth, as that man's life is nothing but a long sickness
which never ends but in death: he is born in sorrow as well as in sin; his
entrance into the world is no less painful, then shameful; if this monster
like the viper, rip up the bowels of his Mother, he himself feels a part of
the pain, which he makes her suffer, and he runs as much danger, as she who
brings him into the world. Therefore it is that Saint Austin says handsomely,
that to be born, is to begin to suffer, and that to live in the body is to
begin to be sick: The disorder of seasons is sufficient to corrupt the best
constitutions, and the Alterations which happen in the world make such
impressions in the Body as trouble the temper thereof. Though Nature be a wise
Mother, that she prepare us for the Summers heat by the moderate warmth of the
spring, and that she fits us for the winters cold by the moistness of Autumn,
yet is the body of man so weak as notwithstanding all these precautions, she
cannot free it from incommodity; Physicians themselves observe, that every
season brings with it its malady: and that ruling over such humors as accord
with them, they never suffer us to enjoy perfect health.

The Elements agree not better than do the seasons, there is always some one
of them which predominates to the prejudice of the rest, they commit outrages
each upon other; and as blood and choler, discharge themselves when over
heated; phlegm and Melancholy do the like when they are corrupted; their good
intelligence is fatal to man; this calm threatens him with a terrible storm,
and he is never nearer sickness, than when in perfectest health; besides these
incommodities which spring from his temper, there are others which proceed from
indigencie, and which oblige him every day to seek for cure, he is daily
tormented with hunger and thirst, ^ames natu^ est ^dam ^rbus, quia Natura sacta
est (...) ^na. August in (...). (...). ^7.
and these are so pressing maladies, as he cannot defer their remedies without
hazarding his life. Natural heat commits spoil in the body which ought to be
repaired. The fire which inanimates us, consumes us, and if it be not furnished
with nourishment to entertain it, it discharges it is fury upon the radical
moisture which preserves us. It Is a lamp that goes out when left without oil;
and a man is so corrupted since sin, as that which we call life, is but a long
death; and that which is termed health, is but a continual sickness. Nature
is become our punishment, every part of our body is bound by the Justice of God
to punish us; so as not needing executioners for the satisfaction thereof, it
finds enough in our selves to revenge itself of us.

The sicknesses wherewith we are afflicted; Sanitas corporis est little quibus
componitur concordia, and ejus agrotatio, little discordia, August.
arise from the mixture of the Elements; though the seasons were not
unseasonable, and though the heavens should have no bad influences, we should
not cease to suffer; our bodily temper suffers for the irregularity of our
souls; and there are some evils turned into nature; insomuch as we cannot live
without them; Thirst is as usual as hunger, this malady, though it be violent,
cease not to be natural; those who are never troubled therewithal, pass
either for Angels, or for Monsters; History ranks it in the number of
Prodigies; and men are more astonished to see a man that did never drink, than
to see a man that did never laugh: yet this so common punishment is so cruel,
as in five or six days it destroys the strongest men, and makes the most
courageous accept of dishonorable conditions. Places which can defend
themselves against force, cannot defend themselves against thirst; and the fire
which consumes the entrails, is of more efficacy, than that which blows up
walls and bulwarks. Watching is not much less unsupportable than thirst.
Tyrants have put malefactors to death by keeping them from sleep. Man must have
recourse to sleep to refresh himself, and must seek to preserve his life in
the image of death. If he neglect this remedy, he languisheth away, and his
very soul which delights in motion, has need of this rest, to reassume it is
vigor. But all these evils are but pastimes or sports, in comparison of these
which are occasioned by our debaucheries. The stone and gout are punishments
which may almost vye with those of the damned, they sieze on the most sensible
parts of the body; had they not their intermissions they would cast men into
despair; and to free themselves from it, the laws of the Ancients ought to be
revived; which permitted the miserable to die.

All the parts of the body has maladies which assail them; there is not any
one which has not some peculiar torments. The eye which is one of the least,
though not of least importancy, is subject to above an hundred several
diseases; the nerves which give them motion, and through which they receive
light, are as capable of obstruction, as those by which the arms and legs are
moved; the smaller they be, the more susceptible they are of pain, and by how
much the parts of the body are the most noble; they seem to be the more
painful. The least hurt in the heart is mortal; and the throne wherein the
soul resides is so frail, as a very vapor is capable to crack it. In fine,
the best Physician, who knew not that a man was sinful, wondered he should be
so miserable; and considering his miseries, confessed he was wholly a disease.
Totus homo totus morbus est.
The soul, which is the bodies guest, is also it is executioner; the ones
agitations trouble the others humors; great men have little health, the great
designs which purchases them so much glory, leaves them but little quiet.
Violent agitations alter the constitutions more than the countenance, more men
dye of anger and grief, than by the hands of the hangman; lovers, and
ambitious men are always in a Fever: the fire which inflames them, consumes
them; and the Physician who deals with their body cannot cure their sickness,
till Philosophy which guides their minds has allayed their passions. The
souls delights are the bodies punishments, and the same meditation which
enlightens the understanding, and heats the will, disorders the temper, and
alters the constitution; thus the whole life of man, is nothing but a vexatious
sickness, his noblest operations serve him for punishments, and he cannot
purchase knowledge but by the loss of his health.

If the maladies be vexatious, the remedies are not more pleasing. Physic
teaches, that the remedies which she furnishes us withal, are but prepared
venomes; she cannot drive out sicknesses, but by poisons; and to cure those
that are sick, she must seek for Antidotes in the bowels of vipers. She is so
unfortunate in her cures, as she cannot assail the disease, without hurting
the party diseased; nor can she strengthen the diseased party without
augmenting the disease. These two maxims which divide the school of physic,
are are equally dangerous: for be it that you will drive away the disease by
it is contrary, or that you will cure nature by it is like, you must either
weaken the sick party Omnis medicina aut Natura amica, aut mali inimica esse
debet. Arist.
whilst you think to destroy his disease, or else increase the disease,
whilst you strengthen the party that is sick: so as the remedies are as
dangerous as displeasing; and we hazard our life as often as we endeavor to
recover health. Hence proceeds the aversions which sick people have to physic;
hence proceeds the Philosophers invectives, against the fear of death, and the
desire of life; which oblige us to endeavor remedies, which are more cruel
than the evils which they promise to cure.

For there is the difference between nature and physic; the former remedies
are pleasing, the others nauseous. Viands which satisfy our hunger are so
conformable to our temperature, as they expel the evil with delight, and
repaires the ruin thereof without pain. Wine appeaseth thirst with so much
contentment, as that drunkards are delighted in the remedy, and wish to be
thirsty, that they may have the contentment of being cured; this sort of drink
is so pleasing to them, as not staying till they have need thereof, they seek
it out merely for pleasures sake; and violate the laws of nature, which has
made it pleasing only because it is necessary. Sleep charms our weariness with
so much of content, as though it be the picture of death, no man does abhor it:
the slothful ground their felicity thereon and those who do most desire to
live, take delight in dying often and long. A man must be sick to have an
aversion of these remedies, and either our health is interessed, or our taste
depraved, when meat displeases us: Remedia null^ sunt tam salutaria quam quae
faciunt dolorem.
but physic is so severe in her operations, as she never undertakes to cure
us, without offending some of oursenses; all her remedies are torments; if she
restore us to health, we must undergo pain ere we come by it; she hurts us to
cure us, nor has she yet found the receipt how to make her potions pleasing:
the sweetest things in her hands, become either dead or bitter, sugar and honey
do distaste us, when prepared by her; and she is so unfortunate in all her
designs, as she weakens her reme^s when she thinks to make them appear
pleasing.

Chyrurgerie, which follows her as her handmaid; out-bids her Mistress for
cruelty; Tyrants are not so cruel as, her officers; she has more instruments
to afflict the sick withal, than hang-men have to torment the guilty: Invenit
nobis Deus remedia periculis pejora, Senec. in Mcdea.
all her cures are effected by fire and iron; she widens wounds to close them,
she cuts off some members, to save the rest of the body; she draws the stone
out of the bladder, with such torture, as seems to equal that of the damned;
and she is either so cruel, or so unfortunate, as she cannot make men whole,
without making them Martyrs; a life accompanied with so much pain, cannot be
very pleasing; health so dearly bought, cannot be much delightful; and a man
must be stupid, if he do not equally apprehend the malady, and the cure.
Abominandum est genus remedii sanitatem debere morbo, Senec* l b. 1. de Ita c.
12.
We see nothing in the world which ought not to cause horror in us. The
simples in our gardens call to mind our sicknesses, the fairest of our flowers
teach us that we either are sick, or may be; those drugs which we fetch from
the furthest Indics, are proofs of our infirmities; our Ancestors world will
not suffice to cure us, we must seek for a new world to find new remedies in;
and if the desire of glory make the ambitious pass over unknown seas; the
desires of health make the sick discover foreign Countries. Who will not
confess that man is sufficiently sinful, since there is no part of his body
which is not threatened with sundry. maladies; and who will not confess that he
is very unfortunate, since all his remedies are punishments, and that he cannot
buy his health, but by the loss of pleasure.

It Is true, that if we more value Gods glory, then our own interest, we shall
find contentment in our pain; for his justice is satisfied by our sickness,
his power appears in our infirmities, and his mercies are seen in our
recoveries. He invents evils to punish the guilty, Omne (...) genus remedii
l^co Deus admo^et, Senec. 1. de ita* cap. 16.
he imployes our sickness to expiate our sins, he makes as good use of a fever
as of death to convert us, and he beats down the pride of Monarchs with
punishments, which taking their name from their weakness, are called
infirmities. His power was admired in Egypt, when he made use of little flies
to overcome Pharaohs obstinacy; men were astonished to see these small animalls
set upon the soldiers of this great Prince, that they wounded them deeply with
weak weapons, and that by their little Trunks (more powerful in the hand of
God, than those of Elephants) they brought all that Monarchs subjects to
despair; they were surprised when grasshoppers made up a body of an Army in his
State; when they spread themselves overall his Provinces, when they laid all
his grounds waste, eat up the ears of corn, and left a fearful so
litarinesse, which threatened the whole Kingdom with an universal Famine. Men
wondered when the frogs forsaking their marish grounds, entered Towns, and
houses; broke through the Corpse du-Guards, threw themselves into Pharaohs
Palace, and passing even to his private Closet, whereunto he had withdrawn
himself, did in their croking voice upbraid unto him his pride and infidelity.
But this so mighty miracle comes short of that which Divine Justice shows in
the sicknesses of the earthly Monarchs, grasshoppers are not so dreadful in
his hands, as are fevers and contagious diseases; and if he appeared adorable
when he revenged himself upon his enemies by flies and frogs, he is no less
the same when he stings the nerves by the Gout; When by a grain of sand he
stops the uritaries; or, when by a vapor which assailes the brains he puts a
period to the designs of the greatest Princes of the world. Grasshoppers are
the works of his hands, he imploys the beautifullest of all constellations to
form them, and he gives them meadows to walk in, and disport themselves, but
sicknesses are the daughters of sin, and mothers of death. Being the spring of
Rebellion, they ought not render obedience to God; and not being the
workmanship of his Power, they ought not to serve his justice; yet he imployes
them to punish the Rebels of his Kingdom; he uses them as State Policies, and
not making use of fire or water, he commands the Fever or the Gout, to set
upon Princes in their Palaces, to mow down their Subjects, and to turn the
most populous Towns, into dreadful deserts; if these faithful Officers do
sometime serve his Justice; they are also sometimes Quosd^ (...) D^ multa
peccare posse (...) i^firmitate corporis ne pec^, ut eis utili^ sit frangi
(...) gu^ribus ad salutem, quam re^nere incolumes ad da^ationem, Hugo lib. 1 de
anima.
serviceable to his mercy; for sicknesses do losen us from the earth, they
bereave us of the use of pleasure, and taking from us the power of doing ill,
they make us forgo the desire thereof; they change the love we bear unto our
body into a holy aversion, they ruin sin whereof they are the effects, and
rendering obedience to Gods designs, they cure the man, by hurting the
Malefactor.

The sixth Discourse.
That the bodies beauty is become perishable and criminal.

A Man must be blind if he value not beauty; her advantages are so visible, as
she is, sure to have the better if her judges have eyes; Beauty is the first
perfection which is seen in any one, and which steals away the heart of the
beholders. She does so powerful forestall the understanding, as we cannot
harbor an ill opinion of a handsome personage; and since we are persuaded that
the works of Nature are perfect, we are apt to believe, that she has enclosed
a fair Soul in a handsome body. ^ulgor bonitatis pulcbritudo, Plato in convi.
It Is therefore that the Platonicks term beauty the luster of Goodness, and
will have her to be the visible Image of an invisible perfection; she has such
power over humane Judgment, as good fortune cannot be expected where there is
no handsomeness. Angels find their contentment in beholding the beauty of
God. Devils think themselves only unfortunate for having lost the hope of
enjoying it, and though it be the cause of their torments, yet is the object of
their desires. This perfection ravisheth the will so readily, as the sight of
her is sufficient to make her be beloved, she oft-times changes hatred into
love, and to make her power appear, she delights to make her Enemies her
Lovers. We have heard of a daughter that fell in love with him that murdered
her Father: the handsome comportment of this Prince blotted all hatred out of
her heart, and the beauty which appeared in his countenance forced her to love
him, whom by nature and reason she was bound to hate. (...) eti^m ^rbaricae
^ver ^tur, and ad ^bilem ^spectum (...) oc^ m^suescit. P^l Jovius hist. lib. 5.
Barbarians bear respect unto her, fair personage^ pass amongst them as
deities, and the lovers of beauty were the first Idolaters.

The command which she exercises over men is so powerful, and so pleasing, as
they are pleased with the loss of their liberty, and contrary to the humor of
slaves, they love their Irons, and cherish their prisons: could Kings use this
art to make themselves be obeyed, they should never know what revolts were, and
all their subjects being their well-wishers, they would be absolute without
violence, rich without imposts, and sa^e without Citadels. Thus when the Son
of God would reign amongst men, he won their hearts rather by his comeliness
then by his power, and he used clemency oftener Specie tu^ and pulthritud^ tua
intend, prospere proced^ and regna, Psalm 44.
then justice to reduce his Enemies to their duty, consecrated beauty in his
person, when he took our Nature upon him; though he assumed the pain of sin, he
would not assume the ugliness thereof, and as there was no ignorance in his
soul, so was there no deformity in his body. There was but one Heretic who
mis-interpreting the words Passiones quidem humanam Christi caruem, contumeliae
in^onestam probavere. Tertul. de carne Christi.
of a Prophet imagined that Jesus Christ was deformed, but tradition upheld by
reason, teaches us that he was beautiful without art, that the Holy Ghost who
formed his body in the Virgins womb would have it adorned with comeliness,
Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum, Psalm. 44.
and that nothing might be wanting to his workmanship, he exceeded men in this
advantage, as well as in all others. His very Types in the old testament were
all comely. Solomon and David, the one of which represented his victories, the
other his Triumphs, were both of them famous for their beauty; Nature seemed as
if she would picture forth in them the Messiah, to satisfy the just desires of
those who could not see him. The Angels took upon them his visage when they
treated with the Prophets; whilst they spoke in his name they would appear in
his form, Abraham saw him in that Glory, wherein he appeared on Mount Tabor,
and numbered this vision amongst the chiefest favors he had received from
Heaven. Jacob had the honor to see him in the person of that Angel which
wrestled with him, before the break of day; David erat rufus and vald^ pulcher,
1 Reg.
the three Children which were thrown into the fiery furnace, saw him amidst
the flames; his presence freed them from fear, they found paradise in the
picture of Hell; and that Angel which bore the visage of Jesus Christ, broke
their Irons in pieces, preserved their vestures, and punished their Enemies. In
fine, Jesus Christ lost not his loveliness till he lost his life, the Luster
of his countenance was not effaced, till by buffetting, his face grew not pale,
till by stripes, and he lost not that Majesty which infused respect into his
Enemies, till the blood which distild from his wounds had made him an object of
compassion and horror.

In fine, beauty is so amiable, as her enemy is odious; all the Monsters
whereby the world receives dishonor, are composed of ugliness: It Is an effect
of sin, which corrupts the workmanship of God, had there been no l Quarti
species (...) similis filio Dei, Daniel.
sinner, there had been no deformed Creature. Grace and beauty were inseparable
in the estate of original righteousness. Nothing was seen in the Terrestiall
paradise which offended the eyes; all things were pleasing there, because all
things there were innocent. There was no deformity known in the world till
after sin; Il-favourednesse is the daughter and the picture of sin, and it is a
piece of injustice to hate the copy, and to love the original.

Albeit these reasons oblige us to reverence beauty where accompanied with
Innocence, yet have we as much and as just cause to fear her, since she is
mingled with impurity, For sin has left nothing in nature uncorrupted; this
Monster is pleased in setting upon the most Glorious works of nature, and
knowing that their chiefest ornament lay in their beauty, has picked out her
more perticularly to discharge it is fury upon. There are none of nature works
now, which have not some notable defaults. Did not love make men blind he could
never make them in love; did he not hide from them their imperfections whom
they love, he should not see so many soldiers fight under his colors; and had
he not taught women the secret how to imbellish themselves, Impurity would have
long since been banished from off the earth. The famousest beauties have their
blemishes, those who are not blind observe their defects; had Helen of Greece
lived in these our days, the Poet who put such an esteem upon her, would be
found to be a liar and a blind man, but say that Nature should make a
Masterpiece indeed, and that Paridoras fable, should prove a true story, her
beauty would notwithstanding be contemptible, since she could not grow old and
keep it, this advantage is so frail, as it cannot long continue, it is so soon
gone, as it rather seems a dream then a truth; let women take what care they
please to preserve it, it will vanish from of their faces, and when they shall
see themselves in a glass, they will have much ado to persuade themselves that
ever they were Te Pulchrum videri non t^a natura, sed oculorum ^ectantium facit
i^firmitas. Boet. lib. 3. de consol*
handsome. All accidents have some power over beauty; Time is as well her
murderer, as her producer, it effaceth all her glory, tarnisheth her roses and
Lillies, and does so alter the Godliest workmanship of nature, as it makes
horror and compassion arise in the same hearts, which it had struck with love
and envy. Momento rapitur, null aque non dies formosum corporis spolium
abstulit, res est forma fugax, Senec. in Hypolit.
It Is not death but old age which triumphs over this perfection in women: if
they grow old they are sure to grow ugly, I ni (...) manus form^ damnosa
senectus. Cumque aliquis dicet fuit haec form^sa do^ebis, and speculum mendax
esse qu^ere tuum. Ovid.
the prolongation of their life diminishes their beauty, and they cannot live
long, but they must see that die which they loved dearer than their lives: In
the state of innocence, old age would not have injured beauty, the food which
repaired nature, maintained the good liking thereof, men lived long, and grew
not old: as death did not put a period to life, neither did oldage weaken it;
the body was as strong at a hundred year old, as at forty. Beauty was then
somewhat durable, time bore respect to this quality, and divine Justice which
found no faults to punish, did not punish women with the fear of old age, or
hard-favourednesse; But now this fear is part of their punishment, they are
compelled to wish to die young, if they will not dye ugly; and thus divided in
their apprehensions, they desire to live, yet fear to grow old.

Flet quoque ut in speculo rugas conspexit aniles, Tyndarys and secum cur sit
bis rapt^ requirit. Ovid. Metam. lib. 15.
Time is not beauties only enemy, the injuries which accompany it wage war
against her, and all the evils which we suffer through sin, assail this frail
perfection. The mil-dew causes defluxions which are prejudicial to her, the
unseasonablenesse of seasons are averse unto her; cold chils her, and keeping
back the blood defaceth the vivacity of her complexion; heat does sunburn her,
and that constellation which makes lillies white, darkens the countenances of
women. Sicknesses do not so soon alter the temper, as they do the tincture; and
the outrages which they commit upon the welfare, or good liking of the body,
are harder to be repaired, than those which they commit upon the constitution;
whole mouths are required to their reparation, after p q Form^ dignitas aut
morbo deflorescit, aut vetustate extinguitur. Cic. lib. 4. Rhetor.
the fever has left them; the color in the cheek is not so soon re-gained as
health. And women as if they did prefer pleasure before profit, are sorry to
see themselves sooner well, than fair; nothing can consolate them for the loss
of a thing held so precious, but the knowledge that it was natures pleasure it
should not be permanent. For her rarest workmanships are of least durance;
there is no beauty constant save that of the stars, and yet they may complain,
that the clouds darken them by night, and the sun by day.

The rainbow is the most beautiful of all Meteors, it shames the Art of
painting, be it either for luster, or for the mixture of colors; it is figure
is so perfect, as the compass cannot imitate it, the greatness thereof is so
vast, as it incompasseth half the world; the waters whereof it is composed
nourish hope in the husbandman, it causes fruitfulness in fields, and warns
men to shun the storms which it threatens. It Is a pledge of the peace which
heaven has made with earth; and though it presage rain to men in general, yet
does it assure the faithful, that the world shall never be drowned again; yet
so rare a marvel lasts but a few moments. One and the same hour sees the
beginning and the end thereof; and the Sun seems to have made it, only to
please itself in the un-making thereof. Lang^scunt folio ^lia pallido, and
gratae capiti deficiunt rosae, ut ^ulgor teneris qui radiat ^osis. Senec in
Hypolit.
The rose amongst flowers is like the rainbow amongst Meteors, her vermillion
out-vies all the beauty of the world. Her odor, naturally as it is, disputes
for precedence with the most pleasing perfumes that Art can compose; the
placing of her leaves, puts painters, who would imitate her, to their wits
ends; yet too boot that she is environed with prickles, and that she seems to
share more in the curse of the earth, than other flowers, her life lasts but
for a few days; the Sun which gave her life, gives her death, and that fire
which enlivens her purple, is extinguished, as soon as lighted. Neither is the
beauty of women of long durance, that luster which bewitcheth men is lost in a
few years, and they are unjust in wishing that men should be constant in their
love, since the object which gives it birth is so subject to alteration.

But this fault in beauty were excusable, since it cures the malady which it
caused, were it not accompanied with another which can admit of no excuse,
neither deserves any pardon. Rara est concordia for^e atque pudicitiae. luvenal.
For beauty is become an enemy to chastity; and since the soul and body are at
ods, these two qualities have much ado to agree. Fair women are seldom
chaste; nature, since corrupted, is turned hypocrite; beauty is no longer a
mark of goodness; she forgoes the soul as soon as she appears upon the body;
and as if perfection were no longer to be found upon earth; a woman cease
oft-times to be chaste, when she begins to be lovely. Nam te deco^ iste quod
optas esse vetat, votoque tuo tuo form^ (...). Ovid. M tam. lib. 1.
That Father in Ovid did witness this very well, who being desired by his
daughter, that he would give her leave to consecrate her virginity to Diana,
replied, that her beauty gainsaid her design; that she was too fair to be
chaste, and that though she should have resolution enough to keep her vow, she
had too many lovers to preserve her chastity: it is very hard for a woman who
delights in causing love in others, not to share therein her self; and that a
woman of an excellent beauty should be ice, since she gives fire to so many
flames; she cannot resolve to hate all those that love her, she cannot be
persuaded, that those who honor her should undo her; what advise soever her
directour gives her, she cannot believe that those who are her slaves, should
be her enemies; nor that those that praise her beauty, would wound her honor.
She thinks that beauty of no power, which has no Martyrs, she believes she
cannot judge of her own charms, but by her servants sighs; that she is
ignorant of her own conquests, if she learn them not from their mouths; and
that there is yet somewhat wanting to her Triumph, if those who have experience
of her cruelty, do not implore her mercy: Flattered by these false persuasions,
she exposes her self to danger, and out of hope of obtaining new victories,
she engages her self in fresh combats; if she be not seduced by vanity, she
is misled by pity; and believes that those who behave themselves so handsomely
in their complaints, suffer real pains; compassion makes her throw open the
doors to love, and under pretense of easing another malady, she forgets her
duty, and betrays her honor.

If she preserves her chastity amidst so many rocks, which threaten her
shipwreck, Fastus inest pulchris sequiturque superbi^ sor^am. Ovid.
she runs great hazard of loosing her humility; her lovers Panegyricks make her
think better of her self, and those praises which men rob God of to give her,
persuade her that she is somewhat of divine. Those who cannot corrupt her by
their idle discourse, seduce her by their adorations; not being able to make
her unchaste, they make her proud; not being able to bereave her of her
chastity, they take from her her modesty; and bring her into a sad condition,
wherein pride is as it were necessary to her for defense of her honesty. She
likes not of common homage, she thinks her self injured if men use not
blasphemy to heighten her beauty; and unless upon cold blood men say what
enamored Poets use to do in raptures, she thinks her self slighted; her
lovers extravagancies, are her Panegyricks; she thinks not that they love,
unless they lose their reason; nor does she judge their passion to be extreme,
unless they commit a thousand follies. She judges of her power by her
injustice, if she does not engage those who serve her in hard and ridiculous
enterprises, she doubts of their fidelity; and because love is a kind of
madness, she will have all her lovers to be either mad, or out of their wits.
It Is not enough for a man to lose his liberty in her service Amor (...)
rationis oblivio. Hieronym. in Ep^stola.
unless he lose his judgment also, more cruel then Tyrants, and more absolute
then Kings, she will have her slaves to be her Martyrs, that they kiss their
fetters, love their sufferings, and listen with respect to their doom of death.
Thus Pride springs from beauty, fair women grow proud, and their insolence
grows to that height, as to ravish men from God; to commit that execrable
attempt on earth, which Lucifer did in Heaven, and to make all creatures adore
rhem.

The first Christian women, who very well knew the misfortune which accompanied
this advantage, did gallantly despise it, they were ashamed to be handsome,
they neglected what our women so much value, they thought it a fault, to
heighten a perfection, which produces lewd desires; the purest amongst them
wished that old age might free them of this domestic enemy, the most zealous
did set upon it in the flower of their youth, and revenged themselves upon
their own countenances, for the unchaste thoughts which they without design had
caused: they never appeared in public unvailed, they Tam sancti viri est
suffundi si virginem viderit, quam sanctae virginis si a viro visa sit. E^usdem
est lidibinis velle videri and videre. Tertul. de Virginibus veland.
sentenced themselves not to see, that they might not be seen, very well
knowing that these two faults proceed from the same principle. They would not
cause love for fear of receiving it; they were so scrupnlous, as they thought
their chastity blemished by men's eyes; that as fruits lose their verdure if once
touched, a woman lost her chastity if once seen; and that since adultery begins
by the eyes, sight was as much to be shunned as touching they remembered, that
their beauty was cause of scandal in Heaven, and interpreting the Scripture
according to the letter, they feared to cause love in men, since they imagined
their mothers had done the like in Angels. In Vestite vos serico probitatis,
byssino sanctitatis, purpura pudi^itiae. Taliter pigmentat^ Deum habebitis
ama^orem. Tertul. de cultu ^oem c^ultimo.
fine, these chaste women did sufficiently witness by their negligence, how much
they undervalued their beauty, for sackcloth was their habit, ashes the powder
with which they perfumed their heads; the white of innocence, and red of
shamefac'tnesse, was the paint they used, modesty did give life to all their
actions; and thus adorned they had Jesus Christ for their lover.

If the example of these famous women cannot reform the disorder of those of
our age, yet ought they at least to think, that beauty is no less dangerous to
those that possess it, than to those that covet it, that it is exposed to
temptations, and environed with scandals, that if it be not the cause of sin,
it is the occasion thereof, and that if it do not form bad desires, it is at
least unfortunate in causing them. This effect is so ordinary to beauty, as the
Fathers of the Church make Stdium placendi per decorem quem naturaliter (...)
invitatorem libidinis non ven^t ex integra conscientia. Tertul. de cultu ^aem.
c. 2.
the contrary pass for a miracle, for if the comeliness of the Virgin Mary
infused good thoughts, if her countenance inspired chaste desires, and if her
eyes the tears whereof did propagate our souls health, did raise men's souls to
God; it was rather an effect of Grace then of Nature, and as her Innocence was a
privilege wherewith the heavens would honor her purity, the sense of piety
which she inspired into men's hearts, was a favor wherewith they would
advantage her beauty. Other saints did not deserve to obtein so much, though
nothing was so precious to them as their chastity, they perceived nevertheless,
that their countenances caused sometimes unchaste thoughts, that flames i^hued
from their eyes, which against their wills set men's hearts on fire, and that
though their bodies were consecrated to Jesus Christ, yet did they not cease to
be pleasing in the eyes of his enemies. Therefore did they revenge the faults
of others upon themselves, they sentenced their mouth to moanes, their eyes to
tears, and their heart to sighs; Pereat corpus quod amari potest oculis quibus
nolo, Ambros.
they did penance for a sin which they never committed; and to the end that
Gods justice might be satisfied they punished the innocent for the guilty, some
of them were so generous, as they pulled out their own eyes not being able to
resolve to keep one part of their body, which without their consent had been
cause of unchastity.

If the beauty of unpolluted souls be so dangerous, we must not wonder, if the
like in lost women be so pernicious, and that the Devil makes use thereof to
corrupt the mightiest men. For women is a fatal Instrument in the Devils
hands, he is never more to be feared then when assisted by this fatal second.
If he undid Adam by Eves cunning, if he made so many wounds with one blow, and
if by one single combat he got so many victories, 'twas because our first
mother held Intelligence with him, if he cannot tire out Job's Adhuc tu
permanes in simplicitate tua, benedic Deo and m^rere. Job cap. 2.
patience by the loss of his goods, and his children, he has recourse to his
wife, speaking through her mouth, he endeavors to make him despair, and to
persuade him under pretense of compassion, to end his unhappy life by an
honorable death, but of all women the handsomest are properest for his
designs: and when a singular beauty serves him for Organ, or Interpreter, he is
almost sure to overcome those he assails. By Dalila's charms he triumphed over
Sampsons c (...) Samson validus and fortis leonem suffoca vit, sed a morem ^um
s^ocare non pot^t, vincula solvit hostium, sed suarum no^ solvit nexu^
cupiditatum, m^sses in c^dit alienas sed unius ipse mulieris accensus igniculo
m^ssem suoe virtutis amisit. Ambros. lib. 1. de David.
strength by the allurements of Bathsheba he engaged David in adultery, and in
murder: by the idle discourse of a handsome stranger, he persuaded the wisest
of all Kings, to offer up incense to the workmanship of his hands; he robbed him
of his wisdom by depriving him of his continency, and to execute so great a
design, he only used the countenance of a Pagan Princess.

But he never appeared more powerful then when he set upon the whole Army of
the Israelites, and when in a moment he made it unchaste, and idolatrous. This
wicked spirit, had to no purpose armed the Midianites against the Jews; all
their endeavors proved vain, though their numbers were greater, and their
soldiers better warriors, they were ever either repulst or beaten; the very
names of Israelites wan battles, the glittering of their Arms routed their
enemies, and the Elements anticipating the valor of these Conquerours, did
most commonly begin the battle. So many bad successes made the Devil have
recourse to his old tricks. He commanded his partners by the mouth of a
faithless Prophet, to set upon those with women, whom he could not overcome by
men; and to make use of beauty where strength was bootlesse. Obeying this his
counsel, they placed before their Battalions a troop of loose women, who
carrying looking glasses, and Idols in their hands, invited the Israelites at
one and the same time, to lose their continence, and to forgo their religion.
This wile was of so great power, that the Army in whose favor the heavens had
done so many miracles, does adore these women, and their idols; they forget
their duty, to obey their love; and renounce their faith to satisfy their lust.

He still uses the same cunning, he corrupts Christians, as he did the
Israelites, and the beauty of women is the smallest temptation, wherewith he
astonished the courage of men. A handsome woman is the Courts plague; after she
has once resolved to bereave hearts, and to have servants, she purchases as
many subjects to the devil, as she deprives Christ Jesus off. After once she
has resolved to hazard the reputation of an honest woman, to purchase the name
of a stately dame; she turns to be a false Diety to which all unchaste people
offer incense, an Idol, which makes more Idolatours, than impiety makes
Libertines; a contagion which being taken in by all the senses, sweeps away
more men than the plague does, consuming fire which heats whatsoever it comes
nigh, and burns all that it touches, a Monster, Quid est spe^iosa mul^er?
Sepulchrum dealbatum: Nisi fuerit casta pudica Pul^ritudo sine his virtutibus
est praecipitium patens, venenum inspicienti^ compositum. Chry sost. in Psalm.
50.
which being the more dangerous by how much the more pleasing, scatters abroad
impurity wheresoever it passes, and which commit murders, and adulteries by
all the parts of it is body. Her looks undo men, the flames which proceed from
her eyes reduce souls to ashes, her words bewitch those that hear them, she
inthrals the heart by the ears, and whosoever does not use Ulysses his harmles
cunning indangers the loss of liberty. Her hair is a net wherein Lions and
Tigers are taken, her strength like that of Sampson, lies in her weakness, she
imployes only these weak arms to overcome the courageous, and makes use only
of these small threads to stop the course of the most unconstant. The lillies
when on her face, lose their purity, and the innocent rose becomes guilty upon
her cheeks: and as the spider makes her poison of the best things, she
composeth the venom wherewith she infects souls, of the fairest flowers.
Modesty and Majesty, which else where defend virtue, do corrupt it in the
person of a handsome woman; and these two advantages which makes her beauty the
more powerful make it also the more dangerous; her very gate is not without
affectation and fault, her studied steps have a certain becomingness which is
fatal to those that behold them; each pace steals a heart from some of her
servants, and doing nothing without design, she either wounds or kills those
indiscreet ones which approach her.

In fine, beauty is so pernicious, as God himself who extracts Grace from sin,
makes use thereof only to punish his Enemies, it is more dreadful in his
hands then thunder, and he has taken more vengeance by women's allurements, then
by the arms of soldiers. He ruined Hamans fortunes by Hesters countenance, the
graceful demeanor which he endued her withal, made Ahasuerus condemn his
Favorite, and the death of this insolent enemy of the Jews is not so much an
effect of Mordecais wisdom, as of his Nieces beauty. God chose out a widow to
slay Holofernes, he obtained two victories over this Conqueror by the means of
one only woman; he took his heart from him by her eyes, and his head by her
hands; he made first use of her beauty, then of her courage, and would have the
Assyrians defeat to begin by love and end by murder. Thus are handsome women
the Ministers of Gods fury, he imploys Hesters and Iudeths as soldiers to
revenge his quarrels, and beauty which causes impurity does oft-times punish
it.

We see no faults in the creature from whence God draws not some advantage; our
weakness is the cause of our penitency, if we cannot alter, we cannot repent;
and if we had the constancy of Angels, we might have the opiniatricy of Devils.
Our offenses serve to humble us, and the proudest spirits cannot think upon
their sins without confusion. Concupiscence, which is one of the originals of
our disorders is one of the foundations of Grace: Adams sin fastens us to Jesus
Christ, and the miseries which we suffer under, make us have recourse to divine
Mercy. Vela caput and mul^er Si ma^er propter fili^s, si soror propter r^tres,
si filia propter pa^res: omnes in te ^tates periclitantur, i^ue armaturam
pudoris; murum sexui tuo strue, qui nec tuo^ emittat oculos uec admittan
lienos. Tertul. de Virginib. veland. cap. 13.
But beauty seems only proper to seduce sinners; if she be not serviceable to
Gods justice, she is serviceable to the Devils malice; and causes Murders,
when she cannot produce Adulteries. Of all the perfections of man, this is the
only one which Jesus Christ would not employ to save souls. He employed the
eloquence of Orators to persuade Infidels, he made use of the doctrine of
Philosophers to convince the ignorant, he uses the power of Kings to reduce
rebels, and he imployes the wisdom of Politicians to govern states, but he
rejects beauty, and judging her to hold Intelligence with his enemy, he never
makes use thereof, but to undo sinners. The beauty of those Virgins which were
consecrated to him converted no Infidels, the innocent allurements of the
Lucia's and Agneses were of no use to the establishment of our Religion; there
modest countenances forbore not to kindle impure flames, and if their
executioners were touched to see their constancy, their beauty set Tyrants
hearts on fire.

Gods beauty is then that which can only securely beloved, it is that, that we
ought to sigh, all other desires are unjust. Whosoever betakes himself to the
beauty of Creatures, revives idolatry, erecting an Altar in his heart, he
offers Sacrifice to the chief Diety which he adores, where he himself is both
the Priest, and Sacrifice. The beauty of the creature ought not to be looked
upon otherwise then as that of a picture which we value, either for the persons
sake whom it represents, or for the painters hand that drew it. He who exceeds
these bounds Commits ungodliness, and who does not elevate his love to the
first and chiefest beauty, of which all others are but weak copies, is either
ignorant or impious. If the beauty of the first Angel have made Apostates, and
if the love which it occasioned in the hearts of those pure spirits, made them
idolators what may we expect from a beauty which being engaged in the flesh,
and in sin produces only wicked desires. Those who have fallen Sero t^amas vi
(...) tam antiqua and tam nova. Con ^ss.
into this disorder must repent themselves with Saint Austin. To repair their
outrages done to th beauty of God, by their infidelity, they must afflict
themselves for having so late known him? And to make amends for their loss of
time, and loss of love, they must labor to love him with more fervencie, and
to serve him with more constancy.

The seventh Discourse.
That the life of man is short and miserable.

It Is strange, yet true, Homo qui medius constit^batur inter Deum and creaturas
dum Deum cessavit amare, incepit ad creaturas omnes per amorem descendere:
quodque in uno Deo inveniebat in creatu^ is quae ^ivit nec invenit. August.
that man having changed his condition has not changed his desires, and that
he wishes the same thing in his state of sin, as he did in his innocence. For
that strong passion which he had for glory, is but the remainder of that just
desire which he had to command over all creatures; his endeavoring to enlarge
the bounds of his Empire tends only to recover what he possessed before his
revolt; the pleasure which he seeks after in all his pastimes, is grounded upon
the remembrance of his former felicity. Those riches which he accumulates with
so much labor, and preserves with so much care, witness his sorrow for being
fallen from his abundance, and the extreme desire which he has to prolong his
life, is a testimony that he as yet aspires after immortallity. Yet has not
life those Charms which made it so amiable, the longest is but short the
sweetest but full of troubles, and the most assured uncertain and doubtful.
For since the soul ceased to be upon good terms with God, the body ceased to
correspond fairly with the Soul. Though they go to the composure of the same
Integrall, they cannot endure one another, their love is mixed with hatred, and
these two lovers have always somewhat of (...) which makes them not agree. The
cords wherewith they are joined together are so weakened, as the least accident
is sufficient to break them; that whereof man is composed may destroy him; the
very things without the which he cannot live, make him die, rest and labor are
equally prejudicial to him: his temper is altered by watching and by sleep,
when either are immoderate, the nourishment which susteines him, suffocates
him, and he fears abundance as much as want; his soul seems as if she were
borrowed, Homo (...) and man ^rentis, frigoris aesius laboris impatiens,
alimenta metu^s sua quorum modo inopia modo copia rumpitur. Odor illi sapor and
cibus, and sine quibus vivere non potest, mortisera sunt. Senec. a^ Marc. c. 11.
and that she is only detained in his body by art: The least accidents do
sever her from it; a vapor does suffocate her; she is choked with a little
phlegm, and blood, which is the seat of life, is oft-time the cause of death;
whithersoever so miserable a creature does convey himself, she receives there
new proofs of his weakness; the change of climates troubles his health, a new
air incommodiates him, cold water hurts his stomach, the Sun which lights him,
scorcheth him* and whatsoever is cause of good unto him, is cause of Evil.

In the State of innocence grace linkt the Soul to the body; death unseconded
by sin could not break the chains; the elements durst not assail him, original
righteousness made them observe respect, they appeased their differences, lest
they might trouble man's temper; fire agreed with water to preserve his health,
and there was as profound a peace in his person as in his state, but since he
forewent his duty, grace abandoned his body to sin, the elements had liberty
given them to war one upon another, man became the scene of their combats, and
after once he revolted from God, he saw all creatures take up arms against him,
Omnis vi^a (...) est, Sense.
sorrow and death set upon him, he was sentenced to live in pain, and die in
sorrow. For the sweetest life bears it is punishment with it. There is no rose
which is not grafted upon a thousand thorns, and how handsome soever the
chains be which link the soul and body together, they are both of them equally
exposed to suffering.

The soul is more capable of sadness, than of joy; though she display her
self to receive in pleasure, yet does she never taste it purely; she weeps
amidst her contentments, she expresses her joy by sighs, and as if she were
not accustomed to great happinesses, she seems to suffer when she receives
them. Though she shut the door upon sorrow, yet suffers she her self to be
easily siezed on by it; though she resist it, she cannot withstand it; Segnius
bomines bona (...) mala sen^ant.
and as if nature had made her more sensible of misery, than of happiness; a
small displeasure is able to make her forget all her former contentments. The
body is not more fortunate than the soul, for it has not many parts which can
taste delight, but it has not any one which is not capable of pain. Pleasures
do enter-shock, and always leave some of our senses in languishment or need;
pains agree in their assailing us, and though they should not come in a crowd,
one alone is sufficient to make it self be felt by all the parts of the body;
their straight union makes their mischiefs common, and if the head suffer, the
tongue complains; the eyes weep, and the heart groans. Thus the happiest life
is miserable, and that moment passes not wherein we are not enforced to bewail
our innocence, and to condemn our sin.

Death comes in to the aid of pain, and by an ingenious piece of cruelty,
agrees with life to augment our misery. For though they appear to be enemies,
they join in our punishment, and join with Gods Justice to revenge God;
Quotidie morimur, aliqua pars vitae demitur, and tunc quoque cum crescimus vita
decrescit. Hunc ipsum quem agi^us diem cum morte divi^mus. Senec. Epist. 24.
we live and die daily; the change which makes us subsist, is deaths taster;
this cruel one siezeth on us by degrees; all the time we have lived is already
gotten by him, and the years which we hope to make use of, are so many titles
which he produces against us. As soon as we begin to live, we begin to die.
Death shares with us in all the moments of our life, it takes unto it self
what is past, because that is certain, and leaves to us only what is to come,
because that is uncertain. So as by a strange misfortune, the increase of our
life is the diminution thereof. The farther we grow from our birth, the nearer
we grow to death: our purchases are mere losses, m and things are so disposed
of since sin, as we cannot count our years without either flattering our
selves, or lying.

It Is perhaps for this reason that the Hebrew, (that holy language which the
blessed shall make use of in heaven) imployes but one and the same word to
express both life and death, with the difference of one only point, to teach
us, that death and life, are divided only by that moment which unites them. In
effect life is nothing but a brittle chain consisting of three links, the
past, the present, and the future; the past, is no more, we retain but a weak
remembrance of it; all the vows we can make will not fetch it back; it is not
void of doubt, whether Gods absolute power, which finds no resistance amongst
his creatures, can gather together the present with that which is past, and
unite these differences of times without destroying their essence. The future
time is not as yet, hope which expects it cannot advance it, and wisdom which
has an eye unto it, cannot dissipate the obscurity thereof; it is less at our
disposal then the time that is past, and for all the vain conjectures which we
may flatter our selves withal, we know not whether it shall come to us, or we
shall go to it; the present time, to say truth is in our power, we are masters
of it; and it is the only thing which we can say we possess, it is the only
part of our life which we are assured of, and who promises himself more is
either ignorant or impious. But this present time is but a moment, and this
difference of time has no parts; time past, and time to come, comprehend whole
ages, but the present consists but in an instant; so as death and life differ
only in a point, and these two which we judge so contrary are entertained by
that moment, which does separate them.

Though I honor this imagination by reason of the gallantry thereof, and that
respect which I bear to the Hebrew Tongue, obliege me to reverence it, yet me
thinks it does not sufficiently express the miseries of life whose alliance
with death is nearer then is thereby represented; death subsists only by life,
and life is only preserved by death: they commence and end together, as soon as
a man begins to live, he begins to die, nature which very well knows that two
moments never subsist together, Commands death to hurry away the one to leave
to life the other that ensues. As she does with moments and hours, so does she
with those years whereof the degrees of our life are composed. Incrementa ipss
si been computes damna sunt. Senec. ad Marc.
She makes our infancy die to give life to our Boyish age; she takes away a
child to substitute a man, and robs us of our youth, to make old age succeed.
Thus if we advance in life it is by the favor of death, and we enjoy our last
years by the loss of the former: who will not praise death, since it makes us
live, and who will not blame life since it makes us die? who will not confess,
that sin is very cruel since it accords these two enemies to our undoing? and
that for our punishment it has turned a happy and immortal life, into an
unfortunate and perishable one.

If this discourse be thought to be too finely spun, yet can it not Infantiam
amisimus, deinde pueritiam* deinde adolescentiam: quicquid transiit temporis
(...) Senec. Epist. 24.
be denied, that man's life is shortened since his offense, and if a strong man
has made a shift to tumble in the world a hundred years, he is a wonder to
those that see him, History records his name with respect, posterity admires
him; and if he pass not for a miracle he does at least for a prodigy. Hoc
quod viv^s proxim^m nihilo est et tamen ob (...) nostram (...). Senec.
Every gift of life is so short, as we may easily judge we have divided it
only to deceive our selves. Our infancy endures but seven years; when our
tongue gets its liberty, and our understanding is formed, we enter into our
Bovish age which is of no longer continuance; it finds its death in our
adolescence, and as soon as down appears upon a man's face, he changes
quality. This age which is esteemed the pleasantest of man's life, and which I
think the most dangerous, lasts no longer than does his Boyish-age, it ends
when youth begins, which lasts somewhat longer than the other parts of life
which did precede it, it begins at Thirty years of age, and ends not till
sixty, old age serves it for a Sepulcher, and when the head is covered with
snow, it is time to prepare for death. For this age is shortest of all the rest,
if it have any hope, it is ill grounded, and the sicknesses wherewith it is
assailed, are so many summons to the grave. If man arrive at that extremity of
the age we term decrepit, he languisheth in pain, he calls in death to his
aid, and the sorrows he suffers makes him think life tedious. Punctum est quod
vivimus, and adhuc puncto minus, sed hoc minimum specie quadam longioris spatii
natura divisit, aliud ex hoc infantiam fecit, aliud adolescentiam, aliud
senectutem. In quam angusto quot gradus posuit. Senec. Epist. 49.
But for all this the longest life is but composd of moments, which multiplied
by days and months produce some years; we divide it to make it seem the
longer, and persuade our selves that by giving it several names we add
somewhat to the durance thereof. We imitate the vanity of Princes who divide
the earth to aggrandise it; and part it into provinces to satisfy their
ambition. Mathematitians teach us, that the earth compared to the heavens is
but a point, they ground their operation upon this maxim, and that art which
teaches us to measure hours by the Sun-diall, draws her certainty from this
truth. Yet Princes divide this point into kingdoms; they think to extend the
whole by multiplying the parts thereof, and that they do enlarge the world by
dividing it into Provinces, but let their ambition do its utmost, let it make
fights by Sea and land, let it cover the one with Houses the other with Ships,
they dispute but for a point a p^nctum; and this place which they have chosen
for the Theater of their vain glory, and the Subject of their differences is
but an indivisible atome. The bounders which we prescribe to kingdoms, are as
well the proofs of our weakness as of our pride. O quam ridiculi sunt
mortalium termini ultra Istrum Dacu^ non ex^at, Parthis o^stet Euphrates,
Rhenus German^ae modum faciat, Pirenae is, Galli^s and Hispani^ dividat. Senec.
q^st. Natural. lib. 1. praefat.
The Alps and Pyrenean mountains which part France from Italy, and Spain, are
lines which nature has drawn upon the earth to divide it, not to aggrandise or
enlarge it; the Seas which seem to us vast, and the Rivers which we think so
deep are less considerable in the world, then the veins are in the body; and
whatsoever it be that feeds the vain glory of Conquerours, it is not so great
as the least of those Stars which appear to us to be so little. Si quis
^ormicis de^ intellectum hominis nonne and ill^ un^m a^m in m^ltas Provincias
divident. Idem i^id.
If pismires had as much understanding as men, they would give as specious
n^mes to their little caverns, since they have a shadow of policy, they would
divide their States into provinces; and by an Ambition equal to ours, they
would frame a little world, of a foot of earth; what Monarchs make of the
world, men make the like of life; they distinguish the ages thereof to flatter
themselves, they think to keep off death, by extending life, and that they
have a great way to go, when they have yet to pass through their adolescence,
and their old age. They consider not, that the longest life is equal to the
shortest, if it be compared to eternity; and that the condition of children is
no better then that of old men, if it be compared with the worlds lasting. The
time we live is almost nothing, and Nature has left us but a moment to merit
eternity; we can add nothing thereunto by all our cunning, but as if we were
more ingenious to work our selves evil then good, we have a thousand ways to
shorten it, and the longest life becomes short through the bad use, we make
thereof. We are prodigal of time, and greedy of good: We think we give nothing
to our friends when we give them whole days, and we consider not that we
advance death by consuming our time. We heap up riches and scatter abroad Nemo
invenitur qui p^ uni^m suam dividere v^lit: vitam unusquisque quam multis
distribuit. Sense. de brevit. vitae.
years, we are straight handed in things, the profession whereof is praise
worthy, and prodigal of those whereof the avarice is laudable. The time which
we have lived for our selves makes the least part of our life, and when we
shall have atteined to sixty years of age, it is found that we have lost more
then the half of it. If we will cut off what time we have allowed to company
keeping, what we have employed in visits, what consumed in pastimes, and what
employed in other men's affairs, we shall find the number of our years to be
much fewer then we account them to be.

Nature, All whose examples are instructions, teaches us to husband our time
well* she is rather prodigal then liberal of her favors; she has sewed the
stars confusedly in the firmament, and though they be the most beautiful parts
of the Universe, she would not have them to own their worth for their raritie.
Rivers flow profusively, their spring heads are not dried up, and though they
water never so much ground they grow not dry. The earth is always fertile,
there is no part of it which produces not somewhat, and if you will except
rocks which seems to be the bones of this great body, her muscles and her
veins abound in milk which nourishes her children. But this mother which is
so liberal in her productions, is covetous of time; she gives it us by measure
to make us value it the more, she spins it out drop by drop; the parts thereof
succeed one another, and continue not together, she never gives us one moment
but she takes another from us; she takes from us what is past when she gives
what is present; and she threatens to take the present time from us, when she
promises us the future. Of all the liberalities which she has used since the
beginning of the world she was never profuse of time, and Simul ad temporis
^acturam ventum est, profusissimi sumus in eo cujus unius honesta avaritia est.
Senec. de brevit. vitae c. 3
this her avarice teaches us that time is the most precious of all her gifts.
Let us learn of so wise a Mistress to Husband our years, let us by our wisdom
prolong our life, and let us not part with so much time for our sports, and our
affairs, but that we reserve the greatest part thereof for our welfare. Thus
shall we have no occasion to complain of the shortness of our life, and though
it be composed but of moments, we shall find, that if well employed 'twill
suffice to purchase eternity.

The eighth Discourse.
That death is the punishment of sin.

OF all the pains which sin has procured us, death is the most cruel and the
most common; all others have their remedies, and self-love teaches us how to
shun them; we by our industry and labor overcome the earths sterility. We
fence our selves from the shame of our nakedness by the means of our clothes;
we save our selves from the injury of the air, and unseasonablenesse of
weather by the commodiousnesse of buildings; physic furnishes us with
remedies against sickness, and reformeth our temper by the government which it
prescribes us; Arts are invented only to free us from the miseries of life;
and the greatest part of Artificers labor only to fence men from the
punishment of sin. But death is a punishment as rigorous, as inevitable; humane
wit has not yet been able to free man from it. All her care cannot make a man
live a hundred years; our first fathers lived longer, and the heavens which
would people the earth by their means, prolonged their life to allow them
leisure for it: but they died after some hundred years, and the oldest amongst
them could not attain to a thousand years.

The rigor of this punishment does equal it is necessity, for death is deaf
to pity, tears cannot appease it, and whatsoever causes either respect or
pity in us, cannot stay the fury thereof. It enters Princes Palaces, Non
mise^etur mors (...) non re^ eretur divitias, non sapienti^ (...) non aetati
denique parcit, nisi quod seni^s est in (...), ^uvenibus vero in ins^is. Bern.
(...) Sermon.
as well as shepherds cottages; it knaps in two the Scepters of Kings with as
much insolency as the shepherds crook; it keeps no other law than what is
prescribed unto it by divine Justice; it siezeth on the son before the father,
the daughter before the mother; sets upon Infants in the cradle, or Monarchs in
their Thrones, and on Judges on their Tribunalls. There is no sanctuary against
it is fury, and those who can pardon the condemned cannot obtain the like favor
from death. There are many prodigies in the world whereat we wonder, and there
is nothing so strange, whereof there has not been some example which
facilitates our belief* there be some whole entire Provinces where the
Inhabitants li^e so happily, as that they are never troubled with sickness;
there are some so auspicious Climates, as that in them the plague does never
mow down men, where the ground is not made sterill through ^amine; and whereas
thunder never falls upon the guilty head: France cannot nourish Monsters, nor
are her houses at any time shaken with earthquakes. Some men are seen to grow
old, yet not grow gray; and women who preserve their comeliness in their age,
and lose it not but with loss of life. Italy has mountains whose entrails
are full of fire, and their heads covered with snow, as if nature took delight
in according these two contraries; and by ending their differences to make her
power appear. But how fantastical soever this mother has pleased to show her
self, what ever diversity she has put in her workmanships to delight us, and
what ever miracles she has wrought to astonish us, she could never free man
from death. The devil who promised us immortallity to engage us in
disobedience, could not make good his word, Didicitque Achilles, and D^s ^ates
mori S^n. (...) ^ade
and the law which binds us to die, is too general to admit of any
dispensation, or exception. When God himself became man, he became mortal,
and taking our nature upon him, he would not exempt himself from death. All
Gods friends have born this punishment; the justest have oft-times lived the
shortest life, and death to astonish others has made examples of them, if some
have been rapt up to Paradise, that favor did not bereave death of his rights,
for after having lived a long time with Angels, they shall descend on earth
again to die there with men.

This rigor would be pleasing were it not accompanied with circumstances which
make it unsupportable, but death assumes fearful shapes to affrighten us, he
is not content to part our souls from our bodies, to break in two the chains
which did unite them, and to destroy Gods chiefest workmanship, but to satisfy
his cruelty, and tire our patience, he assumes a thousand frightfull shapes,
Tres sunt (...) mortis, ca^us infirmitas, senectus Casus dubia; infirmitas
gravia; senectu^ certa denuntiat. Casus nuntiat mo t^m latentem; infirmitas
apparentem; senectus praesentem. H^ quot mortium form^. Hugo de cl^ustro
an^mae, lib 2.
and leaves marks of his fury in the persons of the dead which terrify the
living. He appears hideous even in the beautifullest visage that ever was; he
shrinks up the nerves, hollows the eyes, defaceth the complexion, alters the
lineaments, and turns a miraculous beauty into a dreadful Monster. Sometimes he
burns the bowels by the scorching heat of a fever, sometimes swells up the body
by a long continued dropsy, sometimes he makes an anatomy, or skeleton thereof,
by an irksome consumption, sometimes forms strange characters in the lungs or
brain, sometimes he covers the face over with an ulcer, and changes the Throne
of beauty into the Seat of deformity.

Violent deaths are yet more uncoucht than such as are natural; they are not
to be beheld without terror, and those who have courage enough to tolerate the
gout or stone, have not constancy enough to endure the torture of fire* or
rack; it is therefore that it is said, that our father Adam knew not the
heinousness of his sin, till he saw the picture of death in Abels face; the
loss of grace, Gods anger, the Angels indignation, his banishment from
Paradise, the creatures revolt, the alteration of seasons, warring of Elements,
nor yet the insurrection of the body against the soul, were not sufficient to
make known unto him the exorbitancy of his sin, nor the injustice of his
disobedience: but when he saw his son want motion, his eyes want light, when he
heard no words proceed from his mouth, saw no color in his face, nor felt no
motion of his heart, he thought his sin was very great since it deserved so
sore a punishment.

To say truth, Stipendium peccati mors. Primegen^ta peccati. Paul.
death is the image of sin, this father makes himself seen in his daughter,
his ugliness is seen in his production, and there needs no more to acknowledge
the misery of a sinner, than to consider the aspect of a dead man. Those pale
lips, those sunk eyes, those hollowed cheeks, and that corruption which always
accompanies stench, is the shadow of a soul which mortal sin has bereaved of
innocence and grace. All teaches us that we are criminal, and that the evils
which we endure, are as well the portraitures of our punishments, as of our
offenses. The rebellion which we meet withal in the Elements, and creatures is
the punishment of our disobedience; the irregularity of the seasons is a sign
of the disorder of our passions; the blinding of our eyes proves the like in
our understanding, and the sicknesses which our bodies suffer under, are the
effects of our souls infirmity: but of all the punishments wherewith we are
afflicted, death is the only true copy of sin, and in this copy it is that we
must observe the horror of the original.

To discover all his rigours, we must examine the term of our sentence, we
must consider what punishments he condemned us unto, and observe with how many
evils he threatens us. In quacunque die comederis ex eo, morte morie^s. Genes.
2.
The first is to die the same day that we have sinned, and to bear the
punishment as soon as we have committed the offense. Few are aware of this
punishment, and though it be severe enough, we suffer it, without being
sensible of it, or complaining; we persuade our selves, that life and death
cannot agree in our punishment, and that God himself is not powerful enough to
make two so contrary things serve his justice: but notwithstanding it is true,
that we die as soon as we are born, that death assailes us as soon as we are
surprised by sin, and that we bear Adams punishment as soon as we contract his
offense. For death holds so good intelligence with life, as these do equally
part our years; we perish for our preservation; as soon as we enter into our
boys estate, we forgo infancy, we divide every hour of the day between death
and life, Quare a seen, ubi pueritia, ubi infantia, ubi ann^, ubi menses* beu
periere. Ad Mart. Sen.
and we neither conceive the heinousness of our fault, nor the greatness of
our punishment, if we think that that death, which puts an end unto our life,
is our only one, because it is our last. We die every moment, we lose the
years which we number; and part of our being glides away with them, we are but
half our selves; all of us that is past is deaths purchase; and the youth
which has left us is a loss which we cannot repair. That complexion, the
freshness whereof was more lively than that of the rose, that whiteness which
shamed the lilly, that luster which sparckled in the eyes, that Majesty which
appeared upon the forehead, those pearls which showed themselves within the
currall of the lips, and all those ornaments which nature had united in a
handsome face to make thereof her chiefest workmanship; do they not serve for a
prey to death, and who has no longer these advantages are they not obliged to
confess that they have lost the best part of themselves? the destinies end
their work in silence, Ut facilius obrepat mors sub i^ so nomine vitae latet,
agunt opus suum fata nobis sensum nostrae necis auferunt. Senec. ad Martiam.
death gives blows which hurt not, he mingles himself so pleasingly with life,
as that he is received insensibly, and under hope of living, men take a kind
of pleasure in dying.

The second punishment which our decree brings, is that in not expressing
what kind of death we shall die, we are obliged to fear all sorts of death.
There is nothing more certain than this punishment; neither is there any thing
more secret. Every one knows he must die, every day affords us proofs and
examples of it; our friends and enemies confirm this truth, no man is so
ignorant, or vainglorious as to doubt it; the sepulchers of Kings are
faithful witnesses thereof, and those heads for which the lives of a whole
Nation are exposed, make us see that death spares no body; but the manner
thereof is as unknown, as the hour is uncertain. The stars do not show the
particulars thereof, and unless the heavens reveal it, the devil cannot
foretell it to those that serve him; our decree pitcheth not upon any one, that
we may stand in fear of all; and after the example of Princes which have ended
their lives by deaths, from which their qualities ought to have warranted them,
we may justly apprehend all. It may be 'twill be natural, it may be violent;
it may be 'twill sieze on us in war, it may be in peace, it may be 'twill be
short and cruel, it may be less cruel, but languishing; the Judge which has
condemned us, has not been pleased to express himself therein, to the end,
that the fear of death might be a severer punishment unto us, then death it
self; it may suffice us to know that he is incensed, and that we may justly
expect from his just anger whatsoever death our sin deserves. The truth is we
can suffer but one; the weakness of our constitution does not permit both the
waters to drown us, the fire to burn us, and the wild beasts to devour us,
but the darkness of our decree obliges us to fear all these punishments, Erge
tu i^ tantis erroribu^ es ut existimes Deos mortium signi^ praemittere, and
quidquam in terris ta^ magnum esse ut qu^ perire mundus sciat. Senec. lib. 1.
Quaest. Natural. cap. 1.
and there is no Monarch whose greatness can exempt him from so just a fear;
the plague has not so spared our most pious Kings, and the valiantest among
them, has been murdered amidst the triumph which he prepared for his dearest
wife. A clap of thunder bruiseth the pride of crowned heads; poison is mingled
in their drink, and violent death does but too often befall Sovereigns. Who ought
then to stand in fear, when he shall read a decree which threatens every guilty
person with a hundred thousand deaths? and who ought not to dread a Judge, who
conceals the condition of our punishment, only to make us reverence his power,
and have recourse unto his clemency?

The Omnibus est eadem lethi via: non tamen unus. Est vitae (...) exitiique
^odus. Cor. Gall.
third punishment is not less severe then are the rest; for though we know not
what sort of death we shall die, yet we know we shall be reduced to ashes, and
that divine Justice following us even into the grave, will war upon us after
death; it treats us like those notorious Malefactors, who find not the end
of their punishment in the end of their lives; they are degraded, to make them
lose their honor, their children are prosecuted, to make them lose their
posterity; their bodies are burned, that their ashes may be scattered in the
wind; their houses are beaten down, to ruinate their workmanship; and nothing
is left in any part that did belong unto them, but characters of their faults,
and of their Princes anger. Thus does our supreme Judge deal with guilty man;
he drives him out of the terrestiall paradise, and banisheth him into the
world; he threatens the place of his exile to be totally consumed with fire,
for having received this guilty person; he confiscates all his goods, takes
from him all the honorable marks of his greatness, and reduces him to the
condition of beasts, who did pretend to the glory of Angels; he makes all his
subjects despise his authority, he makes his slaves either Rebels, or Tyrants,
and after so many punishments, he shortens his shameful life, by some
tragical end. But all these punishments leaving yet some remainder of the
guilty person, they pursue him into his sepulcher; he commands the worms to
devour him, and what escapes their fury, he reduces into dust: you shall see
dreadful marks of the execution (...) Pulvis es and in pulverem re^rteris.
Genesis 2
of this decree in the stateliest monuments of our Kings, descend into the most
magnificent Ma^soleums, you will find nothing there but ashes: the earth
covers the pride of Conquerours, and of all these Monarchs greatness,
wherewith their subjects in their life were astonished, there remains nothing
after death, but a little dust.

A man must be a Saint to be exempt from this punishment, God affords not this
favor save to those that serve him unworthily; he preserves their bodies in
the sepulcher, he guards their precious relics in the bosom of the earth, the
waters cannot corrupt them, nor the flames devour them; being innocent, he will
not deal with them as guilty, death spares their body after having separated it
from their soul, they seem to rest in their graves, to repose themselves after
their labor, and to expect with joy that dreadful day which all the guilty do
apprehend. Death then is the punishment of our sin, it is the workmanship
thereof, we have procured it unto our selves by our disobedience, God has
ordained it by his justice, and Jesus Christ, who draws good out of our evil,
has made a sacrifice of it for our salvation.

The ninth Discourse.
What advantages we may draw from death, by the means of Grace.

THough death be the first production of sin, and that the malice and deformed
lothsomnesse of the Father appear in Sons visage, some Philosophers have gone
about to make apologies for death, and after having made use of their reason in
the defense thereof, they have employed their cunning in praising it. Being
ignorant of the Lex est non poena perire. Senec.
first man's fault, they would have death to be a law, and not a punishment;
they have excused his rigor by his necessity, and have gone about to persuade
us, that he was pleasing, because necessary. All things in nature perish, this
mother has brought forth nothing which she has not sentenced to die, nothing
is immortal, and few things durable: fountains grow dry, and their
spring-heads are either lost, orstrayed out of the channel; the mountains give
way to the violence of floods, the sea advances and wins upon the earth, whole
isles have sunk into the earth, we see lakes now where our Ancestors have
seen Towns, and husbandmen plough up fields, where Pilots have steerd their
ships; The Change which preserves Nature is a kind of death; nature subsists
only by alteration, were it not, Ita est nihil perpetuum, pauca di^turn* sunt,
aliud al o modo fragile est: rerum exitus variantur: caeterum quidquid coepit,
and (...). Senec. ad Polyb. in initio.
for change she would utterly perish; kingdoms (which apprehend nothing like
vicissitude) cannot shun it; as often as they lose their Princes, they hazard the
loss of their liberty, they grow jealous of all their neighbors, and ambition
is so perfidious as their allies may become their enemies; all those great
Colossuses which past for miracles in their age, their subsistence depends now
only upon paper; Time has made them know, that all the workmanship of man is
perishable, and that frail hands can build nothing which is eternal. In fine,
the world it self is not exempt from death; the deluge wherewith it was
drowned, and the fire wherewith it shall be consumed, teach us that it may
perish; the Stars which never are at a stay, are threatened one day to lose
their influences and their light, the same hand which has seated them in the
firmament, will one day pull them from thence; and though Aristotle imagines
the heavens to be incorruptible, Jesus Christ assures us, that they shall
perish together with the world. Wherefore then do we complain of death, since
he spares not the Stars, and wherefore do we wish, that our houses may never
have an end, since the world cannot escape the fall which threatens it.

Toll istam pompam sub qua lates and stultos territas: mors est quam nuper
seruus meus quam ancilla contempsit. Sen. Epist. 24.
Death is not so cruel as men imagine, the fear which we have thereof, is
rather an effect of opinion then of Nature; if we were less wise, we should be
more courageous; we augment our evil by thinking too often of it; the weapons
wherewith we endeavor to withstand this enemy serve only to make him the more
redoubted; a Philosopher apprehends him more then does an ignorant person; and
all the constancy of the stoics cannot equal the stupidity of a country
clown. These silly people are easily comforted; they look after no privileges,
which their Ancestors have not enjoyed, they prepare for death when they see
their friends die; and having no plots which may fasten them to the world, they
are not troubled to be interrupted therein by their death. All men seem to
conspire to be cause of astonishment to themselves, and that it fares with
them, as in the route of an Army, where those that ran away, cause fear in
those that fight. Every particular man frames unto himself an Idea of death,
and he who can make it appear the most hideous, passes for the ablest man.
Sciences which ought to encourage us, do intimidate us; and there is not any
one who does not add somewhat to the image of this Monster, to increase his
ugliness and our apprehension. Painters represent him as a ghastly skeleton
bearing a coffin upon his shoulders, and a sith in his hands to mow down the
whole earth. Poets (whose fictions are more pleasing then those of painters) do
give him arrows, each of which being shot does wound a heart; physicians
decipher him as the enemy of nature, and to no end seek for remedies against
his wounds. Philosophers who boast k Mors contemni d^bet mag^s quam solet:
multa enim de ill^ credimus: ^ultorum ingeniis certatum est ad r^gendam ejus
infamiam. Sen. Epist. 82.
that they know him, that they may withstand him, do astonish their disciples
by the number of their reasons, and persuade them that the Monster which they
assail is very terrible, since so many preparations are required to overcome
him. Yet experience teaches us that he takes upon himself pleasing forms to
reclaim us; that he glides so pleasingly into the heart, as those whom he
wounds, feel him not; he set upon Plato sleeping, and it was hard to discern
sleep from death in this Philosopher; one of the Crassuses died laughing, and
the Romans ceased to fear death, seeing it so amiable upon his face: Chilon was
choked with joy; his sons victory was as fatal to him, as to the enemies of
the State; and whilst men sought for Laurel to crown the Conqueror; others
sought for Capres to put upon his fathers head. Clydemus died not less
pleasingly, since the praises which Greece gave him, were the cause of his
death, and that he lost his life amidst his Triumph.

He also since the corruption of our nature makes up a part of our selves. Non
morieris quia agrotas sed quia vivis. Sen. Epist. 58.
He is as well an effect of our temper, as of a fever; and as the agreement of
the Elements makes us live, their disagreement makes us die. We carry the
principles of death about us, and from once that original righteousness
ceased to appease the differences between those parts whereof we are composed
we began to die. It is not necessary that the world disorder it self, to
bereave us of our lives; though the seasons should not be put out of their
pace, we should not cease to perish. And if death be to be feared, we must
resolve to fear life. There are some people who apprehend any thing that
happens of disorder in the world, and who grow pale as often as they see rivers
overflow their banks, as often as they hear thunder, or see earthquakes: They
think that every clap of thunder comes in pursuit of them, and that the sea
exceeds not her bounds but to drown them on the earth; but the causes of our
death are much less violent, and more natural. For the earth should still
stand stable under our feet, O^e de^ntem and oblitum fragilitatis tuae tuae si
tunc mortem times cum tonat. Sen. lib. 2. Quaest. Natural. cap. ultim^.
though the thunder should never roar over our heads, and though the sea should
never exceed her bounds, the elements which we bear about us would
notwithstanding condemn us to death. Death is so a punishment, as it is also a
consequence of our constitution. Whatsoever is composed of contrarieties can
not subsist without miracle; and when the contrary parties do no longer agree,
their division must be the ruin of what they compose. Man's immortality in the
state of innocence, was not an effect of nature; he lost this privilege as
soon as he lost his righteousness, and experience taught him, that nature
without grace could not keep him from death. Haec omnia elementa quibus mundus
administratur tam causa vivendi sunt quam viae mortis. Senec. Epist. 117.
He should then be unjust if he should complain of a misfortune which is in
some sort natural unto him, and he might justly be accused of too much nicety,
if he should not patiently endure a punishment, which he could not escape
without a kind of Miracle.

But I dare add, that death is rather a favor, than a punishment; and that in
the estate whereinto sin has reduced man, it is not so much a mark of justice,
as of mercy: the evils which we undergo considered, to live eternally, would be
eternal misery; earth would become hell, and the continuance of our torments
would make us wish death; which is not dreadful save to those abused souls
which think themselves happy. The miserable desire it; and as death to one who
lives contentedly is a punishment, so is life to him who lives discontentedly.
Cupidum mortis ut lu^ret delictum vetuit mori, Tertul.
Cain desired to die, had not the heavens prolonged his life to punish his
parricide; he had prevented Lamechs cruelty, and after having been his brothers
murderer, he would have been his own hangman. Poets who cloak truths under
fables, have not without reason fained nature to have invented death, to oblige
her children; for seeing that their offense had incensed heaven, that their
life became a misery, that fortune intrencht upon their goods, calumny upon
their innocence, and sickness upon their health; that the fever burnt up their
entrails by unsupportable heat, that the gout stung their nerves, and that they
lived not but in fear and sorrow, she broke the cords wherewith the soul was
fastened to the body, and ended their lives to shorten their miseries.

To leave fables to Infidels; is it not a constant truth amongst Christians,
that life would be an eternal punishment, did not death come in to the succor
of old age, Quid aliud ess^t homini vitiato aeterna vit quam aetern^ mise^iae.
to deliver us from it? and that we should pray to go out of the world, if we
were condemned to live there, after we had lost the use of our members by the
palsy, and were grown blind, and deaf. Hell is only more cruel than earth,
for that death is banished thence; if the pains of the damned could have an end;
they should los^ the greatest part of their rigor, and those miserable ones
would find some ease in their sufferings, if after many ages they were assured
to die: nothing makes them despair, but that eternity of their punishment; and
nothing does so much comfort men as the shortness of their tortures. Tyrants
who unjustly endeavor to imitate God in justice, complain that death freed
their enemies from their indignation; and that by assisting the miserable, it
hindered their designs: for they very well knew, that he knows not how to
revenge himself of his enemy, who puts him suddenly to death; and that those
who will taste the pleasure of revenge, never condemn a guilty man to die till
he be re-possessed of their favor. In fine, there are few who owe not thanks
to death. Perimat tyrann^ lenis, in regno meo mors impetratur. Senec. in
Thyeste.
Those who fear him in prosperity, invoke him in adversity; those who shun him
in opulency, seek him out in poverty; and those who list not to know his name
in health, call upon him in sickness. He is the only cure of the incurable,
the assured succor of the afflicted, the desire and hope of the miserable; and
of as many as implore his succor, there are none more obliged unto him, than
those whose miseries and desires he preveneth.

Though these thoughts may seem uncouth to those who love life, they cease not
to be approved of by Christianity; and to pass for truth amongst the
faithful. If death be rigorous because he is the punishment of sin, he is
pleasing because he is the child of the Cross; he has changed nature, since
he was consecrated in the Person of Jesus Christ; he has forgone those
dreadful names which caused terror, to assume those pleasing ones which bring
consolation. He is only asleep which charms our disquiets, a passage which
leads us unto life, a happy shipwreck which throws us into the haven, an enemy
which takes us out of prison, a Tyrant which breaks our chains, and a son of
sin which furnishes us with weapons wherewithal, to fight with, and to
overcome his Father. In the state of innocence death was a punishment,
wherewith divine Justice did threaten man; in the state of sin, it was a
chastisement, Mors quae in lege Naturae erat poe^a peccati, sacta est in lege
gratiae hostia pro peccato. August.
wherewith she did punish the faulty; and in the state of grace, it is a
sacrifice, which she requires at our hands, and whereby she is appeased.
Formerly, to astonish man, he was told, if thou sinnest, thou shall die; and
now to fortify him in persecution, it is said unto him, if thou do not die,
thou shall sin; death which was a punishment is become a victime, and the
sinners chastisement is become the merit of the just.

The Son of God has thus instructed us by his example, when he would fight
with sin, he took up no other arms than death; he thought the victory would be
more honorable, wherein he should employ the son against the father, and where
he should make use of the effect, to destroy the cause: De peccato damnavit
peccatum. Paul.
this is that which the great Apostle teaches us in these words, where he
says, that the Son of God has overcome sin, by sin, and that in the
punishment of our offense he has found a remedy to cure us. Fictitious
Hercules vaunts himself amongst the Poets, to have overcome Armat us venit
leone, and ^ydra, in Hercul. furent.
Monsters by other Monsters; to have made himself weapons by their spoils; and
to have ended his last labors by the help of what he had purchased in the
former. This fable of Hercules is become a truth in Jesus Christ; and the
Gospel obliges us to acknowledge that in the death of God, which falsehood had
found out in the life of man. For he by dying has satisfied his Father, he
has destroyed sin by it is Son; he has saved the sinner by his punishment.
Religion binds us to confess that death is the rise of our happiness, that
it is the Christians vow; that without being miserable, they rejoice in being
mottall; and that they should want somewhat of their glory; if since Jesus
Christ did lose his life upon the Cross, they were to ascend to Heaven,
without dying they live with pain, they die with pleasure; and to describe a
true Christian according to Tertullians language, we must say, that they are a
sort of men who are always ready to die; Genus hominum morti expeditum. Tert.
in Apologet.
and who placing their happiness in the resemblance or imitation of Jesus
Christ, desire to lose their lives a thousand times amidst tortures, to repair
his charity by their love; and to suffer for his glory, what he has undergone
for their salvation.

The tenth Discourse.
That sleep is a punishment of sin as the image of death, and that it bereaves
us of reason as dreams do of rest.

THose who think sleep the most harmless part of life will never be persuaded
that it has drawn some evil qualities from Adams sin, for it seems to reduce
men to the conditions of Children, and that bereaving them of the use of
reason, it takes from them that unfortunate power which they by their offenses
abuse. The guiltiest actions become innocent, during sleep, those vapors which
do stupifie the senses excuse the sins of those that sleep, and as their Et
bona facta gratuita sunt in somnis, and delicta secura. Tertul. de anima.
Virtues are not rewarded, neither are their offenses punished. Murders are
committed without effusion of blood, revenge is taken upon enemies without
injustice, and another man's goods are without violence taken away whilst sleep
does lull the senses. The soul is not guilty of the faults which her body
commits, and though she gives it life and motion, she has not liberty enough
to give it the guidance thereof. Imagination is the sole faculty which does
in-animate it, and this confused faculty not being guided by reason, commits
evil unpunished, and pleads blindness for the excuse of it is error.

Yet is it certain that in the condition wherein we are, sleep is a punishment
of sin, and had man never sinned, he had never proved those disquiets wherewith
he is agitated during his rest; Nature would have born a respect to her
Sovereigns sleep, the elements which formed his body would not have troubled
his rest, and vapors would have been so mild, as stupefying all the senses,
they would have left the soul at liberty. In this happy condition, man might
well have refreshed himself by sleep, Ego dormio and cor meum vigilat. Adae
s^mnus extasis appellatur a Patribus.
his eyes would have been closed against the light, and his other senses would
have dispensed with their ordinary functions. But the soul would have retired
to within her self, and acting according to the manner of Angels, she would
have known Truth without the interposition of the Organs, her rest would rather
have bn an ecstasy then sleep, and man might have said that his heart waked
whilst his body took it is resti

I have much ado to believe that man was reduced to the condition of beasts,
before he had sinned, and that he should have undergone the punishment of an
offense, which he had not as yet committed. If there have been some Saints whom
sleep did not deprive of the use of reason, and who loved God even whilst they
slept, I think it not strange that the heavens should have granted this favor
to our first father in his innocence, and that he entertein'd himself with
Angels, whilst he could not entertain himself with men. St. John the Elizabet,
Mariae, Joannes, Domini sensit adventum. Istae grati^m loquuntur illis intus
operantur dupliciqus miraculo prophetant Matres spiritu parvulorum. Ambros. in
Luc. c. 1
Baptist adored the Son of God in the chaste womb of the Virgin, the obscurity
of his Prison, could not hinder the light of heaven; from enlightening his
understanding, that stupefaction which continues nine months with other
children, hindered not him from instructing Elizabeth by his motions, and from
letting her know that the mother which she saw was a Virgin, and that the child
which she saw not, was God. The better part of Divines do not question but that
the Virgin did enjoy this privilege all her life, and that her soul, whilst
her body rested, was wholly busied in considering the wonders of her son, she
loved him as well sleeping, as waking; Sleep did not interrupt her love: Sleep
which makes us beasts, made her an Angel, and her soul had this advantage in
the night season that it did act without any dependency upon her body; rest
did not bereave her of half her life, as it does us, were she asleep, or were
she awake, she did equally apply her self to God, her sleep was more operative
then all our watchings, when her mouth was shut, Somnus licentia animae sine
more fugitivae. Tertul.
her spirit supplied her silence, and she praised God with her heart, not being
able to do it with her tongue.

Sanctorum somnus operatorius est. A nbros. Ep^st.
Imagine that Adams sleep did somewhat resemble that of the Virgins, that he
ceased not to reason, when he could not speak, that his noblest part slept not,
whilst his other did, that his souls eyes were open, when his bodily eyes were
shut, and that his soul exercising those species which she by the senses had
received, considered the works of God, for why should we believe that Adam
should suffer that outrage in the state of innocence, which the Saints had
much ado to tolerate in the state of sin? Sleep which is the rest of their body
is the punishment of their soul, they are afflicted that their will should be
rendered so long useless, they conjure their tutel^ry ^els to wake whilst they
sleep, and to love in their behalf (...) goodness, which cannot be loved
according to its worth, they look upon their bed, as upon their grave; Stultum
est* somno delectatis mortem horrore* cum somnus assiduus sit mortis imitatio.
Senec.
they think to die as often as they fall a sleep; and they murmr that their
soul which is immortal, should be constrained to suffer such a kind of
death; I pardon them these their complaints; for it is true that sleep is the
shame of our nature, and that the qualities wherewithal it is accompanied,
teach us that it is become criminal: it reduces men to the condition of
beasts, it takes from them their noblest privileges, and inhibits them the use
of all the senses which may be serviceable to the soul.

This punishment seems to be more injurious than death, whose image it is: for
death loosens the soul from the body, raises her to the condition of Angels,
and withdraws her from a prison, which though she delighted in, ceased not to
be fatal to her: but sleep stupifies the senses, sets upon such parts of the
body as the soul makes most claim to; disperseth it is vapors into the eyes
and ears, and reduces man into a condition wherein he can neither speak, nor
think. The heart during sleep, is in a perpetual motion; natural heat
disgests meat, the liver converts it into blood, and distributes it abroad
amongst the veins; every part turns it into it is own substance, and by a
continual miracle one and the same nourishment does extend it self into
nerves, thickens into flesh, and hardens into bone. Nature repaires these
ruins which watchings had made in the body, she leaves nothing useless in
this condition, and her diligence extends even to our hair, which grows
whilst we Sleep. But the noblest of our senses are a sleep; our eyes serve no
more for guides, nor the ears for intelligencers, the tongue to which motion is
so natural, is no more the souls interpreter; imaginations self does only
furnish her with confused species, Somnus est ligamentum omnium sensuum
Aristot. lib. de somno and Vigil.
and the soul in this disorder is enforced to remain idle, and unusefull.

Passions be they never so violent are more respectfull than is Sleep; their
first motions are only dangerous; who can shun being surprised by them, may
fence himself against their fury; they are as easily calmed as raised; and
knowing that reason is their sovereign, they reserve some respect unto her even
in their revolt. But Sleep contemns her authority, it obliges this Queen to
withdraw her self into the center of her State; and forces her to abandon the
extreamities. It mingles force with sweetness to corrupt men; steals so
pleasingly upon a man, as it has got entrance before one be aware, and reigns
so absolutely that unless it withdraw itself it cannot be repulsed, it is
violence is pleasing because sweet; it is Tyranny supportable, because
necessary; Lucis requies noctisque comes qui par Regi famul^qus venis, placidus
s^ssum lenisque soves, pavidum l^hi genus hu^um co^is ^ngam discere mortem, in
Hercul furente.
and it is authority is so absolute, as it calmes those passions which reason
cannot allay: it takes from Conquerours the desire of glory, quenches the
flames of unchaste love, charms the violence of choler, draws displeasure in
it is vapors, and if it take not from desperate men the design of making
themselves away, it does happily bereave them of the means of doing it.

But he sels his good turns at a deer rate; since to cure our passions, he
bereaves us of our reason; and puts us in a condition wherein we cannot
exercise our virtues; for though he cannot deface the habits thereof, yet he
interdicts us the use, and brings us into the condition of wars under age, who
being born rich have not the liberty to dispose of their goods; we have reason,
yet are not rational; Philosophers have high conceptions, yet cannot
discourse; Princes conceive great designs, yet cannot execute them; Saints
have good desires, but cannot accomplish them; and the faithful have virtues,
and cannot practice them.

Dreams, Somnia somni negotia. Tertul. de anima.
which may be termed the productions of sleep, are not less injurious to man,
than is their father; for they appear to men be the extravagancies of a drowsy
imagination, and the follies of a wise man; there is no Philosopher which has
not some ravings in his sleep, nor so well a governed mind which is not
debaucht in dreaming: the soul has liberty only left her to form
Chimaeraes; and be it either that the vapors which arise from the bowels
trouble her presented forms, be it that the senses being drowsy make but
confused reports unto her; or be it lastly that the organs of our bodies being
bound up hinder her operations; she acts in such confusion and disorder, Saepe
somnia vana, and frustratoria and turbida, and ludibrios^ and immunda a (...)
incutiuntur. Tertul. de anima.
as all her thoughts are but ravings; and her discourses but extravagancies: if
she light rightly, it is by hazard; and if in this bad condition she take a good
resolution, she is more obliged to fortune, than to wisdom. A man must either
be superstitious, or out of his wits to be guided by dreams; and who takes
their ravings for revelations, is in great danger running mad, if he be not so
already. We do not live in those days, wherein God made his will known by
dreams, he treats no more with men a sleep, but does rather dispense his
favors to those who are awake. Since Truths have succeeded figures, God does
not often declare his oracles by dreams; and we learn his designs rather by
prayer than by Sleep.

It is true that as his mercy makes us reap advantage by our misfortunes, and
turns our loss to our souls health, so does it make use of Sleep and dreams
for our good, Somnus recreator corporum, redintegrator virium, probator
valetudinum, op^rum, medicus laborum, cuilegitime fruendo dies cedit, nox legem
facit, auferens rerum etiam colorem. Tertul. de anima.
the first sweetens our Pains, drowns our displeasures, and levels our
conditions; takes the crowns from off the heads of Kings, Laurels from
Conquerors and Miters, from Bishops, breaks the bolts of Slaves, opens the
prison doors, and if he do not restore liberty to captives, he at least makes
them forget their servitude. The Prince has no advantage over his subjects,
when they are both asleep, though his bed be more stately, his rest is no
sweeter, and if any remembrance of his greatness remain in him when asleep, it
causes most commonly but disquiet and suspicion. All men are alike, when
asleep, and sleep as well as death levels all conditions: a Philosopher is not
more able then an ignorant person, when he sleeps, the poor man is as happy as
the rich, when both of them have forgot their condition, and pleasure and pain
cause no difference in men when their senses are stupefied with sleep.

He who does so many acts of justice, does some also of mercy, for he prepares
us for death, reclaims us thereunto, and being more prevalent than all the
discourses of Philosophers, persuades us that a man may die without pain, since
he sleeps every day with delight. In effect, sleep is a short death, and death
is nothing else but a long sleep, the bed is a grave for one night, and the
grave a bed for many ages, we expect to waken from our beds, and we hope to
rise again from Etiam per somnium imaginem mortis, fidem initiaris, spe^
medit^ris, discis mori and ^ivere, discus vigilare dum dormis. Tertul. de anima.
our sepulchers: thus one and the same thing teaches us two differing Truths,
and sleep which fits us for death, animates us to believe the resurrection, the
dreams which he shapes whilst we rest, and those pleasing illusions wherewith
he diverts our soul, when the senses refuse to serve her, are either proofs or
presumptions of our Immortality, and we easily imagine that our soul may very
well escape death, since she is not wholly engaged in sleep which is deaths
picture. Stoici Deum volunt inter caetera praesidia divinatricum artium somnia
nobis quoque indidisse, peculiare solatium naturalis oraculi. Tertull. de anima.
In fine, dreams becomes often oracles, our spirit being losened from the
senses, presages either good or bad fortune when it is retired to within it
self, it does act more easily, then when it is dissipated by objects; Great
Personages receive advertisement from Heaven, sleeping, and Angels treat with
them, whilst they cannot treat with men. God chose the time of sleep to
declare his designs unto his servants, and in the old Testament the dreams of
Saints were oracles Siquidem and (...) divinitus somniat, and man pene vis
ho^inum ex visionibus Deum di^unt. Tertul. ibid.
and prophesies. Joseph won his credit in Egypt by interpreting Pharohs
dreams; and superstition, which glories to imitate religion, did always believe
that her Gods declared their wills whilst men slept. But this advantage, is as
reproach full one to us, and when the heavens deal thus with us, it is
doubtlesly to teach us, that if we will be informed what their designs are we
must forego our callings, and that to purchase Faith we must renounce reason,
so as it is apparent enough, that sleep and dreams upbraid us with our
weakness, and are punishments of our sin.

OF THE CORRUPTION OF All exterior Goods, called by the name of FORTUNE. The
Fifth Treatise:
The First Discourse.
That we must fear what we desire, and desire what we fear.

It Is with much reason that original sin is by Saint Austine termed the
universal corruption of nature, since there is nothing left in man,
uncorrupted; his understanding is so clouded with darkness as he cannot
discern truth from falsehood, his memory is so weakened, as it is painful for
him to learn, and natural to forget; his will is depraved as it loves nothing
but what is pleasing to the senses. His very aids are pernicious, and the
succor which nature has afforded him for his help in his necessity, serves
only to make him the more miserable.

Being stripped of all the good which he possessed in the State of innocence, it
seems he needs desires, and that this passion is requisite to him, to find out
helps for his indigency; being condemned to undergo those punishments which his
rebellion deserved, fear seems to be necessary to him, and that to shun the
evils which threaten him; Divine mercy had ought to have made him fearful; yet
this assistance is prejudicial to him, these remedies do augment his evil,
and he would be less unhappy, if he could keep himself from wishing for good,
or fearing evil. Non est in carendo difficultas nisi cum fuerit in habendo
cupiditas Aug. Confess.
For to boot that desire is but a languishing of the soul which is occasioned
oftener by her weakness, than by her want; and which reaches rather to things
superfluous, than necessary; it is very well known, that it harms a man, whilst
it would heal him; that it widens his wounds, in stead of closing them; and
that it increases his necessities, in lieu of comforting them: Quidquid ill^s
co^gerat non finis erit cupiditatis, sed gradus. Senec.
one desire causes another, and man imagining that the greatest good will cost
him but wishes; forgoes all other exercise to consume himself in unprofitable
desires: he does not relish the good which he enjoys, he despises that which
he sought after, and as if things were the more precious for being either
absent, or lost, he esteems none but what he has either lost, or has not yet
gotten: all things seem pleasing to him which he has not, evils do to him
change their nature; when they are far off, and be it either that his capacity
cannot reach them, or that his desire paints them forth unto him in glorious
colors, he oft-times wishes his harm; Attonitus novitate mali, div^sque
miserque e^gere aptat opes: and quas modo vove^at odit. Ovid. Metam. lib. 11.
and is enforced to accuse Heaven of being rigorous unto him, in having too
easily heard him: he expects his having obtained what he desired; and his
desire is so bad a Counselor, as all the advices which it gives him, are
either unfaithful, or rash.

It Is promises are as pernicious as are it is advices, for it seldom makes good
any thing that it promises, it glories in abusing those that believe in it;
and hope which serves it for a surety, abuses our easiness, in engaging us to
seek after a good which is difficult, and dangerous: she persuades those who
listen unto her, that she is a forerunner of felicity, that a thing desired,
is half possessed; and to have an extreme passion for riches or honor, is to
quit infamy, and poverty. But it falls out clean contrary, for desire adds to
indig^y, it irritates the evil which it would allay, and makes the ambitious,
infamous, and avaritious needy. They are sensible of their wants, Cupiditati
nihil satis est, naturae satis est etiam parum. Senec. ad Helviam c. 11.
since they desire the remedies; and the passion which presses them is no
less a proof of their pain, than of their necessity. Those who suffer
dishonor without desire of glory, are troubled but with one malady; but those
who add to the pain of being despised, the passion of glory, endure a double
Martyrdom. Thus the desire of good, is the increase of evil, and he who makes
many wishes, exposes himself to most sufferings. Heaven punishes the guilty,
by giving them over to their own desires; this passion is more severe than the
rack; and who could handsomely handle it to punish the ambitious or amorous, he
might stay all other punishments. Nothing does so much torment the damned as
their desires; if they could live without wishes as well as without hope, their
sufferings would be less severe, and hell would have lost her sorest torment.

The holy Scripture teaches us, that God makes use of our desires, as
Ministers of his vengeance; and that the loss of our goods and death of
friends are but the punishments of our lightest offenses. When the City of
Jerusalem was taken by force in the reign of Antiochus, in so much as the
Temple was profaned, the Altars beaten down, that the fire consumed what the
sword had spared; that rivers of blood ran in the public places, and that
women were robbed of their honor, and their husbands of their liberty; the
writer of this story tells us, that so tragical a disaster was but the
preamble to Gods Justice; Propter peccata habitantium civitatem modicum Deu^
^uerat iratus. 2 Machab. 5.
and (if a man may be allowed to say so) but the pastime of his anger: if he
had been more incensed, he would have found out severer punishments, but
because his indignation was but small, he was satisfied with the ruin of the
Temple, and Ierusalems pillage: but when his just fury is at the height, and
that the number of our insolent sins does provoke his choler, he gives us over
to our own desires, and command these executioners of his Justice, to make us
try all the rigor which love can make the unchaste suffer, or pride the
ambitious; he sometimes permits these unjust desires to take effect, he grants
what we desire, to make us the more unfortunate, and the more guilty; Pleraque
gaudi^ (...) Iustiti^ eva Deo non su^t gaudia and sepe initiasunt futu^a (...).
Sen. Epist. 53.
the good success of our vows is a mark of his indignation, and the better
pleased we be with our punishments, the more firce and fatal are they. Thus
riches undo the avaritious, honors punish the ambitious, and pleasures are
the torments of the unchaste. For we are in a condition wherein we ought to
suspect all the goods of fortune.

Since the loss of innocence, greatness is fatal to man, and he cannot be
raised up, without hazard of being undone: he is so prodigiously out of order,
as the punishments of his sin are more advantageous to him, than the remainders
of original righteousness. And it is easier for him to save himself in want,
and infamy, than in glory or abundance. Watsoever is glorious is fatal to him;
Diuturnis honorib^ deteriores fiunt homines, and far secundam fortunam non
omnes possunt. Aristot. lib. 5. de Republ. cap. 8.
dignities increase his haughtiness, and makes him forget his misery; they
raise him up only to throw him headlong down; and it is a kind of miracle if
he continue humble in greatness. Lucifer, who had not our weaknesses, could
not resist this dangerous enemy; the place he held amongst the Angels, made him
vain glorious, his glory dashed his understanding, and seeing all creatures
were submitted unto him, he could not endure to submit himself to his
Creator; his crime proceeded from his excellency, he was only proud, because
he was raised to too high a degree; and if the pain he suffers could truth from
out his mouth, he would confess he is only miserable for having been too
happy. Man lost himself by the same disorder; the terrestiall Paradise made
him forget that the earth was the place of his birth, and the matter whereof
his body was composed; the association of Angels, and obedience of beasts, made
him believe he was independent; and held of no body. And seeing whole nature
busied either for his pleasure, or for his service, he thought that if he were
not a God, he might at least become one. But not to speak more of those past
disasters, he is overwhelmed with the weight of greatness; there are but few
hands which can bear a Scepter without vanity, and but few heads which do not
bow under the weight of a Crown. It Is* hard Plerique eo magis contra Deum super
biunt quo ab ejus largitate and contra meritum ditantur and qui provo^ari bonis
ad m^iora debuerunt donis pe^ores fiunt. Gregor. in Moral.
for a Prince to preserve his modesty amidst his honors, and for him to
remember that he is a man, whilst all his Subjects endeavor to persuade him
that he is a God. Great humility is requisite to him, to defend himself from
such pleasing slatteries, and the inclination which by reason of original sin,
he has to vain glory being considered; he has much ado to reject such hopes
as Adam was abused withal, even in the midst of his innocence.

It Is much more hard to make use of pleasure than to make use of pain, and more
Philosophers are found to have been patient in afflictions, then moderate in
pleasures, riches cause more disorder than poverty; and were not men overruled
by opinion, want would be more sufferable than abundance. Though we be not
stoics, and though the fond imaginations of the haughty Philosophers did as well
give against reason as truth, we forbear not to confess with them, that sorrow
is to be preferred before joy, and that it is better for a man to suffer pain,
then to taste pleasure. Imitatrix boni voluptas est, malorum mat^r omnium cujus
blanditiis ^orrumpuntur quae natura bona sunt. Cic. de legibus.
All his advantages are pernicious to him, the remainders of innocence engage
him in sin, and he cannot follow Adams tract, without falling into his
precipice: thus ought he to suspect all his desires, and all his hopes, the
good whlch flatters him, deceives him; what pleases him, is fatal to him; and
to express in a word, the irregularity which sin has placed in his nature, we
must affirm, that he is bound to fear what he hopes, and to hope what he fears.

For fear abuses us as well as hope, and she is unjust, and unfaithful when
she paints forth evil to us like a Monster, it may suffice us to suffer it
when it has happened, without anticipating it by our apprehension. That
wisdom which foresees an evil, and cannot divert it, serves but to hasten it;
and a man had better be surprised by a disaster, then fear it long: this is not
withstanding the usual effect of fear; she fore-runs our misfortunes, under
pretense of freeing us from them; she indiscreetly engages us in them; and
through a vain desire of making us more happy, she oft-times makes us more
miserable; it is thought that she makes up a part of our wisdom, that she
fore-sees not an evil save only to prevent it; that unless it were for fear
of poverty, we should not heap up riches, that it is fear of war, which makes us
raise strong holds, and that if it were not for fear of famine, we should not
cultirate the ground.

But certainly she is vain in her fore-light, Nos a ventur^ torquemur and (...)
bonanostra nobis nocent, timoris tormentum memoria reducit, providentia
anticip^. nemo tantum praesentibus miser est. Senec. Epist. 13.
and whosoever gives himself over to be guided by sotimerous a passion cannot
live happily; we forestall sorrow before it is birth, we go to find it out
before it seeks us, we are ingenious in multiplying our misfortunes, we fear
disasters which will never happen; we become the Ministers of our own
punishments, and we invent torments with the cruelty of executioners never
dreamed off: we are more befriended by fortune than by wisdom, nay even when
she has vowed our undoing, she deals more gently with us, then fear does. An
evil finds us already sunk, when it sets upon us, our fear takes from it the
half of it is victory, it wonders that she who fights against it, should fight
under it is colors, and that whilst she would destroy it is power, she
establishes its Empire: for it is true, she paints forth evil more terrible
than it is: she adds somewhat to it is il-favourednesse, she never represents it
to the life, she is of the humor of those who give out no news without either
disguising or augmenting them: she being by nature Plus in metu^ds est mali,
quam in co ipso quod timetur. Cicer.
melancholy, fancies ever dreadful visions to her self, the evil which is
nearest seems always most dangerous to her: she attributes much to our body,
and not consulting with reason, she apprehends all things that can give against
the senses, she is not astonished at that sin which only hurts the soul, but
the Punishment thereof which takes down the body does frighten her.

Yet this kind of punishment is useful to Christians. They are sooner saved by
sufferings than by pleasures, they must change their feeling as well as their
condition, and remembering that they are fallen from the happy state of
innocence, they must no longer pretend to their past felicity, neither yet
complain of their present misery. Evils are no longer to be complained of,
since they are become necessary; though the name of punishment which they bear
with them, make them anxious to our senses, yet the name of cure should make
them pleasing to the understanding: there is not any one of them whereof a man
may not make a glorious virtue: if death do not make all men Martyrs, he may
make holy victimes of them. It Is a favor to O mors usurparis ad laetitiam matter
moeroris, usurparis ad gloriam glori^ inimica, usurparis ad ottr^um regni porta
^ni. B. in Cant c. Sermon. 26.
die, since God has been pleased to become mortal; the punishments of our
sins are turned into remedies, that which was infamous to us by Nature, is in
Grace honorable; and we would not change condition with Angels, since not
being able to die like us, they cannot sacrifice their lives to Jesus Christ;
the maladies which prepare us for death, do exercise our patience. The great
Apo stle grounded his glory in his weaknesses, and not considering the
advantages which he had being Master of the Gentiles, he only valued his
infirmities, which made the power of his deliverer appear. Poverty is no mo^e
the opprobrie of men, but the glory of Christians; the Son of God did
consecrate it both in his birth and death; it is turned into an eccellent
virtue, since he has been pleased to practice it, though A^dams poverty
proceeded from his guilt, most Christians become poor thereby to become
innocent, profiting by their loss, they satisfy their Judge his Justice, and
revenge themselves of their Enemies hatred. Iejunium mors culpae remedium
salutis, radix gratiae fundamentum est castitatis. Ambros. de Jejunio.
Fasting is a virtue which we have learned at our own cost, the barrenness of
the earth has taught us abstinency, we make a sacrifice of the Monster hunger,
and in the punishment of our disobedience, we find a fence for our chastity. As
evils are profitable to those that suffer them, it is in vain that we fear them;
As Goods are fatal to those that possess them, it is without reason that we
wish for them. The world has changed it is face, since man has changed his
condition; if he will not undo himself, he must fear what he hoped for, and
hope for what he feared. He ought to be dismayed at riches, since they may
corrupt him; and comforted with poverty, since it may convert him, death ought
to be more precious to him than life; since it is a sacrifice; and he is bound
to prefer pain before pleasure, since the cross of Jesus Christ was the rise
of his salvation.

The second Discourse.
That Honor is no longer the recompense of Virtue.

THose who will praise honor, and persuade us that she, is the reward of
virtue, say with Aristotle, that generous minded men prefer her before life,
and those that bereave us of her are more injurious to us, and more unjust,
than those who bereave us of our riches. Princes hazard their persons and their
Estates, and leaving the spoil of their enemy to their soldiers, they reserve
unto themselves only the glory of having overcome. Gloria propria mortuorum
possessio.
It Is the only thing which men carry with them to their graves, it is that which
makes men live, after death, that which preserves their memory in the world,
and which triumphing over years makes their worth be known to all posterity.
Virtue would not have charms sufficient to make her self be beloved, were she
not accompanied by glory, and this austeer Mistress would have no servants did
she not promise them eternal reputation; all the famous actions of antiquity
had no other original, and it may be said that as honor was the end of their
Labors, so vain glory was the soul of their virtue. Ambition, which since sin
is become natural unto men, did undoubtedly persuade him Nulla voluptas humana
videtur ad divinam proprius a^edre quam e^ delectatio quae percipitur ex
^oribus. (...).
that glory was the shadow of Divinity, and that it was she, who altering his
condition, would make Temples and Altars be raised unto him after his death; He
thought he might by the means of honor, obtein what he could not do by the
serpents counsel, and that this fathfull companion of virtue would restore
unto him, what his sin has bereft him off.

But this argumentation is as seeble as false, for honor has lost her purity,
since man has lost his innocence: she is dealt about more unjustly then
riches, it is a good which depends only upon opinion, which is as soon gotten
by vice as by virtue; and which subsists more by good fortune, than by justice.
We have seen great Princes whose lives have been buried in oblivion, for having
been The Aristides and the Phocions who are the famousest ornaments of of
Greece could not vanquish oblivion; Socrates owes his reputation only to his
disciples eloquence, and had not Plato recorded his last words, we should not
know how courageously he dyed.

The Aliquando eligit fama sed saepius errat. Tacit. in vita Agricol.
world values much more glorious actions than virtuous ones; Poets and
Historians who are the Trumpets of Monarchs, tie themselves more to Combats
than to counsels, and do much more exalt the defeat of enemies, then the
Government over subjects. Alexander won much more reputation amongst the
Grecians then did Pericles: and Caesar is much more honored amongst the
Romans, then Cato. The Luster of great actions dazles the eyes; those which
make the greatest noise, receive the greatest praises; men never consider good
advice so much as good success, nor the resolution as the event. The very
Theater whereupon things are acted, serves to put a valuation upon them, that
which was done in Rome made a greater noise then what at Lacedemon; and the
world which suffers it self to be surprised by greatness, never values virtue
or worth unless it be crowned: private soldiers do more gallant actions than
their Captains, but the lowness of their condition stifles them. Italy has
produced slaves more nobly minded than Cato, and they have uttered Maxims
which Politicians would have reverenced like Oracles, had they been spoken by a
Prince It Is thought that one of the Scipio's ows all his advantages over the
Nulli praeclusa virtus est, omnibus patet, omnes admittit, omnes invitat
ingenuos ^bertinos, servos Reges and exules: non eligit domum nec censum nudo
homine contenta est. Lib. 3. de B^nefic. cap. 18
Carthaginians, to the wise advice of Laelius, and the Critics know very well
that Cicero studied the purity of language in Terence, and the grace of
expressing it upon Roscius his Theater, but because the one was but a
franchised slave, and the other a common Player, he only reaped the glory of
their labors.

This unjust vanity is crept even into religion: we oft-times judge of Saints
greatness, by the eminency of their births, we read the life of a Prince with
more admiration then that of a Peasant, and be it either that virtue be rarer
in Courts than in cottages, or that we be rather born away with appearances
than truths, a common action in the person of a Prince seems noble to us. All
things appear great underneath a Crown: and we are so accustomed to flatter
Princes, as they pass for good if they be not bad. Eloquence labors to
disguise their faults, she gives honorable names to shameful actions: and she
thinks that Traffic is not base there, where she barters smoke and wind for
Gold. But that which makes natures disorder evidently appear, is that fortunate
faults pass for rare virtues, and that men appear only to be famous, for that
they have indeed been wicked.

If Caesar Prosparum ac foelix scelus virtus vocatur. Senec.
be more esteemed than Catiline it is because his design had better success,
they were both guilty of the same fault; both had vowed the ruin of their
Country; the one offered at it, but in vain, the other succesfully accomplished
it: the less guilty went for a Traitor, and the more faulty for a legitimate
King; the ones name is odious in all history, the others honorable, and most
Monarchs by assuming his name show that they approve of his Tyranny. Populus
stultus honores saepe dat indignis and fama servit ineptus, dum stupet in
titul^ and in imagini. bus. Horat.
He is the first Emperor of Rome, the gloriousest Scepter of the world was the
reward of his treachery, his life serves for example to all Conquerors, and his
usurpation for excuse to all their unjust undertakings. Yet he is guilty of
Catilines fault, he is not more honored, save for that he is more unjust or
more fortunate; and he is numbered amongst the Emperors only, because he did
execute what the other did project. If Cicero's eloquence could have stayed the
progress of his ambition, or had he died before he had made himself Master of
Rome, his memory would be more odious than that of Dionysius of Syracusa, and
as all Kings would have been styled Pompeys, all Tyrants would have been termed
Caesar's: but because his faults was fortunate, he was honored, and the man of
the world that stood most in need of Apologies, may glory in having all history
made his Panygericks. It Is true that Caesar would have had reason to complain
had he been otherwise dealt withal; since all Nations treat their usurpers so,
and reserve all their praises for those that rob them of their liberty.

Great faults are the noblest virtues; Princes who shed most blood, receive
most honor; robbery and murder are the steps whereby Tyrants get into Kings
Thrones; people put not so great a valuation upon those who have defended them,
as on those who have conquered them; and all things in the world are so out of
order, as usurpation in Monarchs is more glorious than succession. The one is
the work of Nature, the other of Fortune; they owe their election to their
subjects love, and are bound for their conquests to their soldiers valor.
Triumph, which was virtues highest recompense amongst the Romans, was granted
only to such as had committed most murders, and sacked most Towns; renown was
not to be purchased in that Commonwealth, but by violence and injustice. That
which their Historians calls victories, their enemies term butchery; what
served for a sport to the Roman Dames, made the widows of Carthage weep; and
the same success which made them be reverenced, made them be hated by their
enemies. Thus triumph, is only founded upon faults, combats are not made
without weapons, nor are victories won without murder.

This notwithstanding is the glory of Princes, and the mightiness Non est quod
credas quemquam fieri aliena foelicitate infoelicem. Senec. Epist, 94.
of Conquerours; he who has fought amongst Battails, is most valiant; he who
has plundered most Towns, is most happy; and he who has ruined most
Provinces, is the most August: this madness. has been common among Christian
Princes; the laws forbid murder to particular men, and ambition does often
without reason permit Sovereigns to wage war; it is a piece of injustice, to end
a difference by a duel; and it is an heroic. action to engage fifty thousand
men in a Battle, upon a trivial occasion; faults are secure because they are
accompanied with an absolute power; and they are publicly praised because they
are out of the reach of ordinary Justice. There remains nothing to add
idolatry to cruelty, but to render divine honor to these illustrious guilty
ones, and to raise up Altars to those who have ruined Kingdoms.

The example of Pagans may well authorize this impiety, for they never granted
Apotheosis, or Canonization, but to such as were famous for their faults. The
first man whom Italy placed in heaven, did sprinkle the walls of Receptus in
coelum Romulus creditur, n^ paricidium sine praemio relinqueretur. August.
Rome in it is rise with his brothers blood: And the first Prince to whom this
Republique, changed into a Kingdom, did erect Altars, had oppressed the
liberty thereof: since Augustus his death, Apotheosis or Canonization, was the
recompense of mutther and incest, to become God he must cease to be man, and
must forego all humane relations, to acquire divine honor: The Consul placed
men in heaven, whom they would have driven out of the Senate had they not lived
under their Tyranny, they appointed Priests to such as deserved Hangmen, and
Rome was so accustomed to flatter, as she numbered those amongst her Gods, which
she had numbered amongst her Tyrants.

But grant that honor were justly distributed, it is notwithstanding so frail a
good, as men would never so passionately seek after it, had not sin corrupted
his nature, and troubled his judgment. For to boot that it is not within us,
Honor est in little potius potestate qui colunt quom qui coluntur. Aristot.
Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and that it is impossible to be happy in a thing which we possess not, it
depends upon the opinion of the vulgar, who meddle as well in weighing the
merit of men as the Statesmen do. This bad Judge is guided more by humor
then by reason; his Intetest is the rule of his Judgment, and these base
persons esteem nothing honorable but what is advantageous to them: they change
with every wind, and as their minds are agitated with hatred, love, anger, or
pity, they praise and blame the same thing. Thus Conquerors are bound to
acknowledge, that their reputation depends more upon fortune, than victory; and
that to be glorious it is not sufficient for them to have overcome their
enemies, unless by a continuance of good fortune, they win their subjects love.

I know Intervallo opus est, ut quis credatur Deus, semperque h^nc gratiam
magnis viris posteri reddunt. Curt. lib. 8.
it is said that glory is never pure till after death, that Kings must lose
their lives to purchase esteem, and that the Palms and Laurels of renowu serve
only to crown their sepulchers; but I think there are few Conquerors that
would purchase glory at so deer a rate, and who would wish to die, that they
might receive a recompense which is not tasted but in life: what are they the
better for praises given them in History? what redounds to them from a vain
reputation, which cannot get admittance into the other world? and how are they
advantaged either in heaven or in Hell by their sepulchers adornments.

Nothing is more famous in antiquity then Caesar, he is almost as well known
throughout the world as Jesus Christ. All Historians speak of him with
Encomiums, all Conquerors endeavor to imitate him; an action is not Glorious
save when it does conform with his: Children are rather instructed in his life,
then in those of the Apostles or Martyrs, and they know better what he has
done in Italy, then what the Son of God did in Palestine; his voyages are
more admired than Saint Paul's, and his Commentaries are read with more
contentment, then the Epistles of the great Apostle: but what advantage reaps
he by our praises in hell? does his renown lessen his torments? is he less
unfortunate, for being more honored? or is he less tormented, for being
better known? has he any preferment in hell, where all things are in confusion
and disorder: that ambitious humor, which could neither suffer a superior,
nor yet an equal, is it satisfied with our Panegyricks? and a soul which
suffers so much punishment, can it find any contentment in those praises? ought
we not rather to conclude, that his shadow is praised, and his person
tormented? that he is sensible of his Laeudantur ubi non sunt cruciantur ubi
sunt. Hieronym
pains but not of our praises? and that he is well esteemed on on earth, and
tortered in hell?

Is not Alexander ill rewarded for all his labors? and this lover of glory,
does not he repent that he so long served this faithless Mistress? he overrun
the whole world, he was troubled that his Conquests should find a stop, where
the Sun stays his course; he would have gone further then that glorious
constellation, and have carried his arms where the Sun did not carry his light:
he has played the part both of a private soldier and of a Commander upon a
thousand incounters, and has hazarded his Estate, his Army, and his Person, a
hundred times to win a little reputation; yet what of all this remains to him
in the grave? does his glory allay his sufferings? does the title of great,
take from him the name of unhappy? do the Ghosts of his soldiers, or of his
enemies tremble at his presence, Silui^ omnis t^ra in conspectu^ us. 1 Math. 1.
and he who held all the earth in awe, and silence, is he any ways delighted
with his reputation, or our astonishment? his pomp was effaced by his death he
ceased to be Alexander when he ceased to be man; his body is reduced to dust,
his soul burns in hell, and his name which is but a Fantasme receives the vain
praises, which are given it.

Let us conclude then that a man must be a fool to imagine that honor is the
recompense of virtue, and that man never sought after these imaginary
contentments, till after he had lost those which were solid and real. Man's
honor consists in his duty; of all the testimonies which he receives there are
none but those of his conscience, which can satisfy him: knowing that virtue
depends upon Grace, he gives the glory to him who has endued him with the
strength, and he confesses that God Cum Deus co^rouat merita nostra, coronat
dona sua. Aug.
crowns his own gifts, when he crowns our merits. Vainglory was permitted to
the Pagans who defied honor, but she is forbidden Christians, who hold
ambition a crime: she was permitted unto Pagans, whose immortality consisted in
renown, but she is forbidden Christians whose felicity consists in beholding
God. In fine, earth is the place of desert, and heaven the abode of recompense.
God has reserved unto himself the care of dispensing glory to those that serve
him, it is Tunc erit laus unicuique a Deo.
he who will make the Saints Panygericks and who will crown their virtues: let
us not entrench upon his rights, let us give all glory to him, since he is the
fountain thereof, and let us confess that man would never have been ambitious,
if he had always continued innocent.

The third Discourse.
That greatness is attended by flavery and vanity.

THough sin has corrupted man's nature, though it have bereft him of those
glorious advantages which made him walk hand in hand with Angels, and has
reduced him to a condition wherein he is equally grieved with shame, and
misery, yet has it not been able to blot out of his soul the memory of his
greatness. For though the world be a place of banishment, though all Creatures
war against him, and that the seasons are become irregular only to make him
suffer, he notwithstanding seeks for Paradise upon the earth, and amidst all
his mischiefs, he continues a desire of happiness. Though ignorance be the
punishment of his sin, though his blindness continue all his life time, and
that the darkness which clouds his understanding, suffers him not to discern
between vice, and virtues; yet he thirsts after truth, he seeks her amidst
falsehood, and oft-times fights to find her out; though since the loss of his
innocence he be become slave to his passions, and that to obey such insolent
Masters, he be enforced to forego his liberty, he cease not to love command,
and to pretend to the Empire of the whole world; he endeavors to recover by
injustice, Quaerit adipisc^ umbram very re^ni cum ab illo deciderit in quo soli
Deo inferior omnibus dominabatur. Aug. lib. d: vera Relig.
what he has lost by Vanity; and not able to come by royalty, he with open
face aspires to Tyranny. The Devil who cannot efface his desires which are as
the remainder of innocence, is content to corrupt them, and to propose unto him
false objects to divert him from true ones. To say truth, man takes no longer
pleasure in any thing save in criminal delights, the inclination which he has
for the Summum Bonum, serves only to keep the further from it; and for not
taking his aim aright, he strays from his end whilst he thinks to draw near
it: the love which he bears to knowledge is but a mere curiosity, he loves
truth like a whore, not like a legitimate wife, he seeks her out only to pass
away his time, as often as she blames his disorders, he turns his love into
hatred, and becomes her persecutor whose servant he was.

His passion for Sovereignty, is not more lawful, though he desire a Good
which he has possessed, it is upon such conditions, as make his desire unjust.
He wishes for an independent Crown, whith may hold of no body, he will be
absolute in his estate, and since he is become the Devils slave, he will be no
longer Gods subject: his ambition will not suffer him to acknowledge his
legitimate Sovereign, and his baseness forces him to tolerate a Tyrant; he
would think he should injure his liberty, should he assubject it to the will
Quid facies daemones colendo nisi ut offendas illum quo offenso in illorum
potestatem daberis? and qui nihil tihi possent facere illo placato, facient
quidquid vol^t illo irato. Aug. in Psalm. 25.
of his Creator, and thinks not that he wrongs his nobility, when he submits
himself to an usurper: he feeds himself with vain authority, and false
greatness; he thinks himself not forced, because he follows his own
inclinations, and because his Master keeps him tied up with Chains of Gold, he
cannot think he is a slave. This error slides the easilyer into the souls of
Kings, for that seeing so many subjects obey them, they cannot persuade
themselves that servitude can meet with so many marks of liberty. These crowned
heads can hardly believe that their will, which is the living law of their
Empire is made a Captive; that they who are their subjects destiny, should hold
of an invisible Tyrant: and that they who pass for the Gods of the world,
should be the Iniquum erat ut Diabolus homini quem coeperat xon dominaretur.
Aug. l. 3. de lib arbit. cap. 10.
Devils slaves: the submission which they find in their Dominions, makes them
believe they are absolute: the blind respect which is rendered to their degree,
makes them forget the miseries of their birth: flattery insinuates her self
easily into them, unless they be armed with reason, to withstand her, and
these pleasing falsehoods banish away truth. In so high a pitch of fortune,
where nothing is wanting to complete the felicity of their senses; their soul
is weakened, and being charmed by false praises, they believe what they desire.
They imagine that death dares not assail a Monarch which the world stands in
awe of, and whom fortune reverenceth: They make a Godhead of their greatness;
they despise such honors as are not divine; and though sicknesses which
advertise them of their weakness, assure them of their deaths; they hope for
an un-exampled miracle, and persuade themselves that immortality is a favor
wherewith heaven will honor their merit: The guards which watch about their
Palaces, might easily cure them of this error; did not flattery which makes
them as stupid, as insolent, bereave them both of their judgment, and modesty:
the conspiracies which are made against their persons, the parties which are
packt in their Territories, the cunning which is used to corrupt their subjects
loyalty, are reasons good enough to abate their pride; and to destroy that
foolish confidence which feeds their vanity. Magna fortuna magna servitus.
Senec.
But without going so far for remedies for their evils, their only greatness
is able to cure them; when if they would consider the condition whereinto sin
has reduced Monarchs, they would confess that the power which waits upon
them is but weak, and dangerous, full of anxiety, and mixed with servitude.

Though God will suffer us to share with him in his perfections, though he
permit that our virtues be a shadow of his divine attributes, that our
condition be such as we may imitate them; and though a man be not rational
unless he endeavor to express in his soul an image of divinity, yet amongst
that number of perfections which we adore in God, some seem to be advantageous
to us, other some prejudicial. It is lawful for all men to aspire to
holiness, and let us give what ever reins we please to this passion, it can
never be criminal. Every one may safely imitate mercy, when, according to Gods
example our benefits extend unto the good, and to the evil; to Turks, and
Christians; and when without making any distinction of persons, we do equally
oblige the innocent, and the faulty; a virtue is not to be blamed which has
God for it is example; in the religion which we profess a man cannot have too
much charity, Amor sive divinus, sive humanus ^uxta sententiam Arist^elis est
quid ni^io simile.
the perfection whereof consists in excess, and he who is most charitable, is
undoubtedly the most perfect Christian.

But there are some other attributes in God which one nor can, nor ought to
imitate, save with an humble reservednesse; it is dangerous to wish for
knowledge; and as our first father lost himself only out of a desire of being
too knowing, the desire thereof is oft-times sinful, and the seeking after it
always dangerous. Beauty is one of the excellentest perfections which religion
acknowledges in God, it is the chief object of our beatitude; and were not God
as beautiful as he is good, he would not be the desire, and the happiness of
all rational creatures: Dignitas formae gravior possidentibus, and
appetentibus exitiosa, exposita tentationibus, and circumdata scandalis. Tert.
yet we cannot seek after the possession of this advantage without danger; in
women pride accompanies beauty; chastity and she, are not upon good terms, and
it is a kind of prodigy, when a woman is as chaste, as fair. Greatness and
power are two of Gods Attributes, which merit equal honor, each of them
inspires fear into the soul of the creature; if they be ravished with his
goodness, his Majesty astonisheth them; and if his beauty oblige them to love
him, his power enforces them to reverence him. Thus dividing themselves
between respect and love, they love him as their Father, and adore him as their
Sovereign: Iustitia exhibet Deum Patrem and Dominum: Patrem potestate blanda,
Dominum severa, Patrem diligendum pie, Dominum timendum necessario. Tertul.
contra Marc. lib. 2. cap. 12.
yet this perfection which preserves the honor of God amongst men, cannot
without danger be wished for; who prescribes not bounds to the desire thereof
falls easily into error; and he who pretends to his greatness who has no
equal, cannot avoid his just anger. Lucifers undoing was for that he would
reign in heaven; if pride was his sin, greatness was the object thereof; and
if that glorious Angel be now a devil, it is because his ambition made him
wish himself a God. The cause of his disaster, is oft-times the cause of ours,
that which drove him from heaven, banished Adam out of Paradise; this children
of the unfortunate father, mistaking his fault, bear his punishment; and find
by experience, that of all worldly conditions, the most glorious is most
dangerous, and the most absolute, is most faulty. It is more safe to obey, than
to command; and let Kings be never so godly in their Thrones, they run more
hazard in their welfare then their subjects do; the higher they be raised up by
greatness, the more are they threatened by vanity; that which draws them
nearer God, keeps them the farther from him; and the same Majesty which makes
them his images, makes them oft-times his enemies.

This condition places Kings upon the brink of a precipice, Imperium
cupientibus, nihil medium inter summa and praecipitia. Tacit. histor. lib. 5
the higher it is, the more dangerous is it, and like the highest mountains is
always exposed to storms: so great is the danger which does accompany it, as it
may be doubted, whether a Scepter be not as well the punishment of Gods justice,
as the favor of his mercy. The first King of Israel was a reprobate, his
election which was somewhat miraculous freed him not from sin, neither could
the prayers of a Prophet appease Gods anger: his fault at first was but
impatience, and in the progress thereof, but a slight enterprise upon the
priestly office. The presence of his enemies whereby he was obliged to fight,
might serve him for an excuse, and the laws of war, which will have a man make
use of advantages, was a reason of state, which might have sheltred him in the
opinion of Politicians. Yet this fault which had so fair an appearance, was
punished by the routing of his army, he found death, when he sought for glory;
and the same mountain which was the pitched field wherein he set upon his
enemies, was the scaffold whereon he was punished by Divine Justice.

Poets who never read our scripture, judged aright, that Crowns were not always
set upon the most innocent heads, and that kingdoms were oftener the punishment
of sin than the reward of virtue. Iocasta made use of this reason to divert
Polinices from the war which he undertook against Eteocles, she assured him,
that without troubling himself with fighting, he should be sufficiently
revenged of a reigning brother, Ne metus, poenas and quidem solvet grazes,
reguabit. Senec in Thebaid.
for that a kingdom was a severe punishment, and that of all his ancestors
there was not any Sovereign who had not been unfortunate,

Though this Maxim be not always true in Christianity, and that there have
been Kings, whose Thrones have served them for steps to mount up to heaven by,
it is always very dangerous to be raised to a condition which permits them to
do what they please, and with not bereaving them of their passions
unrulinesse, affords them means of satisfying them: For in this supreme
authority, which has no arbitrator, nor censurer, they can do what they will,
their power meets with no resistance, all their counselors are their slaves,
and either flatttery or fear makes all men praise their injustice, Nihilest
periculosius homini iniusto quam omnia posse.
or bear with their violence: if they be unchaste, it is not safe to be chaste in
their dominions. All women are not courageous enough to expose their lives to
save their honor: those who have worth enough to resist the vain discourses of
men, have not strength sufficient to withstand a Princes promises, and there
are but very few who will not hazard their chastity to triumph over the liberty
of a Monarch. If they be greedy they will find a thousand pretenses to enrich
themselves at their subjects costs, and to fill their cofers with the spoils
of Orphans and Widows. If they be cruel they will find fitting Ministers for
their fury: glorious names are given unto their faults, all their revenges
pass for acts of justice; they are termed the Fathers of the people, when they
wash their hands in their subjects blood; their anger is animated by servile
praise, and their cruelty encouraged by approbation: so as Kings have no
greater enemies to their welfare then this uncurbed licentiousness which
accompanies their greatness, and that absolute power which furnishes them
with means to execute all their designs.

But say they were less irregular and grant that reason assisted by Grace
should keep them from abusing their Sovereign Authority, they would not be
exempt from fears, and dangers. Nihil est quod ab Imperatorbus emendari non
queat, nec ullum peccatum est quod vires eorum superet, and quidquid ^mittunt,
fa cere videntur. Nicetas.
For as they are the heads of their People, they are answerable for their
faults, they commit all the evil which they do not hinder, and those public
disorders wherewith all the world is scandalized, are the particular sins of
Sovereigns. When they examine their conscience, they are bound to renew their
state, to consider whether justice be exercised in all their hightribunals,
whether the governors of Provinces do not abuse their power, whether the
nobility in the Country do not trample upon the poor sort of country people,
and whether the Judges suffer themselves not to be terrified by threats, or
corrupted by promises; they ought to accuse themselves of all such faults as
grow insolent through impunity, and make their kingdoms disorders the chief
article of their confession. How great is this obligation, how dangerous is
this condition, and what hazard is there in making good a dignity, wherein
Innocence becomes guilty, where though exempt from sin, one is not exempt from
fear, and where to acquit himself of his duty, a man must to the quality of an
honest upright man add the quality of a good Sovereign. In the state of
innocence, the world had had no kings, or kings would have had no trouble, for
passion not having yet rebel'd against reason, every one might have governed
himself without any danger, and all men might have obeyed without repugnancy:
the will of the subject would always have been conformable to that of their
King, and Kings would have exacted nothing from their subjects, which should
not have been both profitable and pleasing to them: in this happy season crowns
would not have been environed with thorns, and the curse thundered out against
the earth, would not have fallen upon the heads of Kings, Ar^ artium
regereanimos hominum. Greg.
there would have been no difficulty in the art of reigning, and the state
being an image of man; the one and the other would have found rest in his
innocence. But now that men are become unruly, the art of governing them is
become equally difficult, and dangerous; the subjects faults becomes the Kings,
and the Kings fault becomes the subjects punishment: thus the one and the other
of them are mutually miserable, and the most powerful is allways the most
faulty.

If royalty meet with danger, labor is inseparable from it, and glory is
therein so mingled with pain, as government cease to be glorious, when it is
easy. Kings command over free men who do not engage themselves in submission,
save only that they hope there to find happiness: this is a thing which
heightens the greatness of Monarchs, but it adds unto their cares, and unless
they will lose the title of kings, and purchase the name of Tyrants, they must
govern themselves so wisely, as preserving their authority, they do not injure
their subjects liberty. Solus Nerva duas res olim insotiabiles miscuit
libertatem, and Imperium. Tacit.
This is a temper so hard to be met withal, as most Princes are either too
indulgent or too severe, some treat their subjects like savage beasts, and seem
rather to govern Lions, than men; others deal with them as with Children, and
rather discharge the duty of a Pedagogue then of a king, others treat them like
slaves, changing their kingdom into a gally, and foregoing the quality of a
king to assume that of a Captain of a Gally. Others treat them like rebels, and
confounding Monarchy with Tyranny, have no other law than their will, nor other
means to make them be obeyed then torments, and punishments, but Legitimate
kings deal with them as with free people, interessing themselves in their Good,
and studying to win their hearts without intrenching upon their liberties.

This is for certain the most innocent and most honorable way of treating,
Omnium domos illius vigi ^a defendit, omnium vacationem illius occupatio omnium
delicias illius industria ex quose regno dedicavit fibi eripuit. Senec. ad
Polyb. cap. 26.
but it is also the hardest for to arrive at this, Kings must watch whilst we
sleep; they must foresee the evils which threaten us, repulse those wherewith
we are assailed, and consulting with history, must learn by what is past how to
prevent mischiefs to come; if any thing of disaster befall, their government is
blamed; if the success of war be bad, their courage is accused; and as if
nature depended on their will, famine and pestilence are imputed to their ill
government. The Indians admit of no King, who does not oblige himself by oath,
to overcome all the enemies of the State, to govern all seasons, and to warrant
the subject against the injuries of the weather. Though there be as much
injustice in exacting this promise, as insolency in making it, yet does it
proceed from a general belief which all men have, that Princes ought to
labor for the welfare of the Commonweal, to secure the quiet of their
dominions, and to endeavor their subjects happiness; what is there more
painful, or more troublesome, then to appease the anger of heaven, to conjure
down tempests, to fight, and be victorious, and to order things so right, as
that a man do not ruin his subjects, by overcoming his enemies?

But I marvel not that greatness be laborious, since it is servile; Non been
imperat nisi qui paruerit imperio. Senec. 2. de Ira.
and that Kings enjoy less liberty than their subjects. For since sin has
enslaved man, there is no free condition to be found on earth; servitude
succeeded innocence; and to be sure to command, a man must necessarily obey:
great fortunes are famous captivities, though their splendor dazzle us, their
miseries are easily observed, and though their chains seem more glorious, as
being made of diamonds, yet are they as hard, and as heavy as others. Princes
dare not travel, they are confined within their Kingdoms as in a prison, their
visits would cause jealousies in their Allies, should they be accompanied with
great preparations, and they would injure their own greatness, should they be
done without ceremony. They must keep within their own Towns, must not visit
their Frontires, except in Arms; nor see foreign Countries, unless in Maps;
Multa Regi non licent quae humilli^s, and in angusto jacenti^ licent, magna
servitus est magna for tuna Senec. ad Polyb.
and if they go out of their Country, they must be resolved to fight: All
their Marches give Alarmes to their neighbors, when they think upon a journey,
every one prepares for war, and it is imagined they would enlarge their prison,
when they enter into another Territories: These famous Captives are so jealous
of their Gives, as a man cannot break them without becoming their enemy, and
they are so in love with them, as they esteem an endeavoring to set them at
liberty, is to entrench upon their power: their greatness, wherein the best
part of their servitude consists, obliges them to have always Guards about
their persons; they can do nothing but they must have a thousand witnesses, all
their secrets are public, they are besieged in their Closets; crowd, and
noise, trouble the content of their solitariness; those who keep off the
crowd, press upon them; and those who defend them, do besiege them; Those
Sentinels who watch at the avenues to their Palaces, are as well a mark of
their captivity, as of their greatness; and he who were not acquainted with
the Court, would doubt whether he that is with so much care guarded, were a
prisoner, or a King.

Amongst so many slaves, they have never a bosom friend: their greatness
which cannot suffer an equal, Neque cum Diis, neque cum Regibus ob eorum
excellentiam amicitia contrabi potest. Arist. 1. Polit.
cannot admit of a friend: they taste not those honest contentments which
accompany friendship; all that come near them are either slaves or flatterers,
who tell them nothing but pleasing falsehoods: Truth is banished from out their
Palaces; if they raise up any one, they are always jealous of him; they envy
their own workmanship, they un-make what they had made, either to witness
their power, or to content their jealousies; Net regna socium far nec taedae
sciunt. Senec.
and knowing that all things are common amongst friends, they will not relish a
happiness, which obliges them to divide their power of State. Marriage which
is the straightest tie of all friendship, does not abate the irksomeness of
their solitariness, for they take their wives, but choose them not; they marry
for interest, not for inclination; they have least of freedom, wherein they
ought to have most, and have more respect to the welfare of their Territories,
then to their own contentment; the welfare of their subjects is the end of all
their labors, and nature has hidden real servitude, under an appearing
greatness; They command over men, for men's advantage; they are rather
Arbitratours, than Sovereign Lords; rather Fathers, than Masters; and rather
Tutours, than Sovereigns; they are Pilots which ought to avoid storms,
Chieftains which ought to fight, Suns which ought to dissipate darkness, and
dispense abroad heat and light: they are Fathers which ought to govern their
Kingdoms as their Families, and their subjects as their children: whatsoever
exceeds this power, leans toward injustice, and all Princes who mind more
their own renown then their peoples good, deserve rather Iusti reges quibus
impera^t serviunt, neque enim dominandi c^piditate imperant sed officio
consulend^, nec ^ipandi superbia sed providendi misericordi. i. Aug. lib. 19.
de civit. c. 14.
the name of Conquerors then Sovereigns: good Kings serve those over whom they
command, they do not mount their thrones so much to cause fear, as to purchase
love; and if they will perform their duties they must not reign over their
subjects out of an ambitious desire of commanding over them, but out of a
charitable desire of being advantageous to them.

If they have any other motive for what they do, they fall into another sort of
servitude, and becoming Tyrants to their people, they become slaves to their
passions, for as just men are free amidst fetters, wicked men are slaves though
on throns, and these who are so famously faulty have as many Masters which
command them, as they possess passions. Thus greatness be it lawful, or
unlawful, is always waited on by servitude, and the greatest Monarchies of the
world cannot shun the loss of their liberty, whether the end of their labors
be the good of their Territories, or their own renown. It is true that their
conditions are as different, as their designs, for some find their own welfare
to consist in that of their subjects, and others find their loss in that of
their state, the one acquires honor by dispising it, others lose it, by
seeking after it, the one establishes his authority by foregoing it, and the
other destroy it whilst they would establish it, but they all learn by
experience, that since the sin of Adam there is no liberty without servitude,
nor Greatness without dependency.

The fourth Discourse.
That the birth and cruelty of War derives from sin.

WAr is of as long a standing in the world as sin, this daughter was born
together with her Father, and contrary to the laws of Nature she punishes him
that begot Belli prima orizo adeo pecatum est ut nihil al^ud innocent^a nisi
pax summa intelligatur.
her; for as soon as man was fallen from innocence, and that original
righteousness, which composed the differences of the soul and body, had
forsaken him; these two parties declare war against one another, the slave
rebel'd against his Sovereign, and became a rebel himself, to punish his
Sovereigns rebellion, he undertook to reduce reason under his laws, and to
submit the inclinations of the understanding to the motions of Concupiscence.
This intestine war caused foreign discords; when man became once divided in
his person, divisions arose in his state, and at the same time that his soul
and body gave over their good intelligence, all his Omnis creatura pugnavit
contra insensatos.
subjects revolted, every element set upon him to revenge it self, and the
conspiracy was so general, as this unfortunate Sovereign saw not any one part
of his state wherein he had not enemies to fight withal, and rebels to subdue.

Before that Heaven afforded him some means to reduce them to their duties, he
suffered unexpressible misery, and to draw an Idea of his disaster, we must set
forth a man exposed to the rigor of the air, without clothes; one persecuted
by the elements, who had no house, one starved with hunger, who could not
cultivate the earth; one fought withal by his passions, who had no virtues to
discover them, one composed of disagreeing parts, who had no power to
rereconcile them: such a one was Adam, when he was driven out of the earthly
Paradise; all his subjects became his enemies, every element to offend him,
grew unruly, the seasons mingled themselves disorderly to punish him; and
beasts which were not as then wild, changed their Nature to persecute him.

This unfortunate Sovereign was fain to arm himself in his own defense;
Antiquum bellum venatio licitum, quia necessarium.
necessity taught him to cut out clothes to save himself from the cold, to
build Cabins wherein he might keep dry notwithstanding the injuriousnesse of
the weather, to plough the earth, to overcome her sterility, to make arrows, or
spread nets to take birds, and tame savage beasts: he taught the horse to
manage, and forced the noblest of creatures to endure the bit and spur; he
brought oxen under the yoke, forced bulls to change their fury into friendship,
and to forego the forest to live in pastures; he wisely mixed art with force,
and that he might lessen the number of his enemies, he endeavored to divide
them; he made use of those that he had reclaimed, against those which did
resist him; and by an admirable address he chased stags with horses, pursued
wolves with dogs, and flew at partridges with Faulcons, and Goss haulks. Thus
did this Sovereign beat back force by violence, and reduced his subjects to
their duty, by the aid of necessity.

This war was just, because necessary; self preservation was his excuse,
Iustum bellum quibus necessarium, pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis spes
relin quitur. Livius.
and if the beasts were not too blame in setting upon a man, who had revolted
against God, man was not unjust in defending himself against those subjects
which would have oppressed him: Nature taught him that he might commit murder,
without committing sin: and that in the state of sin he might slay the innocent
to feed himself. This permission did notwithstanding inspire cruelty insensibly
into him; by killing beasts, he learnt to kill men; these his first Trials made
him Master of his art, so as passing through all the degrees of injustice,
after having committed murder, he committed parricide. For when he saw that
the death of one man had drawn upon him the hatred of all those that belonged
unto him, he sought for some to side with him, he engaged all his friends in
his quarrel: then did men forge weapons to undo themselves; they who had only
pursued their subjects, pursued those that were like themselves; And arrows
which were only dipped in the blood of beasts, were stained with man's blood; the
Chieftaines of parties, chose out pitched fields to end their differences, they
encouraged their soldiers to the combat, Tunc solum utile est concurrere ad
arma, cum locum apud hostem invenire non potest justitia. Cassiodo^. lib. 3
Epist. 1
they made them hope for the spoil of the enemy, and persuaded them that
revenge and murder were glorious actions.

This cruel opinion spread it self over the whole world, the trade of war
grew honorable, and the name of murderer was changed into that of soldier;
ambition increasing with time, every one thought that greatness consisted in
injustice, that he who had committed most murders, was most courageous; and
that he who had overcome most Nations, plundered most Towns, and overrun most
Provinces, was the most famous Conqueror. When once this error grew to be a
maxim, Arma non servant modum nec temperari facile nec reprimi potest stricti
ensis ira: bella delectit cruror. in Hercul furent.
all disorderly unquiet spirits entrencht upon their neighbors; every Prince
would enlarge his bounds; men began to place right in might, to confound
usurpation with possession, and to think that every thing belonged to him that
could make himself Master thereof. War was made upon foreign Nations; no
other pretext but ambition was sought for, and all such as would not be
subjects to a Prince, became his enemies.

Though we have as many proofs of the corruption of our nature, as we have
inclinations in our soul, yet we must confess there is none more strong then
that which an extreme desire to wage war, does furnish us withal: for fury
has persuaded us, that it was the most glorious employment that might be, we
hear Conquerors spoken of with respect, we read their fights with admiration, we
term their Injustice Heroic actions, Eloquence cannot find out expressions
noble enough to honor their Ambition. Historians think themselves happy when
they write a Prince his life who has drowned the fields with humane blood, and
who like thunder has born down what ever withstood his violence. We give the
title of grand to those who have unpeopled the world, we propound unto our
Kings the example of such who have ruined their subjects to overcome their
neighbors; we foment their ambition, by the praise we give usurpers: we
insensibly persuade them, that Justice is but the virtue of private men: and
that Sovereigns who have no law but their will, ought to seek for no other
right, or title than Violence.

There is nothing more horrible then war, sin is the cause thereof, and this
wicked Father produces nothing which more resembles him than this Monster.
Injustice and ambition are the officers which do guide it, Fury and Cruelty the
Sergeants which do accompany it, and it is exployts are plunder, murder,
violence, and burning; it carries terror and dread into all parts where it
comes, changes fields into deserts, towns into solitary places, and Kingdoms
into Tyrannies, it mingles childrens tears with their Fathers blood, bereaves
women of their honor, and their husbands of their Liberties, raises it is
Trophies upon the ruin of Cities, or upon mounteins of dead men, it grounds
it is Triumphs upon the undoing of kingdoms, and draws it is praises from the
cries and complaints of Captives. Yet Gens cum gente colliditur, regnum cum
regno, Christianus cum Christiano, and sunt qui applaudant, qui vehant
laudibus, qui que principes ultro furentes insiigent. Erasm.
sin obliges us to value it, and though we do experiment the rigor thereof,
we cannot choose but approve of it is disorders. We number the victories which we
have won over our enemies, we look upon the number of the dead, and prisoners
with delight, the pillaging of towns and taking of places satisfies our vanity,
and as if passion had made us lose all humane resentments, we never think that
our victory is our brethrens undoing, that our rejoicing draws tears from the
eyes of Orphans and widows, whose Fathers and husbands we have slain: that hell
is filled with soldiers, whilst the world is unpeopled of Christians, and
that these advantages which make us insolent, cost innocents their lives, make
free men prisoners, and wealthy men miserable.

Those who see the disasters caused by war, imagine the cause thereof ought to
be very considerable, and that Princes break not with their neighbors or
allies uninforced by powerful reasons; yet are the motives thereof, often times
ridiculous; what causes a suite at law between two private men, begets a
quarrel between two Princes, what puts a division between two families, puts a
difference between two states, and that which is the undoing of two parties who
go to law together, does oft-times ruin two Nations, which wage war together,
an apple was the chief cause of the burning of Troy; the ravishing of Helen was
but the occasion; Poets who hide Truths underfables, would have the famousest
siege in all the world should be undertaken to revenge the Jealousy of two
women; and that the greatest Empire of Asia, Manet alta mente repostum judicium
Paridio: spretaeque injuris formae. Virgil.
should be ruined to punish a shepherds judgment.

Ambition which delights in greatness, has no juster nor no more worthy
motions; Greece complained no longer of Persia when Alexander set upon her;
nothing can make this Conqueror carry fire and and sword into his neighbors
country, save a vain desire to reign; and who should have asked him the motive
of so unjust and rash a design, must have found it to have been his vain glory.
The Commonwealth of Rome was at the height of her prosperity, when Cas^
resolved to change her into a Monarchy, Pompeys greatness served him only for
a pretense to execute his enterprise, for though his son in laws exploits had
caused no Jealousies in him, and that he had not been encouraged to that
design, by the examples of Marius and Scilla, his ambition was of it self
sufficient to cause this desire in him: his insolent mind could endure no
equals, his citizens if they will be his friends must be his slaves, all
whatsoever greatness must bow to him, lest they cause his indignation; and the
people must receive a shameful peace, if they will not suffer a direful war.
I am further of opinion, In landibus Caesaris posuit Sallustius quod sibi
magnum imperium exercitum, bellum novum exoptabat ubi virtus enitescere potest
ut miseras ge^es in bellum excitaret. Aug. lib. de Civit. c. 12.
that this Monster nursed up in butchery and blood, would have made enemies, if
he had found none; that after having vexed the Romans, he would have persecuted
the Parthians, and that passing from one Country to another, he would have
dispeopled all Kingdoms, and ruined all Kings. The wars of our Ancestors have
had no juster pretenses; those which our Histories ring most of, have had but
weak motives; the jealousy of two Families have oft-times endangered the
Kingdom; two Favorites have oft-times used their Masters Militia, to end their
own differences; hundred thousand men have interessed themselves in the fight,
not knowing the occasion thereof.

But certainly it must be confessed if wars have small causes, they produce
strange effects; Summum Bruto (...) civilia bella fatemur. Lucan.
and that those which we term civil, exceed all others in cruelty: for men
make profession to violate all the laws of nature, and as if every soldier
were of his Generals humor, he believes that his nearest kindred are his
greatest enemies; he dips his hands in his own blood to assure his Captain of
his fidelity; his ambition makes him lose all sense of humanity; he would think
he should betray his duty, if he spared his friends; and esteem himself not
worthy the name of a soldier, if he could forget the names of father, and
mother. He who sacrificed himself upon his brothers body whom he had heedlesly
killed in the heat of the battle, was yet but an Apprentice in war; and more
experienced than he, would have presented his brothers head unto the General,
to have had some recompense for it. Civil Wars stifle all the relations of
nature; those who fight in the same Kingdom under differing Ensigns, have
nothing of man but the face; they cease to love or know one another, after once
they begin to fall a siding; and when the heart of their Country is the
Theater of their Battles, their cruelty cannot be mitigated by any Alliance.

History, or else Fiction, tells us of two brothers whom their mothers tears
was never able to reconcile: they fought hand to hand in the head of their
Armies, to spare their soldiers blood; they through their own wounds, poured
forth their Fathers blood: death, which they both received at the same moment,
could not appease their quarrel; hatred appeared in their countenances, when
it had forsaken their heart; Non suriis post fata modum, flammasque rebels,
seditione rogi. Stat. Thebaid. lib. 1.
their souls descended into hell, to end their combat there; and fury passing
from their bodies to their funeral Pile, divided the flames which consumed
them. This fiction of the Poets, is a truth amongst Christians; amongst whom
there are brothers found whose hatred is immortal, who preserve their
animosity after the loss of their lives; who leave it for an inheritance to
their successors; who charge their children to revenge their injuries; and who
showing a face of war in time of peace, do meditate murder when they cannot
commit it. I wonder not that the same thoughts which did possess them in their
life, possess them likewise in their death; and that those who delighted in
nothing but blood, did dream on naught but cruelties; since an ill habit is an
invisible chain which keeps the will captive, and will not suffer it to abhor a
crime, which has always been pleasing to it. But I cannot well comprehend how
sin should so far corrupt man, as to persuade him that murder was honorable,
that there was glory in committing it, pleasure in beholding it, and that the
cruellest action that may be, could purchase glory, or cause content.

All Paganism took pleasure to see the Gladiators fight; the effusion of man's
blood was one of their most pleasing spectacles; and Homo occiditur in hominis
voluptatem, and ut quis possit perimere usus est. Quid potest inhumanius dici'
disciplina est ut quis perimere possit, and gloria est quod peremit. Cyprian.
ad Donat.
Rome had much a do to forgo this cruel pastime, after she had embraced the
Christian Religion: people ran to public places, to see men fight; they were
taught to kill one another handsomely, and with a good grace; public schools
were erected to teach this bloody exercise; there were Masters who taught how
to observe method in murdering, who led their disciples into their Arenae, or
Theators for fencing; and who trying their dexterity themselves encouraged them
to fight by example; he was most praised, who shed most blood, and a man sorely
wounded who had killed many men was led about in triumph. Sin must needs reign
in their hearts, since it had driven thence all sense of humanity; and that
making manslaughter a virtue, it had persuaded them that glory consisted in
injustice, and pleasure in cruelty: this madness, grew in time to so great a
height, as to make killing more easy, and the sport more pleasing; men were to
fight stark naked with offensive weapons, but none defensive. Obscenity was
joined to cruelty, to the end that one might content two passions with one and
the same spectacle, and that the sight of a dying wretch might make them love
his murderer; yet these combats are but the shadows of war; the Gladiators
fury is but the soldiers entrance; Companies were filled up which these people
nursed up in blood; and when recruits were to be had, those were sought for in
the Arenae, who had made themselves famous by the death of their Companions.
And certainly duels which serve for pastime to our nobility, are neither more
just, nor yet less cruel; so brutish a passion cannot be but in minds where
sin does Tyrannize: a man must renounce both reason and Grace, to obey so blind
a fury; and one must cease to be either rational or faithful, if he believe
that a Gentleman's Glory consists in Murder; yet this error is become a
custom, Gentlemen love rather to lose their heads upon a scaffold, and dye by
the hands of a hangman, then to be failing in an occasion where they know their
conscience is in an ill condition, and that they are in danger of losing both
soul and body; fear of shame has more power over them then fear of Hell; they
choose rather to incur Gods anger, and their Princes, then the peoples
reproach, and by a foolish extravagancy, they hazard their soul to preserve
their honor.

As this blind Passion differs not much from that which animates Conquerors to
war, so does she likewise proceed from the same principle; the one and the
other proceed from sin, which having put us at ods with our selves, puts us
likewise at ods with our neighbors; and persuades us that all means are
lawful whereby we may acquire honor. Upon this false belief, we engage our
selves in combats, we violate the holy laws of nature, we fly upon our
neighbors and allies, and not considering; Mundus est magna and vere
respublica qua Dii atque homines continentur; in qua non ad hunc angulum
respicimus aut ad illum, sed terminos civitatis nostrae cum sole metimur.
Senec. de otio sapient.
that the world is a Commonwealth; that all kingdoms are the provinces, all
people the subjects thereof, that charity is the law thereof, the Holy Ghost
the heart, and Jesus Christ the head, we use such cruelties one toward
another, as do well witness that sin has corrupted our nature, and that the
Devil does possess our will. He who does not acknowledge the truth, and does
not confess that this irregularity is the punishment of our sin, is yet more
miserable then they who endure it, and complain thereof: for the other grounds
his glory upon his injustice only because he has lost the use of reason, and
thinks himself only happy because he is become stupid. War is then one of the
most fatal effects of sin, and one of the severest chastizements of divine
Justice; it is only excusable Billum pium quibus necessarium. Tacit.
when necessary, and yet it were better sometimes to follow the counsel of the
Gospel, and to lose somewhat of that, which by right apperteins unto us, then
to defend it by so cruel a way: for if he whose every word is an oracle,
recommends peace to us dying, how can we resolve to wage war? if he command us
to forget injuries, how can we commit outrages and homicide? Let Madet orbis
mutuo sanguine, and homicidium cum admittunt sing (...) crimen est, vir^s
vocatur cum ^blice geritur: impunitatem sceleribus acquirit non innocentiae
ratio sed saevitiae magnitudo. Cyprian. ad Donat.
us then conclude that man is sufficiently sinful, since war is his exercise,
since his glory consists in cruelty, since combats are his noblest employments,
since he delights in Murder, since he esteems a pitched battle more innocent
then a single Duel, only because it is more bloody; since he thinks
manslaughter a sin, when it is particular, and a virtue when general; and
when by an injustice which cannot be sufficiently blamed, the sinner finds his
impunity only in the excess of his sin.

The fifth Discourse.
That Riches render men poor and sinful.

THough it be hard to say, which is the severest punishment man has suffered
since his loss of innocence, and that servitude, and death are pains equally
insupportable to those who love their liberty as their life, yet me thinks
there is a third more rigorous, which all men do resent, yet not any one
complains off. And this is nothing else but the calling to mind the possession
of all those good things which we have lost together with our innocence: a
desire of them remains in us, which virtues self cannot efface, we sigh when we
want them, and we never are so sensible of our misery, as when we are assailed
by pain, infamy or poverty. Multis parasse divitias non finis miseriarum suit
sed mutati^. Non hoc miror non est enim in rebus vitium sed in ipso animo.
Illud quod paupertatem gravem secerot and divitias graves fecit. Senec. Epist.
17.
Yet are their remedies new diseases, and we never do so well know our own
weakness, as when we abound in pleasures, honors, and riches.

This is so true a Maxim as that all Christian Religion makes profession, of
either really foregoing all those advantages which men enjoyed during the state
of innocence, or else of desiring to do so. She rejects honor, and seeks out
shame, she shuns delight, and nourishes her self in sorrow, she forsakes
riches, and embraces poverty. Being instructed in the school of Mount Calvary,
she turns the punishments of her sin into remedies, she makes virtues of her
chastizements and shuns those advantages which man possessed in paradise, least
following Adams example, she might fall upon his disaster. To say truth, all
our pleasures are irregular, we cannot labor after honor, without hazarding
our humility, and we cannot possess riches without becoming insolent, the
malady rests not only in our desires; it is past into these objects, which
give it birth, and there is a certain malignity found in the use of Riches
which makes us lose our innocence: Speciosa supplicia. Cyprian.
they are specious torments, and pleasing punishments, which promise us to
allay an evil, which they do irritate. Poverty stands in need of something,
but avarice, Desunt inopiae multa, avaritiae omnia. Senec.
which is almost inseparable from Riches, needs all things, she wonders that
the enemy which she shuns, never fore-goes her, that Poverty should pursue her
amidst abundance, and that gold which she adores should fill her cofers, yet
not her heart. This metal not being to be divided without diminution, it
kindles war amongst men, makes them severally minded, divides their wills, and
causes all those differences which justice endeavors to decide. In the state
of innocence, men possessed all things in common, avarice had not as yet found
out bounders to sever fields: Kings had not yet drawn lines to divide the sea:
as Light is an universal good, so was the earth a common heritage, and this
charitable mother was fruitful enough to nourish all her children. The poorest
man that was, was a King of the whole world. Ambition had not yet formed
states, nor built strong holds upon their Frontiers, all things were possessed in
common, without any jealousy; self-love had not as yet persuaded any one, that
to be master of a thing, all other men must be deprived of it. There was no
such thing known as propriety, every one was content with the riches of nature,
and the earth forestalling men's desire by her happy faecundity, men did with
pleasure gather in her fruits without taking pains to husband her, a man would
have thought he should have been become poor, if he had heaped up riches; and
he who would have thought that by appropriating any grounds ^o himself, he
should have renounced the worlds Sovereignty: as men do not divide the air, nor
the light, so neither did they then divide the sea, nor land; and the seasons
not being irregular, the whole world was but a stately palace whereof the
heavens were the sieling, and the earth the floor. Meadows served for gardens,
rivers for channels, forests were unwalled parks, and the open fields furnished
endless walks, large lakes served for fish-pools, and all men's delights were
innocent, because purely natural.

Art had not as yet corrupted Nature, under color of imbellishing her, every
thing held that place in the world, which it deserved; gold s ^. (...) nocens
(...) ^erroque ^entius au^ prodicrat. OVid. Meta. 1.
was not yet got out of the bowels of the earth, pearls lay quiet in the depth
of the sea, and diamonds in rocks, not causing any confusion in the world:
Marble was trampled under foot, vain glory had not yet found any use for it;
and in a condition wherein neither heat nor cold did incommodate him, man had
not yet thought of building houses, nor making himself apparel. Stuffs were
unknown, because useless; colors appeared not in Luster, save in pinks and
roses; and necessity (which is not the mother of invention, but as it is the
daughter of sin) had not obliged man to seek for remedies for miseries, which
he did not as yet suffer: but as soon as he would be rich, he became poor; as
soon as he heaped together imaginary goods, he lost such as were real; and
when he tilled the ground to make it more fruitful, the earth punished his
avarice by a universal sterility: she who together with fruits, bore flowers,
bears now no roses without prickles: the spring which mingled her beauties with
Autumns fertility was divided from thence by summers scorching heat, and
winters benumming cold. These two vexatious seasons did disaray the trees, and
had not the Angels taught sinful man, how to sow the ground with seed, famine
had prevented the deluge.

When he saw the world changed into a hideous sollitude, he was forced to build
houses to fence himself against the fury of the Element; he was on all sides
so pressed upon by poverty, as he was necessitated to seek out riches;
barrenness which threatened him with famine, made him till the ground; and the
fear lest his neighbors might reap the fruit of his labors, constrained him
to make enclosures: he invented money to entertain commerce with strangers; and
seeking out a metal, the rarity whereof put a valuation upon it; he found out
gold, which nature had hid within her bowels; he thought she had lodged it next
her heart, witness the love she bare unto it; the pain he had to draw it
thence added to his esteem thereof; and being dazzled by it is color, and
charmed by the advantage he made thereby, he made thereof his first Idol. The
Aurum sic Iudaicum populum suo captivavit aspectu ut hoc esse Deum crederent:
Aurum cum mores hominum perdit, perdit and naturam. Chrysolog. Sermon. 29.
Israelites could not defend themselves against this mischievous contagion,
their getting out of Egypt, their passing through the red sea, and the raining
of Manna in the Desert, were not miracles powerful enough to divert them from
so senseless an Idolatry. They persuaded themselves, that gold was the God
which had delivered them; they were blinded by it is beauty; and though Aaron
the High Priest had made it into the shape of a Calf, to make it appear the
more ridiculous, it is being made of that metal, was sufficient to make them
worship it. Iron by divine providence had it is birth together with gold; for
God knowing that murder could not be severed from avarice, he coupled these
two metals together, to the end that the one might be the price of our fraud,
and the other the instrument of our fury.

Adultery followed murder; and chastity which had defended her self against
what man could say to undermine her, could not defend her self against riches.
Presents prevailed more than humble submissions, and this frail sex, which
affords so many advantages against it self, showed it self to be more
avaritious, than proud. In fine, Poets were not much out of the way when they
feigned that all evils had their birth together with riches, and that man
became sinful, as soon as he grew rich; Vivitur ex rapto non hospes ab hospite
tutus: Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti, filius ante diem patrios
inquirit in annos, victa jacet pietas. Ovid. Metamorph. 1.
children attempted their fathers lives, wives poisoned their husbands, brother
conspired against brother, and every one made use of iron to come by gold.
Justice was busied about nothing else but in composing quarrels occasioned by
this metal, Gallouses were erected to punish murderers, and men knew that
gold which he had found out to supply his necessities, was the cause of all his
disasters.

But say that gold should not set men together by the ears, and that peace
should not be troubled with the insatiable desire of riches, yet would it be
always prejudicial to a sinner, and he must wish to be poor, if he would
recover his innocence. For all his desires are out of order, all his wishes
unjust, and sin which does possess him, engages him continually in pernicious
designs, he owes all his innocence to his weakness, and if he do not
perpetrate all the evil which he projects it is because Nature has disabled
him. But riches deprive him of this advantage by affording him means to do what
he desires, and make a guilty man absolute, by bereaving him of the happy
disability whereinto poverty had brought him. Inflant animos divitiae,
superbiam pariunt, invidiam contrabunt, and eo usque mentem alienant ut fama
pecuniae etiam nocitur^ nos delectet. Sen. Epist. 87.
For if he be ambitious, he opens the gate which leads to honor with a golden
key; if unchaste, he corrupts women's chastity by presents; if angry, he finds
enough basely conditioned men, who have courage enough to work his revenge; and
if he love good cheer, he ransacks both sea and land to please his palate, and
satisfy his belly. Thus is gold the instrument of all evil, it attempts
chastity, corrupts justice, sets upon innocence, and oppresses poverty. When
heaven is offended with a sinner, it needs but only make him rich, to undo
him; and make him wealthy to make him wretched; it is equivalent to putting a
good sword into a mad man's hands, to the preserving of poison in a crystal
glass to one that is frantic, and to the setting of a blind man upon the top
of a precipice tapistred with Jessemine and Lillies.

On the contrary, poverty is the sanctuary of innocence, there are fewer faults
where less of abundance. Those who live by hunting and by fishing know not how
to mingle poison with their drink, if they kill their enemies, it is with
arrows; and all their combats have less of art, and more of generosity in
them, then ours have: luxury governs not amongst men who go naked; those
families are not ruined with making stately structures, who can shelter
themselves under trees, excess in eating causes no disasters in those who eat
nothing but the fruits of the earth; and the steem of wine bereaves not them of
reason, who drink nothing but spring water. These innocent people value T^eo
totius vitae necessitates sorro and aeri inni^ as, cum and divitia de metull is
effodi^ndae sine ^ri operario rigore non possunt. Tertul. de habitu mulieb.
iron more then gold, and prizing things according to their utility, they
prefer what is most commodious, before what is most pleasing, they make use of
iron to arive their arrows with, and to build their cabins; the same metal
serves them both for peace and war; that which serves them for defense, serves
them for ornament, and they place their riches where they find most
commodiousnesse; they barter gold with us for Iron, they think they gain by an
exchange, wherein to obtein what they desire, they hazard not their liberty,
nor do forego their countries, they wonder that we cross so many seas, and run
so many hazards for a metal which is but earth, before it be refined, Terra
scilicet plane gloriofior nomen terr^ in igne reliquit, atque exinde de
tormentis in (...), de suppliciis in delicias, de ignomini is in honores,
metalli refuga mutatur. Tertul. de habitu mul.
which loses his name in the fire, which finds it beauty in it is torments,
which draws it is Luster from the crusible, and which becomes not gold before it
has wearied the patience of the workmen. Pearls seem not more precious to
them; if they fish for them in the sea; it is that they may sell them to us;
before our avarice had won them credit, children who made them their
play-games, gave them to our merchants for cockle-shels; they look upon these
stones which we esteem precious, as the mere excrements of the fishes that
produce them, they blame the esteem we put upon them, and being more rational
then we, they conclude, that we do worship the things only by reason of their
rarity.

Abundance is always accompanied with contempt, if gold were more common,
'twould be despised, that which grows in our climate, must pass into another
to purchase reputation; and as there are some fruits which are not good till
transplanted, so are there a thousand things in the world, which are not prized
till after they have changed their country. Apud barbaros quosdam quia
ver^aculum est aurum and copi^sum, auro vinctos in ergastulis habent, and
divit^ malos ^trant, tanto locupletiores) quanto nocentiores. Aliquando re ver
a inventum est, quomodo aurum non ametur. Tert. de habit. mulie.
Barbarians did profane gold before they knew the price thereof; because it
was common amongst them, they made use thereof in infamous things: the chains
of prisoners were made of this metal, those who were most guilty, were the
most richly adorned, that which is here the ornament of Princes, was there the
offenders punishment, thus this people had found out a harmles way how to make
this metal odious. By all this discourse it is easily gathered, that riches are
evils which though they be pleasing, cease not to be dangerous, that man is too
much out of order to make good use thereof, that they are serviceable but to
one virtue, yet of use to all sins. Christians dispose of them by the way of
alms, and Philosophers by way of liberality. But in the one and the other of
them, avarice does unjustly accumulate them, prodigality does profusely
dissipate them, pride makes use of them, to heighten her self, vain glory to
adorn her self, and choler for revenge, they are only useful when they are
given away with delight, and lost without sorrow. Negotiatio est a liquid
amittere, ut majora lucreris. Tertul. ad martyr.
Their loss is a kind of traffic, he is wise who can acquit himself of them,
and he is happy who can live without them. Jesus Christ despised them in his
birth, rejected them whilst he lived, and condemned them in his death; he who
will be his Disciple, must follow his example; and who believes that they
facilitate our salvation, knows not that our Nature is corrupted by sin.

The sixth Discourse.
That since the loss of innocence Poverty is glorious.

The two loves that establish those two Duas civitates fecerunt duo amores:
Jerusalem facit amor Dei, Babyloniam amor saeculi. Interroget igitur se
unusquisque quid amet and inveniet ubi fit civis. Aug. in Psalm. 64.
cities, the one of which had Jesus Christ for it is King, the other, the Devil
for it is Tyrant, could never be reconciled together, their designs are as
opposite, as their inclinations; and though they ofttimes march by the same
track, they always tend to rather contrary, then differing ends. This truth
appears by the use which they make of the miseries of corrupted nature, for
self-love extracts sins from thence, divine love virtues; the one augments our
evils whilst she would diminish them, the other diminishes them, whilst she
would augment them. From the scorn whereinto we are fallen since our
rebelllion, self-love has formed a design of raising her self up; and (giving
against Gods Justice) of finding her greatness in her abasement, Divine love
has extracted humility from thence, and with an innocent piece of cunning, she
leads us to glory by contempt. Self-loue raises despair from death, which is
sins chiefest punishment; and divine love raises from thence a sacrifice,
which expiats our offenses, and gives honor to Gods justice from the creatures
revolt, which does revenge our outrages done to heaven: self-love argues riot
in apparel, magnificence in buildings, and all those other means which we have
invented to defend our selves from the injuries of seasons, and divine love,
which always prefers the glory of heaven before her own interest, argues
repentance from thence, which teaches us to undergo this persecution with
humility. In fine, from the loss of our welfare self-loue has made avarice
arise, which justling Gods designs, undertakes to make man richer in his state
of sin, then ever he was in that of innocence, and divine love, which takes
pleasure in saving of a sinner by losing him, raises poverty from thence,
depriving her self even of those things which her judge would not take from his
enemies, that she may appease him. For Paupertatemque serenda effecere levem
nec iniqu^ mente serendam. Ovid
it is true, that this virtue takes it is original from onr punishment, it is a
remedy which we have got by our evil; and it is a correction which we endure to
allay Gods anger.

Whilst man was innocent, he was rich; the sun by his heat made the earth
fruitful, he cherished it, without scorching; and his influences were so well
tempered, as trees were always covered with fruit, leaves, and flowers; the
fields were fertile without labor, every country bore every thing; and without
crossing the seas, that was found in any one part of the world, which all the
rest produced. Beasts which afforded nourishment for men yielded milk in
abundance, running waters were never dried up; and provision was useless
where there was perpetual plenty. Bees wrought without wearing themselves,
they made their hives at all times, and the earth being continually covered
with flowers, there was no season wherein they did not make honey and wax. Man
being clothed with innocence, he stripped not beasts of their skins to cloth
himself, the art of spinning was not as then found out, or if it were known to
worms: man did not molest their labors; he admired the industry of their
workmanship, the magnificency of their Tombs, and leaving them to reassume life
where they had left it, he delighted to see them after having been dead arise
again.

The elements not having as yet vowed his undoing, he was not bound to guard
himself from their injuries, the seasons were so regular, as he neither feared
heat nor cold; trees were his shelter from them both, and those which afforded
him shade in the daytime, served him for covering in the night. If gold were
already ripped out of the bowels of the earth, it was rankt amongst such things
as are esteemed of more for their beauty, then profit. Man thought himself rich
enough without that metal; having all things at his command he needed not to
buy them: and art not being as yet come into the succor of Nature, he
contented himself with looking upon what he could not make use of. In this
happy condition, most desires were Summa-opes, inopia desidertorum. Senec.
Nihil interest an multum babe as an nihil concupiscas. Ident.
useless, and all those wishes which are occasioned by indigency not having as
yet a mother, could not disquiet man. He was rich for he wanted nothing, Nature
supplied all his needs, whilst he slept void of care; the stars which
glittered above his head, did by their influences make the earth fruitful, and
the Rivers running amidst the fields, did by their waters bring plenty every
where.

But when man became faulty, he became poor; he lost all his wealth, in losing
the Summum Bonum, and that self same moment which robbed him of his innocence,
threw him headlong into poverty. The earth grew barren under his feet, her
fruitfulness brought forth nothing but thorns; her bowels must be ripped open
ere she yielded fruit, and she must be threatened with iron in her bosom to
make her nourish us. Trees shook off their leaves, when winter had disrobed
them, men thought that nature was drawing toward her end, and that the earth
ceasing to be his Palace, grew to be his Sepulcher: shame showing him that he
was naked, made him make himself clothes of leaves, and cold which made him
sensible of his sinfulness, forced him to apparel himself with skins. From
that time forwards, necessity made him ingenious; Tantam paraturam materiarum
primum regendo homini qua necess^as praecessit, dehinc and ornando, qua ambitio
successit varias indumentorum formas promulgavere. Tertul. de pallio.
he built Cabins to fence himself from the heat; he sowed corn, to avoid
famine; finding that the earth was not fruitful save by his labor, he locked
up what he had gathered thence, and to shun poverty, fell upon avarice. But he
found by experience, that the remedy was worse than the disease, and that if
poor men wanted many things, the covetous wanted all things.

Grace, which does not abandon even the sinful, taught him how to use this his
punishment, and to turn hie poverty into an illustrious virtue. He began to
condemn perishable things, and to wish for things eternal; he endeavored to
forgo earth, that he might raise himself up to heaven; he had such happy
success in his designs, as he found plenty in poverty; and confessed that that
virtue had been more advantageous to him then innocence. To say truth; this
pain was glorious when it became voluntary; and from once that man began to
suffer indigency with humility, he found that God was his Father, Heaven his
inheritance, Jesus Christ his Redeemer, and that the holiest blessings were his
recompenses. For Pater pauperum Deus passim in Scripturis appellatur.
God takes the poor into his protection, he who draws his rarest qualities from
his noblest works, and who makes himself be called the God of heaven and
earth, would be called the Father of the poor; a man cannot set upon them,
without hurting him, their interests are joined to his glory, and whosoever
makes war upon them, does infallibly provoke his anger. He has done a hundred
miracles in their behalf; and when Kings would obtain any favor from his
goodness, they have assumed the quality of poor men, to render themselves more
considerable with him. David fore-went the quality of a King, to assume the
name of needy, and his poverty is the best reason which he alleges to obtain
what he demands of God.

The Son of God values not this virtue less then does his Father; Nascitur in
praesepio, famet in deserto, pauperibus ^r, afina (...) n^ in cr^ mori^r.
Chrysostom. 5.
he hallowed it in his own person when he would become man; he preferred the
condition of the poor before that of the rich; and he who was born in a manger,
would live without a house, and die upon the Cross; his disciples were all
poor men, and of as many people as he chose to preach his Gospel throughout
the world, there was not any one eminent for riches, nor dignity. Shepherds had
notice of his birth before Kings, and the instruction of the poor was as well a
proof of his mission, as the healing of the sick, or raising of the dead.

Though his mystical body be alike composed of rich and poor, though men's
qualities are not considered, though his Church be as well open to the
Gentiles, as to the Jews, and that slaves be admitted into his house, as well
as are their Master; yet the poor hold there the first place, and of as many
members as go to the composure of that admirable body, they are the most
precious. Kings are the hands thereof, Prelates the eyes, the people the feet;
but the poor are the bowels of it, they are quartered next his heart; i Esurivi
and non dedistis mihi manducare; sitivi, and non dedistis mih ibibere. Luc.
and when he shall descend from heaven, to revenge injuries done unto himself,
and to punish our offenses, he will begin with them who shall have neglected
him in the poor: the highest favors on earth are reserved for them. Those
dispensations which raise men to an absolute power, and which give them
authority over the beasts, or Elements, are the reward of voluntary poverty. If
the chief of the Apostles did miracles, it is because he fore-went his goods; if
by his words he cured maladies, it is because he had forsaken all his riches; if
his shadow cure the sick, it is because his heart was never wounded with
avarice: P^ him exp^vit (...). Pauperis imperium Natura non pertulit. Just
namque sequebatur ut signa largiretur qui opes contenps^rat. Aug. de verbis
Aposto^i Sermon. 26.
and if nature bear a respect to his commandments, it is because he had vowed
poverty. When he healed the legs of the man that was born lame, he began by a
confession of his poverty; he thought the first dressing which he was to apply
to this evil, was the contempt of riches; Gold nor silver have I none, (says
he to this infir ne man) but that which I have, give I thee, in the Name of
Jesus Christ, arise, and walk. Weakness bare respect to poverty, nature
violated her laws, to obey the words of the poor; and the heavens will was,
that he who could give no alms, should do miracles.

In fine, Paradise is the poors inheritance, and after having commanded upon
earth, they shall reign with Jesus Christ, in glory. That which is promised to
other virtues, is performed to poverty; in the acknowledgement of merit, and
the distribution of Crowns, the poor are dealt withal as advantagiously as are
Martyrs; Quid sibi vult quod ^adem promissio facta est pauperibus and
Martyribus nisi quia vere ^artyrii genus est paupertas voluntaria. Bern. Se^m.
1. de omnibus sanctis.
and these two conditions are equally rewarded in the Gospel to teach us, that
poverty is a kind of Martyrdom. To say truth, if men do miracles, when they
overcome pain, when they tire their Torturers, when they triumph over Tyrants,
and vanquish the Elements, and wild beasts, do not they do wonders when they
preserve poverty, amidst riches? sobriety amongst Festivals? when they go
naked, amidst the pomp of apparel? when they are humble amidst honors? and
when they persevere to refuse the Goods which the devil promises them, which
the world offers them, and which the flesh propounds unto them? ought not they
to be crowned, who overcome the world with all it is promises, who contemn the
devil with all his illusions, and who tame the flesh with the concupiscence
thereof?

But in the advantages of poverty, we ought to observe the unrulinesse of our
nature, which is reduced into such a condition, as she cannot without danger
make use of what she has of good: she cannot without injustice pretend to her
ancient riches, neither can she acquire new wealth without avarice; we must
look upon the things of this world without desiring them, we must live upon the
earth, as in a place of exile, and to be happy and innocent, Si vis vacare
animo aut pauper fit (...), aut pauperi ^lis. Senec. Epist. 17.
we must be poor, or imitate those that are so. The possession of riches is
always accompanied with somewhat of Agglutination, which is never without
impurity; we are slaves unto our wealth, they possess us when we think to
possess them; we take pains in heaping them up, are careful in keeping them,
and sorrowful in their loss; it is as troublesome to keep them, as to lose
them, and the pain of purchasing them does always exceed the pleasure of
squandring them away. To free a man's self from these misfortunes, he must grow
familiar with poverty, he must sweeten his pain by suffering it patiently, and
look upon all the things of the world, as upon goods which we had lost before
were born. We are ruined in the person of our first father; our defeat as well
as our default preceded our use of reason, and the same fault which took from
us our innocence, bereft us of our riches. If we make use of the blessings of
the earth, it is out of mercy: if the Sun light us, the earth support us, and
the fruits thereof do nourish us, it is an obligation which we owe unto our God:
when once he pronounced the decree of our death, our goods were confiscated to
him; the power of making use of them, is a privilege which we hold of his
goodness, and he deals with us, as we do with those malefactors which we
suffer to live in prison, after their sentence of death is past: if they
dispose of their goods, it is by their Prince his favor; and if they leave them
to their children, it is by his permission. Thus we ought to think that nothing
belongs to us in this world, that God gives us all which he takes not from us,
and that he makes use of his own rights, when he re-demands that which he had
but lent us.

When Famine does dispeople the earth, when all our labor cannot overcome her
sterility, and when the seed we sow answers not our expectation, we ought to
adore Gods justice, which having sentenced us to death, has reserved unto
himself the kind of our punishment. Dominus dedit Dominus abstulit fit nome^
Domini benedictum. Job 1. 4.
If soldiers plunder our houses, if they do what they please abroad, if they
burn what they cannot carry away, and if they in a moment destroy what we have
been gathering many years; we must think that poverty is the punishment of our
disobedience, that we have no more right to our goods than to our lives, and
that he may well ruin us who can when it pleases him make us die. If our
families be undone by law, if Judges be corrupted by the credit of a powerful
man, if those who ought to defend us do oppress us, and if an unjust decree
bring us to beggary; let us remember that the decree pronounced against us in
Paradise, Illa est p^ peccati justissima, ut unusquisque illud quo been uti
^oluit, amittat. Aug lib. 3. de lib. arbit.
was more rigorous and more just, that succession or industry is no
prescription against Gods Justice, that how soever our goods be gotten, they
are always forfeited to him; and that process at law is as lawful a way to
bereave us of them as fire or shipwreck. In fine, whatsoever loss befalls us,
let us find our consolation, in our offense; let us make our punishment, our
remedy; and whilst we consider that we are guilty let us not complain of being
poor.

The seventh Discourse.
That Apparel is a mark of sin

IF whole man be but mere vanity, if Nature be out of order by his
disobedience, if his soul, which has the honor to be the image of God, and
which boasts of her innocence, cease not to find death in his sin; if the
will which joined with Grace is the beginning of merit, be more inclined to
vice then virtue; if his understanding which enlightens all the faculties of
the soul, be more capable of error then of truth; if all his knowledge be but
mere ignorance; if his most perspicuous virtues want not their faults; and if
his body be his souls prison, we must not wonder that the necessity of apparel
be a punishment of his fault, as well as riot therein is a mark of his vain
glory. But as it often falls out, that we are most taken with things of least
consideration, we find by experience, that there are women in the world, who
would rather have their souls sullied, then their cloths; Nullarum foeminarum
fere pretiofior cultus quam quarum pudor vilis est. Cyprian. de habit. virgin.
who would rather have the state be out of order, then their head attire; and
who would be less troubled to see their honor steined, then their gown. To
disabuse these weak women, they must be made know, that luxury in apparel
deserves to be despised by men, and to be punished by God.

Clothes have two uses, which are equally lawful, the first is to cover our
nakedness, and to hide our body, which began to be shameful when it ceased to
be innocent, Adam could not endure himself when he had lost original
righteousness, and the shame which infused upon his sin, made him seek out
leaves to hide that from his eyes which did displease his soul, he was afraid
of himself, when he saw his body did no longer obey reason: he was afraid to
offend nature by his nakedness, not having as yet seen any other monster then
himself, he withdrew himself into a wood, and not being able to shun himself,
he endeavored to cover himself. Fecit quoque Dominus Deus Adae and uxori^ ejus
tunicas pelliceas, and induit eos. Genes. 3.
God himself, who was indulgent to him in his sin, cut out his first suit, and
to free him from shame, which was not his least severe punishment, he clothed
him with the skin of beasts.

The second use of Apparel is to shelter us from the injury of seasons,
Tegendo homini necessitas praecessit, dehinc ornando ambitio successit. Tertul.
de pallio. cap. 4.
and to free our bodies from the rigor of the Elements; for man had no sooner
violated Gods Commandments, but all the creatures rebelled against him: beasts
began to grow savage, and retired themselves into the woods, that they might no
longer treat with a rebel; those which are now reclaimed owe their mildness
to our cunning, and stay not with us but because we have drawn them from the
Forests; if they obey us, it is out of hope of some advantage; and our
rebellion having freed them from their oath of Allegiance, which they had taken
in Paradise, we must feed them, if we will have any service from them. Those
which do reserve their natural fierceness, submit not un-inforced to our
will, they must be made to suffer before they be tamed, and our power being
Tyrannical, their obedience is constrained. They are slaves which serve but by
force, and who to free themselves from their servitude attempt sometimes upon
our lives.

At the same time when the beasts fore-went their mildness, the Elements
changed their qualities; Nullum est elementum quod homini aliquod genus mortis
non minetur.
those four bodies whereof all other bodies are composed, declared war one
against another to afflict us, and breaking the bonds which nature had
prescribed them, intrencht one upon another, to the end, their division might
be our punishment. They did that to punish us, which greatest enemies use to
revenge themselves; they endangered their own loss out of a desire to destroy
us. The earth which had served us for a nurse, became barren to make us perish
by famine; she grew hard under our feet to weary us: forgoing her flowers where
with she adorned her self to appear more pleasing to us, she loaded her self
with thorns to prick us; she opened her bowels to bury us; and she who grounded
upon her own proper weight, was always immovable, quaked under our feet to
work our astonishment. The Sea which judged aright, that our ambition and avarice
would not be contented with the Empire of the earth, Nihil tam capax
sortuitorum quam mare. Tacit.
hid rocks underneath her waves, troubled her calmnesse with storms, call in
winds to her aid to undo us, and advancing her waters into the fields, came to
set upon us amidst our own Territories: the air which seemed not able to hurt
us, save by denying us respiration, corrupted her natural pureness, to make
us sickly, lent her bosom to the Tempests, became the receptacle of hail and
snow, and being serviceable to Gods Justice, became the Magazine of his Thunder
and Lightnings, sent Pestilences into the world, turned a simple sickness into
a contagion, and carrying corruption through all parts, did oft-times change
the earth into a fatal sepulcher. Ignis an homini in hac vita perniciosior an
utilior jure dubitari potest.
Fire being the most active of all the Elements, did us more harm then all the
rest; for this body which seems to be but a pure spirit, and by which the
Angels themselves did not disdain to be called, crept into the Thunder, and
agreeing with it is enemy, formed storms wherein the waters mingled with flames
of fire seem to conspire man's death, and the worlds overthrow; contrary to
it is nature, which seeks out high places, it descends, and gliding into the
entrails of the earth, excites earthquakes, consumes mountains, and devours
whole Towns: to revenge it it self for the wrongs which we make it suffer by
making it a slave to all Arts, it burns those who come nigh it, it consumes
what is given it, and not interessing it self with men's designs, it oft-times
mars their workmanship.

But man was not so sensible of all these persecutions, as of that of the Sun;
for this glorious constellation drew up malignant vapors, spread abroad mortal
influences, disordered the course of the seasons, parted the Spring from the
Autumn, which were all one in the state of innocence; stripped the Trees of
their leaves in winter, withered the flowers in Summer, and bereft the earth of
her ornaments, and riches. Amidst so many disorders, man was bound to make him
clothes, and to rob his subjects that he might defend himself against his
enemies. He hunted wild beasts, clothed himself with their skins; he who had
aspired to make himself a God, was brought to a condition of decking himsefe
with the hides of Animals, and learnt to his cost, that no apparel is proof
for all seasons, but that of Innocence.

Thus his being necessitated to cloth himself is a mark of his offense, let
him do what he can to turn this punishment into bravery, O^ ista ornamenta
damnati and mortui hominis impedimenta sunt quasi ad pomp^m funeris constituta.
Tertul. de habit. mulieb.
he is bound to confess, that he covers his body only to fence himself from
pain, and shame, had he preserved the respect which he ought to God, his body
would not have rebelled against his soul, and had not this particular revolt
been followed by a general rebellion, he needed not have been obliged to seek
for Arms to defend himself against his subjects. He sees then his fault in his
apparel, they are sensible tokens of his disobedience, and would he govern
himself by reason, he should chastize his body as often as he puts on his cloths:
and yet we seem to have a design to out-brave divine justice, and to laugh at
it is decrees; to glory in it is punishments and to make that serve for our glory
which ought to serve for our confusion; for there is hardly any one who does
not some ways advantage himself by his apparel, who does not heighten himself
by the Luster of gold or pearl, and who turns not the shameful marks of his
undoing into stately Trophies of his victory. Adam was never so ashamed as when
he was forced to cloth himself, the skins he wore were the apparel of a
penitent; before that vanity had found out a means to imbellish them, they drew
tears from his eyes, and sighs from his mouth. He never clothed himself but he
bewailed his innocence, and when cold weather made him put on more cloths he
considered how the irregulariry of the seasons, was the punishment of his sin.
In sordib^ agebat Eva, ipsam se circumferens lugentem, and poenitentem,
ignominiam primi delicti, and invidiam perditionis humana omni satisfactionis
habitu expiabat. Tertul. de habit. mul.
His wife knew not as yet the art of trimming her self, all her daughters
eloquence could not persuade her that that which was a punishment of her
disobedience should add unto her beauty; and comparing her innocence with all
her other ornaments, she could never think to gain by an exchange, where for
original righteousness which she lost she got nothing but the slaver of
worms, or scum of fishes.

Let us use what art we can to lenifie our loss or to excuse our vanity, we
cannot deny but that our most gaudy apparel are the spoils of beasts; and that
we are very miserable since betraying our greatness, we seek for ornaments in
the bottom of the sea, or in the bowels of the earth, for what else is wool
but sheep fleeces? what is silk whereof so many different silks are made but
the drivell of worms, and the sepulcher which those little animals make unto
themselves when they die? what is purple which had wont to be the badge of
Sovereignty, but the blood of certain fishes? Sed lapillos qui cum auro
superbiam jungunt quid aliud interpreter quam terra minuta^ia: nec tamen aut
fundamentis demandandis aut pa^ietibus moliendis aut sastigiis sustinendis
necessaria. Tertul. de habit. mulieb.
what are Pearls but the warts of certain shel-fish, and the thickest part of
the foam of the sea, which could not be turned into it is substance? what are
diamonds and rubies but water congealed within rocks? what is gold which is
made use of in so many profane things, which men disguise in so many shapes,
which is sought for with so much pain, which is got with so much injustice, and
kept with so much care, but the excrement of a barren soil, to which the fire
gives Luster, and our error valuation? what in fine, is the linen cloth with
which we are covered all over, and wherein the greatest part of our vanity
consists but a kind of herb or grass which we see grow up and die, flourish in
the fields, and in a short time weather away? which passes through women's
hands, which is wetted with their spittle, turned with the spindle, strecht
upon the loom, wrought with the shittle, whitened in the dew, and at last cut
into bands and handcherchiefs? must not one have lost his judgment to glory in
such trifles? and if his ornament deserve any praise, is it not rather due, to
those that made them, then to those that wear them? whosoever glories in a suit
of apparel intrencheth upon his tailors right, and who values himself the more
for the stuff he wears, injures the worms that spun it, or the workmen In
homine la^dandum quod ipsius est vestem formosam habet and domum pu^cbram nihil
horum in ip^o est sed circa ipsum lauda in ipso, quod n^c eripi nec dari
potest. Sen Epist. 41.
that wrought it. Our glory ought to be in our selves, and we ought never to
ground our greatness upon a thing which we forego as often as we put off our
cloths. A man must not adorn himself with that which he borrows from other
creatures, and to believe that all the spoils of nature can heighten his
descent is to have too ill an opinion of himself.

But if the materials whereof our cloths be made be contemptible, the cause why
we wear them is criminal; for those who may be said rather to set out, then to
cloth themselves, and who join pleasures to necessity, have for the most part
but two designs, which are equally unjust. The first is to satisfy themselves,
and to entertein their self-love by the care they have of their body; they will
make an Idol of a slave, adorn a guilty person who deserves death, bring him
with pomp to his punishment, and disguise his misery to flatter his ambition:
they are like those captives who think the better of their Irons because they
are gilded: yet all their ornaments are but marks of their sin and
misfortunes; and as a footman who wears a gaudy livery makes but his misery
more visible, those who trim themselves the finest make but their shame more
public. The art of trimming or adorning acknowledges no author but the Devil.
Daemones instrumentum istud muliebris gloriae contulerunt, laminas lapillorum
quibus monilia variantur, and ^rculos ex auro quibus brachia arctantu^, and
medicamenta ex fuco quibus lanae co^orantur. Tertul. de ^abit. mulieb.
He who taught the curious the virtue of herbs to make their enchantments, and
the influences of the stars to order their Horiscopes by; he who taught the
avaritious the way to purify the earth, to make thereof the preciousest of
metalls, he who taught the ambitious the secret of intrenching upon the peoples
liberty, taught women to mingle colors, to polish diamonds,, to calcive
pearls, to compose materials, and to falsify whole nature to inhaunce their
beauty, and to acquire reputation by the loss of their modesty: ought not this
masters condition infuse distrust into his disciples? and if women had not as
well lost their judgment as their modesty, would they not believe that a
sinful Angel would tarnish their innocence, that impure spirits would attempt
their chastity, and that rebellious slaves would endeavor to make them lose
their humility?

The second design of those who delight in sumptuous apparel is to please
those that look upon them, to entangle souls in their nets, to purchase lovers,
or slaves, to govern by the pomp of their apparel, as Monarchs do by the
terror of their Arms. This is the more usual, and the more dangerous motive:
the more usual, because vain glory seeks out a Theater, because self-love, as
well as ambition, will have spectatours. Quod pro sold inani gloria vestimentum
pretiosius quoeritur, res ipsa t statur, quia nemo vult ibi pretiosis vestibus
indui, ubi ab aliis non poterit videri. Greg. Mag. in Homil.
To say truth, women do not greatly care for dressing themselves when they are
alone; solitariness is an enemy to pomp; a body is soon weary of linifying
himself when he means not to appear, the pain he finds in doing it makes him
lose the pleasure of it; and as Peacocks close up their plumes when no body
beholds them, women neglect their dressing when no body admires them. They
reserve their pearls and diamonds for great meetings; Courts, and Masks, are
the occasions whereupon they heighten their beauty; and when they have neither
witnesses to observe them, nor servants to adore them, self love is not of
power enough to make them adorn themselves.

As this motive is the more usual, so is it the more sinful; for to boot that
a woman that will cause love in another, runs danger of being caught
therewithal her self; that it is hard to carry fire to ones neighbor,
without self-burning; it is assuredly to imitate the devil, to serve for
instruments to wicked spirits, to lose the souls that Jesus Christ would save,
and to present poison, or a poniard, to mad men, who would kill themselves. Let
women disguise their designs how artificially they please, let them excuse
their intentions by their pretenses; the endeavoring to seem pleasing to men,
is never blameless, the desire of entangling them is always sinful, and the
care they take in attiring themselves, either to captivate them, or to continue
them captives, is equally prejudicial to their chastity. Pomp and luxury in
apparel savours of prostitution or vain glory, Vestium cultus aut (...) aut
prosti^u ionem sapit. Tertul. de habit. mulieb.
both these faults are contrary to our religion; The difference of condition is
but a piece of cunning which self-love has found out to authorize our
disorders. Our first condition is the condition of sinners; we are sinners,
before we be Sovereigns, our souls were sullied with Adams sin, before our
bodies were clad in purple; and all the titles which flattery confers upon us
cannot efface that of guilty. It precedeth our birth, accompanies our life,
and does almost always follow our death, so as from the cradle to the grave,
our chiefest ornament ought to be modesty, and our apparel ought to partake
more of penitency then of vanity. If we will Cur non mores meos habitus
pronunciat, ne spiritus puriores ab impudentis vulnerentur Tertul. de cultu
foemin.
not have the Angels to be therewithal scandalized, they must not savor of
novelty, they must not be riotous, and nothing must be therein observable which
denotes insolency or uncleannes: cloths were invented by shame and pain,
whatsoever ambition or self-love has added thereunto is superfluous, and who
governs himself by custom, or excuses himself by his condition, forgets that
he is a Christian, or remembers not that he is a sinner.

The eighth Discourse.
That the shame which accompanies Nakedness, is a punishment for our offense.

PHilosophers who knew not the secret of original sin, thought nature rather
to be the step-dame, then the mother of man, and that she had not given such
testimony of her care of his preservation, as of that of other creatures:
beasts are born with their weapons and their apparel; they are provided either
of hair or wool to fence them from the cold, and armed either with horns, or
claws to defend themselves against violence, those of the weaker sort have
their wiles to free themselves from their pursuers, and if they want both
strength and cunning, nature has furnished them with agility to shun their
enemies who hunt after them; thus we see that Lions are armed with teeth and
claws, and that these generous animals confiding in force, never refuse to
fight when combat is offered, bulls have their horns, stags their coverts,
wild bores their tusks, and all these differing defenses, are so well munited,
as a man cannot set upon them without danger of being hurt. Hunting is an
exercise wherein danger is mixed with delight, if the hunters give blows, they
oft-times receive some, and if deer or wild goats suffer themselves to be tame,
it is not without revenge. Foxes have so many wiles, as it is experienced as
well in hunting as in war; that it is easier to overcome a courageous enemy,
then a crafty one. Does, Hindes, and Hares, are so swift of foot, as dogs nor
horses cannot overtake them; these timorous beasts find their safety in their
feet, and as the Parthians fight retreating, these overcome their enemies by
running away.

Man on the contrary, who glories himself to be the Lord of the Universe, Quid
est homo* imbecillum corpus and fragile, nudum, suapte natura inerme, alienae
op is indigens, ad omnem fortunae contumeliam projectum, cujus^ibet ferae
pabulum and victima. Senec. ad Marciam c. 11.
enters into his dominions without either weapons, or apparel. He finds his
subjects revolted, and has neither strength nor agility to reduce them to
their duty, he is sensible of the unseasonablenesse of seasons, yet cannot
fence himself from their irregularities, nor defend himself from their
disorders. He makes trial of the rigor of the elements, yet cannot keep
himself uninjured by them: he is exposed to the fury of his enemies, and wants
weapons to fight them: and nature dealing with him, as with a monster or an
illegitimate child; affords him only tears to bewail himself; he must be
brought by time to the use of reason, before he can either make himself cloths
or weapons, for fourteen years space he is a prey for wild beasts, and did not
necessity make him ingenious, he would be the most miserable of all creatures.
Cortex ambit arborem, pe^ tegit volucrem, la^a ovem induit pilus jumenta and
fera^ vestit: Sol^ homo inermis and nudus nascitur. Hugo.
The rest are clothed as soon as born; natures self takes care of clothing
them, their apparel constitutes a part of their body, and the hair or wool
which covers them is the mere work of nature: but man is stark naked, when he
parts from his mothers womb, his skin is so tender as the very air offends it,
he must be put in prison, to be freed from the fury of his enemies, he is
treated like a slave to save his life, and he is not suffered to make use of
any of his members, lest he use them to his own prejudice. When he is grown
great, he is bound to make war upon nature, to preserve himself; to unrobe
beasts to cloth himself, he must use a kind of Tyranny upon creatures, if he
will free himself from the fury of the elements, and he has so little credit
in his dominions, that as he must tear up the earth for food, so must he strip
beasts to cloth himself.

Though these Philosophers complaints may appear just, yet are they
irrational; had they known man's fault they would never have blamed nature? for
she was not his step-dame, till he became a sinner; neither was she cruel to
him, till he was disobedient to God; during his innocence, she had largely
provided for all his affairs; Homo nudus in Paradis^ indumentum gratiae habebat
quando membra ejus voluntati non repugnabant. Aug. lib. 14. de Civit. cap. 17.
original righteousness served him for clothes, and though this apparel was
so very purely fine, yet was it proof against all seasons: as Summer was not
excessively hot, so neither was Winter extremely cold; Spring and Autumn were
so pleasantly inter-mingled, as man though naked, suffered no incommodity:
Trees which lent him their shade to refresh him, did not as yet furnish him
with leaves to cover him: the earth brought forth no thorns to offend him, it
was so smooth, and so all of a piece, as he might touch it, and not hurt
himself, the grass and flowers wherewith it was beautified, served in stead
of a pleasing Carpet, which satisfied his eyes, and was easy to his feet: In
fine, sin not having as yet wounded his soul, he was not enforced through
shame to cover his body; he beheld himself with delight, not with shame; Gods
workmanship not being yet through disobedience gone astray, he observed nothing
therein which was not pleasing to him; and to say all in a word, as he had no
faulty parts, so had he no shameful ones; he saw not in his body, the pictures
of his souls rebellion, and whilst the soul obeyed God, all parts of the body
obeyed the soul: Proinde con^ in obedientia carnis tanquam quam poena test
inobedientiae sua consuerunt for fici. Aug. lib. 14. de Civit. c. 17.
but as soon as he grew guilty, he was forced to betake himself to apparel,
to free him from pain and shame; for in a moment the seasons grew out of order,
the Elements waged war as well in his Dominions as in his body: the earth
mingled thorns with roses, the face thereof which formerly was smooth, became
furrowed; and stones succeeding in the place of flowers, turned a delightful
garden into a horrid desert. Man hearing storms thunder over his head, and
feeling thistles spring under his feet, was enforced to cover both head and
feet to preserve life.

He was no less oppressed with shame then pain, and the amazement he was in, to
see the shadow of sin upon his body, made him resolve to cloth himself, as
well as did the irregularity of the seasons: the Lord of the whole world who
bare the Image of God, imprinted in his face, was a ghast to see himself; he
could not endure his nakedness, after once he had lost his innocence; he
sought for leaves to hide his rebellion, and not having yet felt any pain for
his sin, he was ashamed of his punishment; he observed an impudent novelty,
which made him judge his nakedness unseemly; Extitit in motu corporis quaedam
impudens novitas unde esset indecens nuditas, and fecit att^itos reddiditq^
confusos. Aug. 14. de Civit. c. 17.
he knew by the disorders which he found in himself, that obedience of the
soul caused obedience in the body; and that the revolt of the one arose from
the like of the other. Since this fatal hour, man had shame mingled with his
delights; those which are most requisite are most shameful; those delights, by
which the world is preserved, are infamous; those which withstand death, and
make amends for the havoc he makes in families, require solitude, and
darkness. Man hides himself to re-produce himself; Hoc re^te factum sic
appetit sciri, ut tamen erubescat videri. Aug. 14 de Civit. cap. 18.
marriage which is holy in it is Institution, and sacred in it is type, is
shameful in it is use; nor has the necessity which does authorize it, been
able to take away the shame which does accompany it.

Man's death is more honorable than his birth; they glory in murder though it
be unjust, and are ashamed of marriage, though it be lawful. Open Champions
are the Theaters whereon battles are fought; these fatal and bloody actions
are done at noon day: they are made famous, and public by the beating of
drums, and sound of Trumpets; all men are called in to assist in the routing of
an Army; the Conquerours ground their renown upon the number of the enemy that
are left dead in the place; and that which is termed a Triumph, is the reward
of an hundred thousand murders; but man's birth is shameful, Sic igitur quod
decet ex natura, ut etiam quod pudeat, comitetur ex poena, August. 4. de Civit.
c. 18.
this guilty party steals into the world. Solitariness and obscurity are
destined for his production, and nature, makes him suspect that his conception
is criminal, since it is infamous. I very well know that a modern Author has
imputed this shame to man's fantasticknesse, that he has endeavored
effrontedly to maintain, that that ought not to be esteemed shameful, that was
natural; that amongst Philosophers the production of man was esteemed
honorable, and that the Art which instructs how to murder was as infamous,
as unjust; but this Author who never had other guide, than nature; no
religion, but libertinisme; no faith, but experience; nor other felicity, then
the delight of the sense; had not fallen into this error, if he would have
consulted the holy Scripture: he might there have learnt, that shame was born
together with sin, that nakedness accompanied innocence, and that man did not
abhor himself, till he became sinful. If he commit murder with impunity, if
he boast of fighting; if he be not pleased in the glory thereof, save when it
is bloody; it is because sin has corrupted his reason, and that engaging him in
cruelty, it has made him turn beast. But not to engage my self in seeking out
the cause of so strange a disorder, which seem to countenance murder, and to
place man's glory in the destruction of his like, 'twill suffice to know that
shame is the punishment of Libido in confusionis causa. Aug. 22. de Civit. cap.
17.
sin, and that nakedness Cognoverunt quia nudi erant nudati scilicet ea
gratia, qua fiebat ut nuditas corporis, nulla eos lege peccati menti eorum
repugnante confunderet. Aug. 14. de Civit. cap. 17.
was banished from off the earth, together with innocence. Man could not
consider his bodies revolt without confusion, he was troubled to see that he
who was so absolute in the world, was now no longer so in his own person; and
that he who commanded over savage beasts, could not commmand the moyetie of
himself.

It Is argued against this truth, that the Barbarians continue their going
naked, though they have lost their innocence, that shame has not been able to
make them cloth themselves, and that nature which is equal in all nations,
has not imprinted in them that resentment of shame which makes even the most
affronted to cover themselves, and to carry this their argumentation higher,
and to give it all the strength they can, they say that these people discovered
of late, are not polluted with original sin, since shame which is the
punishment thereof, has not as yet appeared in their faces. They laugh at our
apparel, and their climats being much more hot then ours, they are contented
with such clothing as nature has given them; and they leave us in doubt
whether shame be a punishment of sin or no, since they being as well faulty as
we, they are either less ashamed or more affronted. Illam perisse ego judico
^ui quidem perit^ pudor. Cur^us lib. 6.
To answer this objection we must suppose that shame Proque metu populum sine
vi pudor ipse regebat. Ovid 1. Fast.
which is a punishment of our sin, is also a remainder of our innocence; that
Adam who lost grace, lost not reason; that that light of nature which remained
to him, in his obscurity, was sufficient to make him distinguish between good
and bad, and to make him abhor that which contradicted seemlinesse. Though he
endeavored to excuse his fault, he observed the disorder thereof; and though he
loved the greatness which he had unjustly endeavored, he forbear not to blame
his rashness. Though this remorse was not sufficient to obtein pardon for
hisoffence, 'twas sharp enough to cause shame in him; and that of reason which
remained in him, was sufficient to make him blush. His passions revolt caused
as much shame as pain in him, and the rebellion of his flesh made him cover
himself as well as the rigor of the elements: this punishment was mixed with
grace, and God who would not for ever undo him, sent him this shame to reduce
him to his duty: 'twas an evidence that though his nature was Nullum quippe
vitium ita contra naturam est, ut naturae deleat etiam extrema vestigia. Aug.
19 de civit. cap. 12.
corrupted, yet it was totally destroyed; and that sin which had tyrannized
over him; had not been able to efface all the principles which he had received
from his Sovereign: but he neglecting the use thereof, and those who came of
him not improving this remainder of innocence, it grew weaker with time, and
the more faulty they grew, the more shameless they grew.

They lost as well the shame of sin as the knowledge of God, they lost the
only advantage which remained to them in their misfortune, and nature growing
obdurate, they did no longer lament their past happiness, nor were they
ashamed for their present misery. This is that which makes the Barbarians not
blush at their nakedness, which makes them glory in their shame, which makes
them esteem that natural, Evulgatus pudor non societatem libidinis (...) sed
incitamentum adfert. Tacit. Annal.
which is irregular; and which makes them authorize their disorder by their
evil custom. We must not wonder if those who have lost all the sense of
humanity, have not preserved the like of shamefac'tnesse; if those who make
greatness of courage to consist in revenge makes simplicity to consist in
impudence: if those who eat man's flesh, do prostitute it, and if those wild
people who know no religion, be likewise ignorant of modesty: but I wonder why
Christians take upon them the fashions of Infidels, why shamelessnesse should
pass from America into Europe, why believing women who have no more familiar
virtue then shamefac'tnesse, should imitate Barbarians, and that by discovering
their bosoms, they should defy modesty. They put on their apparel not to
cover themselves, but to make a show; that which served for their shame serves
now for their vain glory; apparel which was the mark of their modesty, is now
a proof of their impudence; did not the Periere mores, sus, decus, pietas
fides, and qui redire nescit ut periit pudor. Senec. in Agamemnon.
weather constrein them to put on cloths, they would go naked; their vanity is
such as seeks only occasion to show it self, they cast off their
handcherchiefs in great assemblies, it is uncivil to be veiled at a mask or a
play; and they are ashamed to appear modest, where men use all their art to
make them unchaste. Thus great meetings are nothing but public prostitutions,
innocence is there destroyed by bringing nakedness in fashion; and men lend
weapons to the Devil, to undo the subjects of Jesus Christ.

The ninth Discourse.
That Buildings are the work of Necessity, Pleasure, or Vainglory.

THough we do not know all man's advantages in the state of innocence, and that
that happy condition be not much lamented because it is not much known; yet we
very well know it was exempt from pain as well as from sin; and that man saw
nothing neither in his person, nor in his state, which caused either pain or
shame in him. The body was subject to the soul, and the senses, which so often
break Nudi erant and non confandebantur non quod eis sua nuditas esset
incognita, sed turpis nuditas non erat quia nondum libido membra praeter
arbitrium commovebat. Aug. 14. de civit. c. 17.
loose that they may fix themselves to objects without reasons permission, did
nothing but by her order; and this Sovereign was so absolute, as her subjects
had no other inclinations, but what were hers.

The world was as much at quiet as man was, and the elements with by their
contesting molest him, held so good intelligence as the one never intrencht
upon the rights of the other; men neither feared the overflowings of rivers,
earthquakes, nor fires; the earth was a temple and a palace, Religion did so
well agree with nature, as the same place served man to do his homage to God
in, and to disport himself in, he saw his Creator in every Creature, they were
images which painted forth unto him the perfection of him that made them, when
he beheld them for his pastime, his pleasure was not to be parted from his
piety, and contenting his curiosity, he satisfied his duty. In Paradiso etiamsi
non om^a poterat a^e peccatum, quid. quid tamen non poterat non volebat, and
ideo poterat omnia quae volebat. August. 14 de (...). c. 15.
This Temple was also his palace, he could wish for nothing, neither for
pastime, nor yet for profit, which was not in this stately habitation. The
heavens served him for a canopie, and the irregularity of the seasons had not
yet obliged him to deprive himself by buildings, of the sight of the most
beautiful part of the world; the Sun was his torch, and when this glorious
constellation withdrew himself to give light to the other half of the earth,
the stars stepping into his place, afforded light enough, not to leave men in
darkness, grass mingled with flowers served him for his bed: Trees lent him
their shade, and holes which nature had hollowed in rocks served him for
Chambers and Closets. Gates were needless when there was no fear of thieves,
A^s est ^minibus portus infortunii. Comic.
and windows would have been useless when people apprehended neither wind,
nor rain. Nature had so well provided for all things as arts were superfluous;
and her workmanship was so exact as man's industry could add nothing thereunto;
all the fields were gardens; all Forests, Parks; all dens, Palaces; and though
the flood has changed the face of the world, it is outrages could not efface
the beauty thereof. There be Forests yet thick enough to shelter us, Champions
of extent enough to weary our eyes, Valleys delightful enough for diversion to
them, and Cavernes rich enough to satisfy them: the pillars which sustain
these forests, are the models of our Columns, the brooks which water these
Champions, have furnished us with the invention of water-pipes; the concavity of
Trees hung in the air, has taught our Architechts to vault buildings; their
proportions have caused Symmetry, and the Caverns in mountains, are the
original of our houses.

It Is true that where sin had corrupted man, and disordered nature, we were
forced to raise buildings to save our selves from the injury of weather; and
not being secure in a condition where we saw so many subjects revolted, we were
necessitated to build Citadels to keep us from being surprised by them.
Necessitas brevibus clauditur terminis, opinio nullis. Marsil. Ficin.
But necessiy not being so ingenious as self-love, she was contented with
providing remedies for the most pressing evils, and did not seek so much for
accommodation, as for preservation. The first houses were but one story high,
the earth afforded the materials, and Thatch was the covering; man finding
nothing delightful, in so sad an abode wished for an earthly Paradise, and
never thought of his former condition, without being sorry for his
disobedience, which had banished him from thence: he never betook himself to
this prison, but either when the nights obscurity, or the weather, made him
seek for Covert; he looked upon it as upon his grave, and living in so
unpleasing an abode, he did by degrees prepare himself for death; but when
self-love grew weary of suffering the punishment of it is sin, and when justling
divine Justice it would find out a Paradise in this world; it invented
Architecture, and taught man how to change his prison into a Palace: under the
conduct of so good a Master he raised stately Palaces, he sought for stone in
the bowels of the earth, he polisht them with tools, he ranked them with
Symmetry, and placing one of them on the top of another, he made his exile
glorious, and his prison pleasing.

Those who will excuse this disorder, say that it is a work worthy the wisdom of
man; that he is not forbidden to defend himself from natures outrages; that
it is to imitate God, and that every building is an image of the world, and an
Epitome of the Universe; that time is requisite to bring things to perfection,
that the first men were not less vain, but less industrious; that if Adam had
been a good Architectour, he would not have left his children so long in Dens,
and Cabins: that houses were the beginning of Towns; that (...) Philosophia dux
(...) pepe^, (...) di^ ho^inet in societatem vit^ convecasti, (...) primo inter
se do^ deinde (...) ^xisti. Cicer. in Tuscul.
men were never civilized till they lived within the circuit of walls; and that
whilst they lay in Forests, their lives were rather bestiall, then rational.

But let vanity make what excuses she pleases, it is not to be denied but that
buildings as well as apparel, do prove our guilt, and that the excess and
pomp which are used therein, are marks of our ambition; for houses are built
either out of Necessity, Pleasure, or Vainglory; and men seek for nothing
therein but the preservation of their life, the satisfaction of their senses,
or the honor of their name. Our first fathers built only to shun the
persecution of the Elements; they were contented with a house which saved them
from storms, and provided that it would afford them shade against the Sun, and
covering against the cold, they were well apayed: Architecture was not yet
become an art, every man was his own Architect: after having cut out his
clothes, he made himself a house; and seeking only how to fence himself
against the incommodities of life, he sought for neither delight, nor vainglory
in buildings: two Trees joined together did oft-times make a house, the
entrance into a rock would with small cost, lodge a whole family; Tum primum
subtere domos, domus antra fuerunt, and densi frutices and juncta co^tico
virga. Ovid. 1. Metamorph.
and the thickets which now serve for a retreat for wild beasts served to
lodge men in: Nature was indulgent to these innocent malefactors; seeing they
bare respect to Gods Justice, which did punish them; she allai'd the rigor of
the Elements, and regulated the Seasons disorders. Though these first men were
less guilty than we, and that their buildings were the mere workmanships of
necessity, yet they did acknowledge Adams rebellion: as often as they withstood
themselves into those Sanctuaries of dirt and mire, they were bound to believe
that during the state of innocence, the world was not an Enemies Country, and
that the creatures did not make war against them, till their Father had
rebelled against God.

When they had lost the remembrance of the earthly Paradise, and their sorrow
for the loss thereof, they endeavored to content themselves in their exile,
and to please themselves in their structures, they enclosed whole Champians
within their Parks, they changed rivers into Waterworks; and Forests which
served for coverts to wild beasts, into Groves, for the better ornament of
their houses: Ager uni Domino, qui populum coepit, angust^ est: and est fundus
quod aliquando emporium vocabatur. Sen. Epist. 89.
that which did suffice to lodge a whole Generation, was too little to lodge a
single Family; one man possessed more land then a Nation; and that which
formerly made up a little Kingdom, was now the Farm for one particular man:
they made Nature serve their pleasures; they corrupted her who gloried to
follow Gods orders, did fit her inclinations to their designs; they saw no
rivers, on the banks whereof they raised not up houses of delight; wheresoever
the earth threw out warm water, they there made bathes; where the Sea advanced
it to the Land, they there made fish ponds, and prescribing bounds to this
Element, which receives Laws only from God: they forced the fierceness thereof
to be serviceable to their pastimes: they built Citadels on the tops of
mountains, to discover the subjacent Countries, and changing Champians into
large pastures, they made their neighbors inheritances serve their delights.

But man's luxury growing weary of things when they became common, and despising
what it possesses, after having gotten from nature all that they could hope
for, they disordered her course, to find contentment in her disorder: they
turned the course of rivers to enclose their Palaces withal, they raised up
valleys, and levelled mountains; that they might exercise their tyranny every
where, they found the invention of Arches to build in the air, and of
Aqueducts to bring water into Towns; they planted forests on the top of their
houses, Non vivunt contra naturam qui pomaria in summis turribus serunt, quorum
silva in tect^ do^um ac fastigiis ^tant unde ortis radici^, quo improbe
cacumina egi^ent. Senec. Epist. 122.
and bringing themselves to man's first condition, they lodged under trees and
woods; they built in barren places, that they might please themselves in
overcoming nature; they peopled Deserts to drive Lions thence; and to take
pleasure in pain, which seems to be her Enemy, they built houses in the midst
of solitary places. But certainly they were forced to confess that they were
inconsiderate in building so great Palaces for a man, who during his life, and
after death takes up but seven foot of earth, they grew weary of so great
buildings, they lost themselves in these Labyrinthes, and knowing that they
could fill but one chamber, they acknowledged it was unjustly done to build so
prodigious a number of rooms, Quid prosunt multa cubicula? in uno jacetis non
est vestrum ubicumque non estis. Senec. Epist. 89.
they learned by experience, that what they could not possess belonged not to
them: and that to build in so many places, was to make lodgings for Owls, and
to prepare habitations for Horn-Coots.

Vain glory reaped no advantage by the faults pleasure committed, but looking
upon the works thereof only as upon beginnings, she undertook whatsoever
seemed to be impossible, and her raising of Colossuses and Pyramides was only
to purchase fame: she thought that of all man's works there was none more
withstood the injuries of time, then those huge heaps of stone and rocks; she
esteemed victories, odious, battles, bloody; and thought that Triumphs required
Historians and Poets, to make them be known: she knew that Children were not
immortal, that kingdoms had their periods as well as families; and that the
virtues of Princes were as well buried in oblivion, as their vices: she was
persuaded nothing was of so long continuance as buildings, that the vast
greatness thereof, rendered their authors memorable to posterity, and that the
works of so many hands and so many years, could not perish but together with
the world. Upon this foolish belief, Kings caused Colossuses to be built of so
prodigious a height, that ships passed between their legs with their Masts up
and Sails displayed: they built Pyramides, the foundations whereof descended
even unto hell, and their tops were lost in the clouds: they tired their
subjects to content their ambition; they threw all the revenues of their
kingdoms into the bowels of the earth, to purchase reputation; they engraved
their names in brass, they hung their arms round about the walls of towns, and
because marble is more solid then paper, they thought that that these monuments
of vain glory would last longer then the writings of Orators or Philosophers.

This passion is as ancient as the deluge, (...) nobis tur ri^ cujus caput erit
usque ad (...) and feci^ nobis nomen. Genesis 11.
those that descended from Noah were the first that attempted it: they would
leave marks of their might to posterity, before they would divide themselves to
people the world; they undertook a piece of work worthy their vain glory, and
not knowing the distance between heaven and earth, they resolved to erect a
tower which should unite them both together: they thought certainly heaven
might have been taken by Scalado, and that without taking the pains to win it
by their virtue, they might take it in by storming. No less then a miracle
could dissuade them from so rash a design, they laid the foundation of this
building so deep in the earth, as they hoped to reach to heaven, after having
come so near hell: their work advanced insensibly, they had already outgone the
highest mountains, they saw storms formed under their feet; they wondered that
drawing nearer to the Sun, the cold grew the greater, they could not comprehend
how getting so far from the earth, their approach toward heaven should be so
very small, they lost the sight of men, the greatest trees seemed but as
Pismires to them, and all objects appearing to them but as Atoms, they wonder
that the stars seemed no greater. The desire of glory made them overcome all
difficulties, their courage was inflamed by their passion for purchasing
esteem, and the death of their companions that fell into precipices, could not
assuage their ambition. Heaven Descendit Dominus ut videret civita^ and turrim
quam aedificabant filii Adam and dixit, coeperunt hoc facere nec defistent a
cogitationibus suis donec eas opere compleant: descendamus and confundamus
linguas eorum. Genesis 11.
did compassionate their pain; to stop the course of so unprofitable a labor
it put confusion into their mouths; and to divide their underwanding, divided
their language, every wondered that he had forgot his native tongue, and learnt
another in an instant; the brother could not believe that his brother could not
understand him, the father thought it strange that his son could not conceive
what he meant and wives were much astonished to see their husbands change their
language not having changed their country. So strange an accident put an end
to so great a work, and parted those by force who out of vain glory had
undertaken it, the people that understood one another retired into the same
countries; that which had divided them from others, united them together, and
they imagined that 'twas the will of heaven, they should live under the same
climate, since it had given them the same language.

Men were not made the wiser by this memorable example; there were some, who
joining industry to vain glory endeavored to imitate the works of God, and to
make in this lower world an Epitome of the Universe. This was a more refined
pride, and seemed more praiseworthy then the other since 'twas more ingenious:
for Princes who built Tombs or Palaces had no hand in the work more then the
bare desire; the Architectours conceived the design, the earth furnished the
materials, the people were at the expense, and the handycrafts men contributed
their labor: thus was the glory divided, and those bare away the most, who
certainly deserved the least.

But when industry joined with vain glory, honor was no more divided; he who
laid the project employed no other hands, then his own to effect the work. Thus
did ingenious Archimedes enclose whole Nature Aemula Naturae parva reperta
manus.
in a vessel of Crystal; he observed all the motions of the heavens in a
brittle Globe, and if he could not infuse influences into the stars which he
there engraved, he gave them at least light and beauty: whosoever was in the
midst of this in-animated Sphere saw the Sun arise above his head, and the
stars set underneath his feet; this transparent globe did at one and the same
time show all the secrets of Nature, and looking upwards or downwards one might
there observe all the rarities of both the Hemispheres. A certain Poet,
admiring the excellency of this work, Luditur and fragili noster in orb labor.
thought he could cause Jealousy in his Jupiter, and in this belief made it be
told him in his language, that the hand of a man had equaled Gods hand: and
that if it had as much strength as it had compendious adresse, it might have
formed a second Uuiverse,

But notwithstanding what the Poets say, this Masterpiece of workmanship did
not survive it is author, the same age saw the beginning and end thereof, the
ransacking of a Town put a period to this little world, when Siracusa was taken
by the Romans, Archimedes was there slain, and his work destroyed. Those proud
Mausolaea which promised immortality to their builders, are reduced to ashes as
well as the bodies which they did enclose, we do not know the places where
their foundations were laid, and of all the marble and porphiry which went to
their composure, nothing but smoke and dust remains, of all the stately
buildings which vanity has produced, none but the Pyramides of Egypt have
triumphed over time. Those mighty masses of stone remain yet entire, the
Theaters, the Amphitheaters of Rome, which were built so many ages after these
miracles of Memphis, are now nothing but ruins, regarded for their Antiquity,
those proud portals and stately Theaters, for which Romes greatness, after she
has been so often demolisht, is still admited, are only receptacles for owls,
and nests for serpents. And those Temples, wherein heretofore so many Gods were
lodged, serve now only to raise Romes walls. But the Pyramides of Egypt stand
yet firm upon their foundations; Thunder bears respect unto them, the injuries
of time spares them, and as if Nature knew that they were built by the labor
of Gods people, that they are the workmanship of their hands, and that the
Coement Tempus edax rerum tuque invidiosa vetustas, Omnia destruitis, vitia-^
taque dentibus aevi, Paulatim lenta consumitis omnia morte. Ovid. 15. Metamorph.
which fastens the stones together was steeped in their tears, she preserves
this work as a mark of their servitude, and as an eternal monument of their
glorious deliverance. None of the other buildings, could defend themselves
against the elements; if the sword have-spared them, fire has consumed them,
if water have not overthrown their foundations, it has undermined their tops;
and if rust have not spoiled them, Time which consumes all things has devoured
them. It is not fitting that the workmanship of men should be more lasting then
that of God, Quid enim immortale manus mortales fecerint? septem illa miracula
and si quae his multo mirabiliora sequentium annorum extruxit ambitio aliquando
solo aequatavisentur. Sen. ad Polyb.
since Nature perishes in any one of her parts, that she preserves not her
productions but by their loss, there is no reason why edifices should be
eternal, since the world for being infected with sin was drowned by an
universal deluge, and shall be consumed by a general fire, it is not fit that
our Palaces which are but the inventions of pleasure or vanity, should be of a
bettercondition, and man must learn by the ruin of his workmanships, that
guilty hands can make nothing which deserves not to be destroyed either by
sword or fire.

The tenth Discourse.
That the greatest part of our pestimes are occasions of sin.

THough man had remained in the state of innocence, he would have stood in need
of some diversion or pastime, his constitution which places him beneath that
of Angels, requires that his labors should be intermitted by some honest
recreation, and his mixture of soul and body does not permit him to be always
busied. Nature, which serves him for a rule endev^s some relaxation in her
labors: ^
the earth rests in the winter season, she sometimes sports her self for
recreation, and amongst her serious works does some ridiculous ones, which are
her ^ions or extravagancies. The sea is calm after a storm, the winds w^ with
she was agitated leave her in quiet, and those spirits which appear enemies to
rest, are lulled asleep in the bowels of the earth.

Though labor be natural to man it needs relaxation, his spirit is too weak
to be always busied; it is not of the nature of rivers, or of the heavens which
find their rest in motion, as sleep repairs the bodies strength, so does
recreation repair the like of the soul, and change of exercise is to her a kind
of recreation. But in the state of innocence, man found his delight in his
duty, he unwearied himself in considering Gods wonderful works, and natures
beauties, which had charms enough to recreate him, Qu^ libet (...) specu^ est
in qu^ (...) nobis Deum (...).
had not power enough to seduce or corrupt him; whilst he saw the stars he
adored him who had given them their light and influences: whilst he beheld the
flowers he admired him who had made them so beautiful and delicate, whilst he
considered the earths fertility and the diversity of her productions, he
bethought himself how so many miracles cost God only the speaking of a word,
and how the nothing out of which they were produced did contribute nothing unto
them but a blind obedience. When he heard the comfort of birds or the noise of
the waters he rowsed up his soul to his Creator, and (...) he had understood
the language of those creatures, he sung his praises who had made them speak.
In fine, man was religious in all his recreations, whilst he did divert
himself, he did actions of piety; and Nature being mingled with Grace, whilst
he did unbend his cogitations he did some homage to his God. But when sin had
once corrupted his inclinations, he served his recreation from his duty, and
took delight in nothing but offense.

All the remedies which we bring to this disorder have not yet been able to
reform it: our most harmless recreations may become faulty, and we find by
experience that whilst we think to divert our mind we engage it in the
creature, Indulge goul^. (...) ^l (...), nostrum est quod (...), and man^ and
(...). (...).
which does estrange it from the Creator. Our disports have no longer either
measure or bounds, they are either useless or dangerous, if there be no
excess in them, there is vanity; if they do not ravish our hearts, they steal
away our time; and if they do not altogether thwart Gods will, they hinder us
from following it.

There are some men whose eyes are only busied in beholding the beauty of
Tulips; they make an Art of this pleasure, and a serious occupation of this
useless recreation; they traffic in onions, as Merchants do in stuffs: The
price of these flowers is inhanced by their fantasticalnesse; an extravagancy
in nature passes with them for a miracle; they therein admire the mixture of
colors, Adulterium colorum amat. Tertul.
they are not therein pleased with purity, and to use Tertullians words, if
they meet with no adultery, or incest there, they are not pleased. their
passion has found out a new language to express the difference of Tulips:
it is a piece of incongruity to use an ordinary term; a man must speak according
to the rules of Art if he will be admitted into their Academy. All the secrets
of husbandry are requisite to cultivate these flowers, which do satisfy but
one of our senses; they must be taken out of the earth, and put in again in
their due seasons; and a man must labor all the whole year to reap some
delight in the Spring.

The love of painting is yet of less ^e then is that of flowers; for let
painters do what they can they cannot equal nature: their pieces will never be
so well finished as are her productions, Pictura mendacium est veritatem
imitans Plato.
nor can their pensils how excellent Masters soever they be represent the roses
and lillies, which grow in the fields; yet we see men of good condition who
fill their Closets with pictures, who extract vanity from whence the painters
have extracted profit; who spend their lives in observing the Pieces made by
Bassa^, or Caravaggio, who study to know a copy from an original, and who
spend a good part of their estate in buying of pictures, Honestius inquis
impensas i^ corinthia pictasque tabulas quam in vestes pretiosas eff^derim.
Vitiesum est ubique quod ^ium est. Se^. de tra^quil. (...). 9.
which do not content their eyes, till they have wounded their imaginations.
This exercise is termed an honest recreation; men never blame themselves for
having spent all their time, their esta^, and their affection in this useless
occupation, nor do they think themselves too blame though they make an Idol of
the handy work of a Carver, or Painter.

Though clocks are useful, and that the hours which they show forth, put us
in mind of the shortness of our life, yet cannot I approve of too inordinate
affection thereunto. For what likelihood is there that our watches should
measure our time, of which we are so prodigal? Tam difficile inter Philosophos
quam inter horologia con^nit. Senec.
That we should take so much pain to make them go aright, and that we should
not labor to accord our passions? that we should be careful to govern them by
the Sun, and should never think of governing our selves by Jesus Christ? yet
this is one of the pastimes of the age; where we may see men who carry the rule
of their life in their pockets, who accommodate themselves unto their watches,
who think not that they go astray, because they measure their moments, and
enjoining themselves to as much pain as did Charles the Fifth, think there goes
no less art to make many watches go just together, then to make diverse people
join in the same design.

Learned men despise these recreations, and yet take others which bear not more
reason with them: the knowledge of Medals which was formerly only an help to
History, is now the occupation of Critics. They neglect the lives of Princes,
to study their pictures, they ground their science upon the Caprichio of an
Ingraver; such moneys as were current in the reign of the Emperors, are placed
in the best parts of their Cabinets. Vetustas quae prodidit colenda sunt,
satisque habent meriti si plurimum habeant temporis.
They treasure up brass and latten, out of a foolish curiosity, they change
weighty gold for rusty medals, and (...) if antiquity set a valuation upon all
things, they more esteem the picture of Antonius, or Marcus Aurelius, upon
copper, then that of Henry the Great, or Lewis the Just upon gold; they vex
themselves about worn out characters, they ask advice of all Authors, to
explain these Enigmaes, and as if they were ingenious to their prejudice, they
seek in sepulchers the cause of their punishments. These Sanctuaries of the
dead to which avarice bears respect, have not been able to defend themselves
against these men, who do violate religion, to content curiosity. Nature
complains of their searches, and all the World wonders that the pictures of the
dead which have nothing of pleasing in them can serve for a diversion to the
living.

But if all these pastimes be the effects of sin, it must be confessed that
gaming is one of the most unjust and sinful ones; it is authorized by custom,
and because it is common, it is thought to be harmless; half the world have no
other employment but this exercise. Definit esse remedio locus, ubi quae
fuerant vitia mores sunt. Senec. Epist. 18.
It Is is the trade of all such as have no trade, and the occupation of all
useless men: it is the ruin of the greatest families, and it alone sends more
poor to the Hospital, then hunting, love, and war do, joined altogether; yet
has it so powerful Charms as it makes it self be beloved of all those that
it disobligeth; it is Martyrs are so faithful to it as when they have no more
to lose, they notwithstanding languish after it; it is inconstancy makes them
love it, they hope that after having dealt ill with them, it will make them
amends; and being far from imitating those discreet lovers, who cease to pursue
an ungrateful Mistress, who paies their service with dis-respect, they
endeavor to overcome it is inconstancy by their fidelity, when this Tyrant has
made himself master of their affection, it is almost impossible to get them out
of his clutches; the loss of their estate sets them not at liberty, after
having lost wherewithal to play, they continue to love it; and the will
growing obdurate against what resists it, they never have so great a passion
for this pastime, Quod non licet acrius urit.
as when they are not in a condition of taking it. Though I hope not to cure an
evil which all the world holds incurable; I will not forbear to make the
nature of it known, to the end those who are not yet infected therewithal, may
defend themselves against it, and that growing weary by other men's harms, they
may fortunately eschew the danger.

It Is first disorder Ibi enim vitiorum omnium sed in primis irae atque
avaritiae regnum est. Petrarch. Dialog.
is that it awakens all the passions which discompose the heart of man, it
excites all those motions which molest his reason, it raises those
overflowings which moral philosophy endeavors to calm, it irritates such
Tempests as the other striveth to allay, and causes more storms in a moment,
then all philosophy can quiet in age. Avarice waits close upon it; and let
such handsome gamesters say, what they please, who do but bite upon the bridle,
when they loose; and who bear their bad fortune with a good grace, all men play
to win. This exercise is a kind of Traffic: it is a general usury wherein
every one glories; it is their clearest incomb, who can join sleight of hand to
good fortune, and who can lead fortune as they list. They are less egged on by
pleasure, then by profit; and if they will acknowledge their own weakness,
they must confess, that those who are most liberal, are avaritious at play.

Anger governs there yet more absolutely then does avarice; a man cannot have
ill luck without some commotion, Si qui ale^ ludunt omnes perdunt, nemo unquam
luderet. Nunc lucrantur aliqui, sed lucrum illud arrha est damni. Petrarch.
Dialog. 27.
his pulse beats high, when the dice do not favor him; an unlooked for chance
puts him in disorder; if his ill luck prove constant, his fury turns to
impiety, and after having imprecated the gain, he vomits forth blasphemies
against heaven. Ambition takes her place between avarice and anger; for though
play makes all men equal, though the freedom of play forbids ceremony, though
it be lawful in play for every man to defend his own liberty, and that therein
the servant may argue with his Master, yet vainglory has a share therein; men
think winning an advantage, and that he that wins is either more dexterous, or
more fortunate; and as if fortune ought to be more just in play, than in
battles, men complain that she favors the weakest, or the worst side.

In fine, sorrow succeeds all other passions in this exercise, for if the loss
be great, it is always accompanied with sorrow. Shame and repentance set on
those that loose, Taxillorum nullus eventus prosper, mali omnes and miseri. Nam
and qui perdit affligitur, and qui vincit illicitur inque insidias protrabitur.
Petrarch. Dialog. 27.
the one siezeth on the heart, the other on their countenance; they are
displeased with all things: not knowing to whom to break themselves, they
betake themselves to every body; and are bound to confess, that contrary to
their intention they find pain and repentance, where they sought for pleasure
and recreation. The second disorder of play, is, that it alienates men from
their duty, and hinders them from doing what they ought, or from attending
their affairs. All worldly things are so linkt together as an evil seldom
comes alone; one misfortune always produces another, and it is almost
impossible, that a malady does not oft-times become a contagion. Great winds
cause great droughts, and whilst the air is agitated with these exhalations,
the earth is no^ watered with rain. Droughts cause dearths, and all the
husbandmans labor cannot defend us from famine. Dearths cause the plague; for
when necessity makes all things food, and that without considering what is
good, or what is bad, men fall to whatsoever they meet withal; men's temper
must be corrupted, and the body which is nourished with unwholesome food, must
needs gather ill humors. Thus in a Kingdom, one disorder is always cause of
another. Pejus vivere sub principe qui omnia scele^a per^ quam sub eo qui omnia
ulciscitur.
Indulgency of Princes leaves faults unpunished, impunity causes
licentiousness; licentiousness ushers in murder, and murder causes war in
the midst of peace. Particular families being little States, and Economy being
the picture of policy, one disorder never happens there alone; the Masters
fault is always followed by the confusion of all the Domestiques. Excess in
gaming is an infallible proof of this truth, for those who passionately love
this pastime, give over the thought of business, neglect the government of
their house, lose all their relations of Father, Master, or husband, and by one
and the same fault, injure their children, wives, and servants. They lose all
they have, in a short time, they morgage their lands, contract debts, and are
constrained to keep out of company because they cannot appear abroad in their
former gallantry. If the wives will not shut themselves up with their husbands,
they must make friends, and must engage their conscience, and betray their
honor to continue their ordinary expense and port.

But if this misfortune which is but too ordinary, should not happen, Gamesters
must confess, that this exercise bereaves them of all their time, which is a
disorder no less considerable then all the rest. For Time Rect^ lud^ iste
latruncu^rum dict^ est cum rem omnium pretiosissimam tempus scilicet furetur.
Petrarch.
is the most precious thing that is, our salvation depends upon the moments
thereof; eternity must be his reward or punishment, and we shall be happy or
miserable according to the good or bad use we make of time, which is the
measure of merit, the rule of good or bad actions, and these days which we are
so prodigal of, are the bounds which divine Justice has prescribed to our
labors. When the soul forgoes the body, and passes from time to eternity,
it is no more in her power to acquire virtue, or ^hstand vice, she carries
nothing into the other world but what she has gathered here: good desires are
of no advantage to her, if they have not bin fore-gone by good effects; nor can
all the ages to come profit her, if she have not employed past moments well. Yet
Nil pretio^ tempore and nihil body eo vilius invenitur: transivit dies salutis
and nemo recogitat: Nemo sibi perire di^ nunquam redituram causatur, sed sicut
capill^ de capi^ sic nec mom^tum peribit de compor^. Bernard.
experience teaches us, that gamesters never count their years; a man must be
very eloque^t to persuade them that hours are more precious then pistols, and
that it is easier to pay their debts then to recover the weeks which they have
lost. Time advances always and never returns, it is as hard to recall time
past as to stop the present. When the Sun (which is the rule of times motions)
stood still in the midst of his career, to obey a man's word, the present time
ceased not to roll on, though it had lost it is guide, when the same
constellation returned toward the east. to assure a great Prince that his
death was deferred, the time past did not retreat back with it, and divine
Providence which changed the course of the Sun, would not alter the nature of
time. Yet Nemo se judicat quidquam debere qui temp^ accepit: quum interim hoc
unum est quod ne grat^ quidem potest reddere. Senec. Epist. (...).
all such as play are prodigal thereof, they are shamefully profuse of a
thing, the sparing whereof is honorable; they think they give their friends
nothing when they bestow but whole days upon them, and because the loss
thereof is common they think it not considerable: their life is iesse deer unto
them then their pleasure, and they prove that passion blinds them since under
pretense of pastime these shorten their life, and hasten their death.

But though they be guilty of so many faults, they still allege vain excuses,
and use false reason to defend their bad cause, they say that a man cannot be
allways busied, that the weakness of his spirit and the misery of his
condition considered, Lyram and a^cum remittimus quo melius possint tendi, ita
reereandus otio animus ut ad labores reddatur vegetior. Plu. tarc. in Moral.
recreation is requisite for him. I confess that this excuse has some color
of truth, and that men who are most serious need some relaxations in their
businesses; but they must not make a trade of their recreation, nor must they
contrary to the laws of Nature, employ those hours in pleasure, which are
destined for labor: as those men are to be blamed who turn their Physic into
food, and who to purge away some ill humors, forego their usual meat, and
take nothing but medicines. So are they likewise, who leave serious exercises
to use such only as are of no use, and who think they live in a world, only
to please themselves, and not to take pains.

Some others say, that it is better to play, then to deprave, that less evil
is committed in Academies then in company keeping; and that those who are
busied about play, trouble themselves not with their neighbors faults. That in
this corrupted age, wherein the severest virtue becomes the subject of Calumny,
it were to be wished, that all the world would be silent, that men were dumb,
and women deaf, to the end that detraction and idle talk were banished from off
the earth. That gaming is fortunate in producingthese two effects, and that it
does so powerfully possess those who practice it, that they have no use of
their tongue to talk idly or deprave, nor yet of their ears, to listen to
such things. That of two necessary evils a man must shun the most dangerous,
and that recreation be it of never so little use, will always be innocent
enough, if it can hinder revile and unchastity. Non ideo vitia in usum
recipienda sunt quia aliquando aliquid boni effecerunt. Nam and sebres quaedam
genera valetudinis levant, nec ideo non ex toto illis caruisse melius est.
Abbominand^ est genusremedii sanitatem debere morbo. Sense. 1. de l. (...).
cap. 12.
They must be but weak men that are satisfied with this bad excuse. For it is
not permitted in our religion to cure one evil by another. Moral Philosophy
and Physic do differ in their cures, the latter hurts to heal, and imploys
instruments and fire to dry up an Ulcer, but the other does not allow that a
man commit one fault to forego another, and knowing them all to be averse to
virtue, whose party she mainteins, she equally condemns them. Saint Paul never
advised us to use play so to keep men from slandering, and this great Apostle
who loved chastity so well, never thought that an excess in recreation might
serve him for an excuse.

Though Idleness do cause love, all exercises do not extinguish it; this
passion has her employments as well as others; after having consumed it self
away in sighs, it is well pleased to take some recreation, and of as many
pastimes as it chooses, there are not many wherein it delights more then in
play, it makes use as of an occasion thereof to see and entertain what it
loves. It uses such freedom as that pastime affords it. It teaches slaves
to act two parts at once, and to hazard their money and their liberty upon the
same chance or card, that Poet who was so justly banished to Pontus Euximus for
Turpe est nescire puellam ludere, ludendo saepe paratur amor. Ovid.
having taught the Roman Ladies how to make love, recommends play unto them,
as a pastime which serves to their design: he will have all maidens know how to
play, and that by a double traffic, they win their Lovers hearts and money.
The Privatives which accompany this pastime, are fitter to kindle flames of
love then to extinguish them. This passion is entertained by the presence of
such objects as do arise, she expresses her self by looks and sighs, she
furnishes Lovers with a thousand ways to seduce those who will listen to them,
growing learned in so good a school, they quit their losses, and oft-time of
servants become Masters. But if all these sufficient reasons cannot disabuse
those women who love play, and if they think it be a buckler for their
chastity, we will give them leave to play, provided they will give us leave to
believe that this exercise is a cure for their incontinency, that the use
thereof is permitted them only to free them from love, and that knowing their
frailty, they are allowed this pastime to secure their reputation, which would
be in hazard of shipwreck, if they should be idle or solitary.

Yet if they will listen to our religion, this wise tutouresse will Hae
voluptates haec spectacula Christianorum sancta, perpetua gratuita, cursus
saeculi intuere tempora labentia dinumera, ad signum Dei suscitare, ad tubam
Angeli erigere, ad Martyrii palma^ gloriare. Tertul. de spectaculis.
furnish them with better means how to assist chastity, when it is assailed.
Her enemy dares not pursue her in prison, those places of dread infuse horror
into him, and being guilty, she fears all places where guilty people are
punished; she apprehends hospitals, and her delicate disposition cannot endure
those houses where the eyes see nothing but objects of pity, where the ears
hear nothing but complaints, where the nose smells nothing but evil odours, and
where all the senses find nothing but subjects of mortification. Penance is a
better cure for love then play, and if women who seek to succor their
weakness by this diversion, had kept their bodies under by fasting and
penance, they would confess that suffering is a friend to chastity; and that
the fire which does consume them, is the just punishment of their infamous
delights.

The earth is an abode of penance; we should not seek for pastimes since we
were driven out of paradise: guilty men dream of nothing but death after once
they are condemned. The sorrow for their fault, and the apprehension of their
punishment will Dehinc cum de originis loco homo exterminatur, quippe qui
deliquerat, pellitus orbi ut metallo datur. Ter tul. de pallio. cap. 3.
not permit them to take any pastime: he would redouble their pain, who should
propose pastimes unto them, the most ingenious Tyrants never inhibited
complaints to such as were to be punished. Yet it seems the Devil deals so
rigorously with us, as he binds us to recreate our selves after condemnation,
and engages us in debaucheries, to take from us the occasion of bewailing our
sins. If we take any recreation, let us not forget our misfortune, let us
mingle tears with our delights, let us take our pastimes as sick men take
potions, let necessity which ought to be the rule thereof, be our excuse; and
let us not allow our selves longer relaxation, then is necessary to support the
miseries of our life. Let us wish for that glorious condition where Saints find
their recreation in their duties, where the same object which does ravish them,
does recreate them, and where by an admirable encounter, all the faculties of
the soul are always employed, yet are never weary nor weakened.

OF THE CORRUPTION OF ALL CREATVRES. The Sixth and last Treatise:
The First Discourse.
Of the Beauty, Greatness, and Duration of the WORLD:

THough the world lost it is first purity, when man lost his innocence, there
remains yet therein enough of beauty, to oblige such as do consider it to make
it is Panegyricks; Visibilium (...) xim^ est (...), invisibilium (...) maxi^ est
Deus sed ^dum esse conspi^ Deum esse credi^. Aug. de Civit. lib. 11 cap. 4.
sin could not so much efface all it is perfections, but that those which it yet
has, caused admiration in Philosophers; and force Infidels to adore his hand
who made it. It resembles their famous beauties to which age or sickness have
yet left features enough to make their beholders judge that 'twas not without
reason that they were adored in their youth. Thoug it be disordered in some of
it is parts, though the elements whereof it is composed do divide it, though the
seasons which maintain the variety thereof cause it is confusion, though
Monsters which heighten the works thereof dishonor it, and though beasts which
have antidotes in them, have also poisons; yet is it easy, to observe the
worlds advantages amidst it is defaults, and to acknowledge that if Divine
Justice have put it out of order to punish us, Providence had ordained it for
our habitation, and had placed nothing in so vast a palace which was not
sufficient to ravish our senses, and to content our minds.

The curious discover therein every day new beauties to satisfy themselves;
it is a book which never wearies those that read it. Every creature Mundus ipse
liber est tot litteris exaratus quot creaturis, in quo possunt omnes legere and
intelligere. Chrysostom.
is a character which represents some one of it is Authors perfections, and
Infidels instructed in this school have framed unto themselves noble Ideas of
the divine Essence. In effect, the spaciousness of the Heavens which serves
for bounds to nature, and which enclose all the works thereof in their extent,
do point out unto us Gods immensity, who comprehends whatsoever he produces,
and incloseth within his essence whatsoever he by his power does draw from
thence. The earths solidity which serves for center to all the world, and which
grounded upon it is own weight cannot Immotusque mane^s dat cuncta moveri.
Boethius.
be shaken by storms nor winds, is an Emblem of Gods stability, who causes
all the alterations in the world without any change in himself, and who by an
unalterable act of his will, rules all the adventures of our life. The Suns
light is a shadow of his, and the prodigious activity of this glorious
constellation which produces metals in the bowels of the earth, flowers and
fruits in the fields, clouds and meteors in the air, and which by it is
influences does rule over all the productions of nature, is the picture of that
infinite power, which shed abroad in all his creatures does act with them, and
accommodate it self to their inclinations. The incensed sea big with storms,
the waves whereof rise up unto the heavens and descend unto the depths, her
fury which threatens ships with wracking; and the neighboring fields with
deluge, is a fearful draught of Gods anger who prepares torments for sinners,
and makes himself be dreaded by rebels who would not love his goodness. In
fine, every creature is a lookingglasse Ex perpetuitate creaturarum
intelligitur Creator aet^rnus, ex magnitudine omnipotens, ex ordine and
dispositione sapiens, ex gubernatione ^onus. August. in Joan.
wherein a man see the Lineaments of his Creator, and where, with but a grain
of grace all rational men may become faithful.

So prodigious is the mightiness of this work, as 6000 years have not been
sufficient to discover it; avarice nor ambition have not been able to find out
the ends thereof; there are yet whole Countries whether by reason of the
extremity of cold; and the Seas vast extent no man ever yet came. There are
unknown Hinc camporumi^ infinitum p^tentium fusa planities, varii u^bium situs,
and seclusae nationes locorum difficultate, littor^ in portum recedentia,
sparsae tot per vastum insulae qua intervent^ suo maria distinguunt. Senec. ad
Marc. c. 18.
deserts which man's curiosity has not been able to penetrate, and the Sun
enlightens some part of the earth whereon no Conqueror ever yet set his foot.
Those who have gone round the world, have not discovered it is profundity, and
though they be vainly persuaded that there is nothing so great which their
understanding cannot comprehend, yet are they bound to confess, that there be
havens whereinto they never put, and savage people, whose language nor manners
they understand not. There is none but God alone who knows the greatness of
his work; every age discovers unto us our ignorance. And though the earth be
but a point, yet does it consist of so many parts as we may with reason doubt,
if what we know not thereof, do not exceed for bulk and beauty, it is known
parts. That new world which our forefathers knew not, is richer, and of larger
extent then ours. It is so ravishing, as it makes whole Nations quit their own
Countries to conquer it; the wealth thereof gives the law to all Europe; the
latter Kings of Spain have made more conquests with the gold thereof, then all
their Pred^ssours have fought battles with the iron of their Mines. Their
overcoming of this part of the world has made them overcome the rest; their
victories depend only upon it. And did not the Indians dig up the entrails of
Perve, the Spaniards would not trouble the Peace of Europe. It Is true, that
these Provinces are so far distant from the Center of their State, and the Sea
which brings them the wealth thereof is so treacherous, as they run hazard of
being undone, as often as the Indian Fleet is in danger of shipwreck. And
Politicians are of opinion, that so great a body the parts whereof are divided
by so many seas, can be of no long durance: Deus omnia videt quid totus oculus,
omnia potest quia totus manus, omnia replet quia totus p^ est. August.
it only appertains to God to govern in a State, the Provinces whereof though
never so far distant, are yet always united to their Sovereign; and which
though situated in different Climates, are still enlightened by the same Sun.

The beautifulness of this Kingdom is answerable to it is greatness, nothing
is therein to be seen which hurts the senses, all the pieces whereof it is
composed are pleasing, their difference makes a part of it is beauty, and the
wit of man which is naturally critical, can find nothing in this work to be
found fault with. Every part is so well placed as they are not to be altered
without some disorder. Deus t^tam molem istam cum omni instrumento elementorum
corporum spiritaum verbo quo ^us fit, ratione qua disposuit, virtute qua potuit
de nihilo expressit in ornamentum majestatis sua. Tert. in Apologetic.
The Elements are lodged according to their deserts; the earth as the heaviest
makes the lowest story; the fire as the lightest is nearest heaven, the air
and water whose qualities have some resemblance, are seated above the earth;
and beneath the fire. The noblest of these Elements is the most barren, it is
so active as it will not permit any creatures to live in it. The Salamander
does for a while resist it is heat, and till his moisture which does preserve
him, be dried up, he delights in the fire; but if he tarry long there, his
pleasure turns to pain, and he there finds his death.

The air whose purity comes nearest that of the fire, is the abode of birds,
they cut this liquid Element with their wings, they make new paths in those
spacious Champians, they therein breath with freedom, and till man found out
the art to kill them with his arrows, they laughed at his Empire. Their wings
are oars which guide through this sea, their tail is their rudder, and when
the storm is so great, as they fear being born away by the fury thereof, they
take up stones in their feet, and defend themselves against the Tempest. Though
they live at liberty, Aquilae solemn ita sustinent ut natorumsu^rum
ge^erositatem de ^illarum aud^ judicent alioqui non educabunt ut degenerem quem
solis radius averte it. Tert. deanima.
they acknowledge a King, which title the eagle has won, be it whether for
that she flies highest, or for that he can look fixedly on the Sun, or for that
he defends his subjects from birds of prey, which appear to be the Tyrants of
this part of the world.

The Sea abounds more in fishes, then the air does in birds. Their number is
as prodigious, as their shapes, the species is there by miracle preserved, and
Naturalists who boast to know all things, know not in what part of the fish,
her fecundity does lie. The Elements which give them their life being almost
always in agitation, war is there more frequent then peace, and the abode of
these Monsters is the picture of a State divided by Civil war. Right consists
there either in force, or fraud, the greater eat up the less, and if the weak
ones want nimblenesse to defend themselves, they become a prey to the more
puissant. A^citiae exempla ba^ and musculus quando p^gravi superciliorum
pondere obrutis ejus oculis, infestantia magnitudinem vada p^aenatans
demonstrat oculorumque vice fungitur. Plin. lib. 9. cap 62.
The Whale which does for greatness equal mountains, does not govern in this
Empire; this great Colossus wants spirit to inanimate his body, Nature which
has made him so vast has made him so dull, that he needs another fish to
guide him, he would fall foul upon the sands, did not his faithful Officer
keep him aloof from the shore; and this inanimated Rock would bruise himself
against the earth, did not this guide advertise him of his danger; to
recompense his guide for so good an office, he lends him his throat for a place
of retreat, and this living gulf serves for a Sanctuary to this faithful
guide. Delp^is non homini tantum amicum animal, verum and musicae arti,
mulcetur symphoniae cantu. Hominem non expavescitut alienum, obviam navigiis
venit, alludit exaltans. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 8.
The Dolphin is the Sovereign of the Sea, he carries the Ensigns of his power
in the noblest part of his body, and Nature which has given him dexterity to
command, has placed a Crown upon his head, to put a difference between him and
his subjects; he naturally loves man, and as if he knew that he likewise were a
Sovereign, he helps him at the sea who commands upon earth; he is delighted
with music, though he be dumb, he is not deaf, and the love he bears to
music, has made him oft-times assist Musicians in shipwreck.

The earth is no less peopled then is the sea: this fruitful mother is never
weary of bringing forth children, nor of nourishing them; all the parts thereof
are fertile: Deserts which produce Monsters, produce food likewise to nourish
them; Forests serve for retreats to wild beasts, the fields receive such as
are necessary for man's entertainment: and Towns afford shelter to such as we
have reclaimed, and made tame either for our service or pastime; every species
is preserved by multiplying it self; Nature repaires the havoc made by death.
And notwithstanding the cruelty which men use toward those harmless beasts,
Horum insatiabilis gula hinc maria soris tatur hi^c terras, alia ham is, alia
laqueis cum magno labor persequitur, nullisque animalibus, nisi ex f^tidio p^
est. Sen. Epist. 89.
their number is not diminished. Excess in feasting cannot drain either the
earth, or sea, these two Elements abound more in fruitfulness, then we do in
gluttonies; and notwithstanding any debauches made, yet at any time in any
Country; the fields were never depopulated. Though man be the Sovereign of all
the world, he is much more absolute in the earth, than either in the water, or
air. He rules over fishes, and birds only by art; and since they dwell in
Elements which are not conformable to his nature, he must use violence upon
himself, before he can fight against them. He gets o^ shipboard, and trusts
himself to the perfidiousnesse of the sea to surprise fish. He cannot come up
to birds because of their swiftness, his mind could never yet raise his
earthly body to pursue them in the air. He sends bullets where he himself
cannot go, and putting division between these innocent creatures either by
industry or deceit, he makes the Gerfaulcon fly at the Heron. But he can do
what he will with beasts, he sets upon the fiercest of them in their Forts;
their dens nor thickets cannot defend them from his violence. Animalium
tyrannus homo primus animal occidit Hyperbius Martis filius, Prometheus bovem.
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 56.
He reclaimes some to make use of them, he strips others to clothe himself;
and cuts the throats of others to feed on. This absolute power impedes not the
beasts from having Sovereigns amongst themselves. The Lion has won this honor
by his strength and courage; all other beasts bear him respect; at his roaring
all his subjects tremble; nor are Kings more re-doubted in their Kingdoms,
then is this noble Animal in Forests.

Thus all things in the world are wisely ordered; every Element acknowledges
it is Sovereign, every species has it is laws, and had not man disordered this
great Republique, all the parts thereof would yet enjoy peace and tranquillity.
Yet they agree in what is requisite for the worlds preservation; Per propria
singula a singulis elementa separantur, per communia singula singulis
nectuntur: oportebat enim esse separata, ut singula suam conservarent naturam,
oportebat and aliquo nexu copulata esse ut ex his omnium corporum nasceretur
compositio. Procopi, Genes. cap. 1.
though their inclinations be contrary, they keep fair quarter in their
quarrels, and do not forgo all sense of love, when they exercise their hatred.
Fire agrees with water to compose all bodies, and air mingles it self with
earth to give life and breath to all creatures. Every Element uses force upon
it is inclinations to agree with it is Enemy. In birds the earth becomes light,
in beasts the air waxes heavy, in fishes fire grows cold, and water hardens
in rocks: if at any time they fall foul, it is always out of some good design;
and divine providence by which they are governed gives them not freedom to wage
war save for her glory, and our advantage. The obedience which they owe to God,
exceeds their own aversions, and the Commandments which he gave them when he
made them of nothing, keeps them yet within their duties; they do not make use
of their advantages which one of them has over the other, and knowing very
well that the worlds welfare depends on their agreements; they appease their
hatred to cause it is quiet. The fire invirons all the other Elements without
consuming them, it is content to burn such exhalations as come near it, and to
set such Comets on fire as do presage alteration in States, or the death of
Kings. The air does enclose all sensible creatures, the humidity thereof does
temper the fires heat, and the earths dryness. Waters make no advantage of the
situation which Nature has given it, though it be liquid, and raised above
the earth, it does not pass his bounds, the word of God gives it it is limits,
he who raised it up retains it, and he teaches us by this miracle, that there
needs no more to drown the world, then Hi circumfuso pendebat in aere tellus
ponderibus lib^ata suis, and pressa est gravitate sui. Ovid. 1. Metamorph.
to leave the sea at liberty. The earth has it is foundations laid upon the
air, this Element wherewith it is environed, supports it. The worlds Basis has
no other stay then the weight thereof; that which ought to beat it down,
susteins it, and it keeps equally distant from all the parts of heaven, only
because it is the heaviest of all bodies.

But that which astonisheth all Philosophers, and fills the wisest pates in the
world with admiration, is to see that the world which is but a point, should be
the center of the Universe, and that all Creatures labor only to adorn or to
enrich it. The heavens roll incessantly about this hillock of sand to beautify
the fields thereof. Terra omnium media posita est circa quam coelum volvitur,
quam astra omnia illuminant, and ipsa quoddam astrum est quia immobilis.
Alcinous cap. 15.
The Sun inlightens it and cherishes it with his beams, this glorious
constellation has no other care then to make it fertile, and if he be in
perpetual motion, it is that he may adorn it with flowers, load it with fruits,
and enrich it with metals, the Air forms no clouds nor rain, save only to
water it: And whole nature is busied in nothing but how she may oblige the
least part of the Universe. It Is truth; the earth does thankfully acknowledge
all these favors, for as she owes all her productions to the Suns favorable
aspect, she in token of thankfulness thrusts all her fruits up toward him,
opens all her flowers when he rises, shuts them up when he sets, and as if she
were only adorned to please him, she hides all her beauties when he keeps far
from her.

Though all these considerations make the worlds beauty sufficiently appear,
that it is creation is the most considerable part of it is excellency. And he who
knows not what means God used to produce it, Quomodo fecisti coelum and terram
non sit ut homo artifex formans corpus de corpore non utique fecisti mundum in
mundo quia non erat ubi fieret antiquam fieret ut ess^. August. lib. 11.
Confess. cap. 5.
Ignores the rarest of all his wonders. This great piece of workmanship had
nothing, but nothing for it is Materia, all the different parts whereof it is
composed had the same original, and this vacuum in-animated by the word of
God, brought forth the Heavens with their constellation, the earth with all
it is fields, and the sea with all her rocks, Nature which is so powerful can
do nothing of her self, her works are rather alterations then productions, she
turns dew into flowers, and rain into wine, she multiplyeth all things without
a miracle, a few grains of corn in her hands prove a whole harvest, and a few
acorns sown in the earth, do by her care become a Forest, but let her do what
she can she cannot make any thing out of nothing, and he who shall bereave her
of the elements, takes from her the means of exercising her power. Art which
boasts to imitate nature, can produce nothing of gallant, unless it have some
subject to work upon, a painter cannot finish a picture without colors, nor
can an Ingraver make the visage of an Hero without brass or porphiry. The
most skillful Architects fall short, if they be not assisted by Nature, and
their stateliest designs would be but useless Chimeraes, did not the Forest
furnish them with Timber, and the Quarries with marble, to put them in
execution. But God makes all things out of nothing, and when he operates as a
Creator, he draws all his works ex nihilo. This is so admirable an effect of
his power, as profane Philosophy cannot comprehend it. Mundum ab aeterno
so^niavit Aristoreles, quia ex nihilo fieri potuisse nunquam intelligere potuit.
And the learnedest of all her disciples chose rather to believe that the world
was eternal, then that it was made of nothing. It is not hard to conceive how
flames may arise from water, and by what secret veins rivolets are drawn from
out the barren bosoms of rocks; Philosophy has light enough to comprehend
that all is in all things, and that the variety of the parts of the world,
hinders not their communication. But she cannot conceive without the help of
faith, that the whole world could proceed from nothing, and that this nothing
obeying the word of God has produced flowers, Constellations mountains and
rocks.

Qui vivit in aeternum cr^avitomnia simul. Ecclesias. cap. 18.
There went but one moment to this great work, and if we will believe the
wisest of men, heaven and earth were created in an instant, there went six
days to their disposal; and this comely order which we observe in the world
was the work of a week, but the matter was formed as soon as God had spoken the
word, and that which we call the creation of the world, did last no longer then
was requisite for the ordering of it. Nature does wonders which do surprise
men's understandings, her works deserve to be admired by Philosophers, and she
sometimes does miracles which surpass our belief; but this wise work woman is
slow in her productions, she does nothing without the aid of Time which is her
Counselor and Officer. As she takes time to put on her resolutions, so she
never executes them without him, she requires whole years to ripen fruits, and
stands in need of all the four seasons to bring them to maturity. She requires
a whole age to bring a forest to it is perfection, Nihil difficile est Naturae,
utique ubi in finem sui properat: ad originem rerum parce utitur viribus,
subito ad ruinam toto impetu venit. Senec. Natural. Quaest. l. 3. c. 27
and Philosophers accuse her it being more speedy in her decay than in her
increase; she is precipitate when she leans toward her ruin, there needs but
a moment to overthrow her goodliest works, but she is slow in forming even most
common things; and if she undertake to change mould into metal, and to give it
the Luster of gold, or the hardness of Iron, she does not finish this useful
Metamorphosis under many ages after she has begun it. But when God works of
himself, he does not assubject himself to the laws of time; the same moment
which sees the beginning of his work, sees the end thereof.

If this way of working were wonderful, it was no less easy, for all this
mighty work cost him but a word, he made himself be understood by nihil, and
this nihil did obey him. He Si quaerimus quis fecerit Deus est, siper quod,
dixit and facta sunt, si quare fecerit quia banus est: nec enim author est
excellentior Deo, nec arse^ficacior Dei Verbo, nec causa melior quam Dei
bonitas. Aug. lib. 11. de Civit. c. 21.
spoke (says the Scripture) and the ending his word was the beginning of the
world, this Commandment was followed by the effect thereof, and far differing
from that of earthly Princes, who leave the execution of their commands to
their subjects, he accomplished all he had ordained. We must yet further
believe with divinity, that this word was but mental, and that only act of
Gods will, without other expression, perfected all the beauty of the Universe,
and established the world where nothing was.

Contrary to the laws of Nature, which suffers that soon to perish which she is
not long in forming, this admirable work indures numberless ages, thousands of
years are past since it is creation all kingdoms have changed their
countenances, and their governments a hundred times; Ubi sunt superbae
Carthaginis alta moenia? ubi cunctis littoribus terribilis classis? ^bi tot
exercitus? omnia ista duobus, Scipionibus fortuna partita est. V^. Maxim. lib.
3.
whatsoever of most glorious the hand of man has erected is buried in ruins;
Cities which gave law to so many people are reduced to dust, nothing remains of
their greatness but a vain remembrance, and their glory is so totally effaced
as men dispute about the place wherein they were built. But the world does
still subsist, and seems not to draw nearer it is end for all it is growing
further off from it is beginning. All it is principal parts are yet entire, and
though they be preserved by change, yet are they always like themselves. The
Sun gives as much heat as at his birth; Those so many Territories which he has
cherished have not diminished his heat, and those who see him rise every day
complain not that Time has weakened his influences, the sea nor earth have
lost nothing of their former fruitfullnesse; and what of Virtue the curse of
God did leave in them is not weakened by the succession of so many years* it is
true that if we compare the guilty world, with the world when it was innocent,
we shall find a strange difference between them; after having admired Gods
power, we shall be obliged to adore his Justice; and confess that rebellious
man, did not deserve a world which was only made for man when obedient.

The second Discourse.
That all creatures have lost some of their perfections.

THere is not any one who does not complain of the rigor which the creatures
use toward man, every one is sensible thereof, and not any one seeks out the
cause; those who argue upon the works of nature, wonder to find therein so much
disorder, and knowing that the Government thereof is subordinate to that of
Divine Providence, they cannot conceive why she should be so irregular: some
imagine that the world being composed of so differing parts, can have no peace
which is not interrupted by war: that the quarrelling of the elements is
necessary, Eleme^ to^um pugna servat mundi pac^m, sed mundo minatur interitis.
and that their qualities cannot be so well tempered but that they must be
always in opposition. That the power of God cannot end their differences
without destroying their inclinations, and that a body which is composed of
fire and water must of necessity be troubled with an intestine war which
threatens it with an inevitable corruption, that the seasons cannot be better
regulated since the Sun going over our heads in an oblique line, does according
to the Summer or the Winter approach nearer to us, and draw further from us.
That beasts according to their natural Temper should either be wild or docile,
that those which have most fire in them are the nimblest, and that those which
have most earth are the heaviest, and the most stupid; that thus the faults of
the creatures do not proceed so much from the workman, as from the matter
whereof they are composed. This opinion is too injurious to the power of God to
be approved of by Christians; and since it proceeded from Philosophers schools
who did believe, that Materia Prima was eternal, we must not wonder if laying
a false ground, they draw from thence bad conclusions; some others who are
somewhat more respectfull, yet not much more rational, imagine, that God made
the world in the same condition that now it is, that he might fit himself
according to the condition of man, who was to become sinful; that he had no
regard to his innocence, because it was not to last so long, and that he left
some disorders in his work, to the end they might serve for punishment to the
faulty.

These Philosophers seem to me to have lost their reason out of too much
foresight; they do not consider that original righteousness ought to have
been as exempt from punishment, as from sin: and that man in his innocence had
had reason to complain, if having nothing amiss in his person, he should have
found disorders in his Estate. God Deus non ante vitor est quam homo peccator.
August.
always waits for our offenses before he punishes them; and though his mercies
may through his favor forerun our services, his justice does never through
punishments prevene our sins. What likelihood was there to lodge an innocent
person in an infected house? to make the seasons irregular which did measure a
life not yet troubled by passions, and to give mortal influences to
constellations, which were to enlighten immortal man? what reason have we to
believe that man not being guilty the creature should rebel against him, and
that the Elements should not be at peace in a body which was perfectly
assubjected to the soul. I know very well that they reply, that original
righteousness, did free man from these disorders, and that serving him in
stead of a buckler of defense, his body was thereby miraculously preserved from
being burnt in the midst of of Summer, or frozen in the midst of Winter. But
say he should have no feeling of these irregularities, he would yet have seen
them, and his eyes would have suffered punishment in beholding an unpleasing
object. What pleasure could he have taken in seeing a sun, the heat whereof did
scorch the grass, and cause the flowers to fade, to which it had given birth.
What delight should he have tasted in feeling the earthquake under his feet,
or to hear the thunder roar over his head? what contentment would he have found
amidst boisterous winds, and storms at sea? should he not have had some reason
of complaint, if he should have seen so many punishments prepared for a sin not
yet committed.

The best Divines do therefore confess, that the face of the world was changed
when man altered his condition, Spinas and tribul^s non germinavi^ terra nisi a
Deo maledicta. Genes. Rosa^ sine spinas nasci ante peccatum credidit. Basil. in
hexam
that the earth lost his beauty when man lost his innocence, and that thorns
were mingled with roses when concupiscence was mingled with nature. From that
time forward divine Justice did fit our abode to our desert, and thought it not
reasonable that guilty man should be lodged in a Palace prepared for the
innocent. She punished man in his state, after having punished him in his
person, and altering the inclinations of all creatures, made them the Ministers
of her vengeance.

The earth lost the fertility which was natural to it; this nurse which by her
profusions did prevent our need, brought forth nothing but bulrushes; as soon
as she was cursed, she grew avaritious; her bosom must be opened with the
plough share, and watered with our sweat and tears, if we will get any thing
from thence: this merciful mother became a severe step-dame; she dis-avowed us
for her children when once we ceased to be obedient to our Father; and as if
her fertility had been affixed to our innocence, when we grew sinful, she grew
barren; every part of the world is a proof and punishment of our sin; it is
irregularity upbraids us with our disobedience; and to know upon what ill terms
we stand with Creator, a man needs only to consider the worlds confusion.

The Sun which does precede at our birth, is oft-times the arbitratour of our
death; his heat is as fatal to us as necessary, and the same influences which
keep us in health, infuse maladies into us; the same stars which denote our
good fortunes, presage our ill adventures; as they have propitious, so have
they malignant aspects, and if some constellations do promise good success
unto us, others threaten us with bad; Nature is changed into a punishment,
whatsoever makes us live, makes us die; and the Elements are as well the causes
of our death, as of our life. Terra venenorum ^erax a (...) paren^. Basil.
The earth is not only barren of fruit, but abounds in poisons; by detaining
what is useful for us, she brings forth what is pernicious; her sterility, and
her fruitfulness are equally prejudicial to us: we ought to suspect
whatsoever she brings forth without our labor, and as there is danger in the
presents of an Enemy, the free-gifts of this step-dame are fatal: she
nourishes Monsters to devour us; and all her children are our Enemies; our sin
has made them lose the respect which they owed us; when they are oppressed
with hunger, they come forth of their dens, overrun our grounds, and make us
take up Arms to defend us from these revolted subjects. In fine, the earth has
no one part which does not threaten us with danger; her entrails vomit out
flames of fire to consume us, her depths open underneath our feet to swallow us
up; her mountains loosen themselves from their foundations to overwhelme us,
and she delights in destroying her self that she may un-do us.

The sea is not more respectfull than is the earth; this Element obeys us not
but against it is will; it punishes our avarice and our ambition by ship wrack;
it drowns the vessels which it is forced to bear, it raises it self up in
mountains, and sinks again into valleys to free it self from our servitude,
and troubles it is own tranquillity to revenge it self of our Tyranny. When
Divine providence which keeps it within it is channel, Non est satis ^stimare,
parens melior sit homini natura an t^istior (...). Plin. lib. 7. prooem.
gives it it is liberty, it overflows the fields, and makes us know by the rage
thereof, that it seeks out all occasions to annoy us. The waters thereof would
cover the tops of mountains, did not the Heavens stay their impetuosity, and
the whole earth would be nothing but a vast sea without either bounds or banks,
did not the hand of God prescibe limits to it is fury. All the art of man has
not as yet been able to calm the fierceness thereof; the most expert Pilots
tremble as often as it is incensed, and knowing that no force can withstand it is
rage, they betake themselves to vows to appease it.

The air seems to hold intelligence with it; to make war upon d Non vides ut
fluctus in li^ora tanquam exitu^ incurrat? Non vides ^t ^stuans fines suos
trans^at, and in possessionem terrarum mare inducat? Non vides ut illi perpetua
cum claustris suis pugna sit. Sen. Natural Quaest. lib. 3 cap. 30.
us; it gives free scope to the North winds, which march furiously through her
Champians, and bring tempests, and shipwracks with them. After having revenged
themselves on men at sea, they set upon them on land, and sowing cotagions in
Countries, they change the best peopled Cities into dreadful Deserts; thus the
purest of all Elements assumes impurity; men's bodies are infected by the
corruption thereof, it poysoneth whatsoever it does penetrate, and the lungs
which draw it in, corrupt the heart, and brain.

The fire being much more active then the air, commits more havoc; if it is
consuming flames be not universal, as are contagions, their fury is more
sudden, and the evils caused thereby find less remedy. It mixeth with
Thunder to punish us, it descends contrary to it is nature, to pursue us, it
flashes out in lightening to affrighten us, and changes it self into a
thousand several shapes to undo us. It shuts it self up in the bowels of the
earth, that it may break forth with the greater violence; it strives not so
much within this prison to recover it is liberty, as to punish our offenses; it
makes it is way through the tops of mountains, and shoures down Sulphur and
Flames upon the plains from off those high places. It seems it knows very Hoc
est testimonium ignis aeterni, hoc exemplum jugis judicii poenam nutrientis.
Montes uruntur and durant, quid nocentes and D^i hosts? Tertul. in Apolog.
well that divine Justice has chose it to be the Minister of her vengeance,
and that the spoils it commits on earth, serve only to show us what Rigor it
will inflict upon the Guilty in Hell.

Thus all things are changed in the world, the Elements have neither the same
use nor the same inclinations, that which was serviceable to man in innocence,
persecutes him being become guilty. Whole Nature is a scaffold where the
Creatures act the part of executioners, and revenge themselves on man for the
injuries he has done them. For to boot that they are forced to share in his
faults, they know very well that they are fallen from their first nobility,
that they have not all those advantages, which they had in the state of
innocence, and that they have lost some of their natural qualities. The Sun
gives not so much light as he did before the sin of Adam, his influences are
neither so pure nor yet so puissant, he who did dispense nothing but heat and
light, wonders to see himself send forth sicknesses and death. The Stars have
no longer those favorable aspects, which made fruits and flowers to grow in
all seasons of the year; their efficacy is weakened, and the vigor which
appeared in all their effects, now languisheth.

But Maledicta te^ra in oper^ (...): in laboribus comede^ ex (...) cu^ (...)
vitae tuae. (...). cap. 3.
the earth being a nearer neighbor to man then the Heavens, it is more
changed; all the parts thereof are barren, if they be not manured; the curse
which it received by reason of our sin, has made it lose it is fruitfulness,
it is all brisled with thorns, or covered with Thistles, it refuses to feed
it is children, since they are become sinful, and by an innocent parricide, it
attempts their lives who have lost original righteousness. The fruits which
it bears, proceed rather from our industry, then it is fertility, if it assist
us at our need it is with an ill will, and it is being bound to serve the sinful
is a part of it is misery; if this be not true, I know what that great Apostle
meant when by an admirable Prosopopeia he makes whole Nature to speak and
groan; Expectatio creaturae revelationem filiorum Dei expectas: vanitati enim
creaturae subjecta est non volens: quia and ipsa creatura liberabitur a
servitute corruptionis in libertatem gloriae filiorum Dei. Scimus enim quod
omnis creatura ingemiscit, and parturi^ usque adhuc. Romans 8.
when affording words unto her sorrow, he makes her wish our change and her
deliverance; for when he says the earnest expectation of the creature waits
for the manifestation of the Sons of God, does he not witness that they hope
for some advantage by our felicity? and when he says, that the creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly, does he not insinuate that they are
corrupted by sin? when he adds that the creature it self shall also be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, does he not make it evident, that
Jesus Christ will satisfy their desires, and that he will restore unto them,
what we have unjustly bereft them off?

I am not ignorant that some Interpreters not sufficiently weighing the
intention nor words of Saint Paul, do wrest this text, and understand it to be
meant of man; but the Apostles ensuing discourse makes it appear, that he
speaks of all creatures, and that the corruption which they complain of, is not
that which they have received from nature, but that which they have attracted
from our sin. Nisi granum (...) cadens in terram mortuum fuerit ipsum solum
manet. Joan. c. 12.
The corn cannot complain of it is putrefaction, because it is the cause of it is
increase, but it has some reason to complain that it is vigor is diminished,
and that abusing the Laborers hope, it does not repay his pains with usury.
The earth does not complain of it is being placed in the nethermost story of the
earth, and that it serves for basis to all the other elements, but it complains
with reason that it has lost it is fertility, and that it is adjudg'd to bring
up thorns in stead of roses. The Air complains not of being subject to these
changes, which make up a part of it is nature, but it complains, and that justly,
that for the punishment of our offense, it has lost it is purity, that it is
the seat of storms, the abode of thunder, and that fatal place wherein Famine,
and Contagions are formed; and to pass from the elements into the heavens. The
Sun does not complain of his being in a perpetual motion, that he carries
light to all the parts of the world, and that he does differently disperse his
heat throughout all the climates of the earth; but he has cause to complain,
that he has lost his former Luster, that his influences are mortal, that his
aspects are malign, and that his presence wherein man's happiness did consist,
does now cause fears and sicknesses in him. To this misfortune from whence the
creatures just complaints proceed, we may add the Devils Ad ^anc vanita^
creatur^arum, hoc quoque (...), ^uod creatu^ q^ in ^sum hominis venit, (...)
part p^missa est po^ati (...) mundi. (...) ^n cap. 1 Romans
Tyranny which does torment them, for after once this proud Fiend had overcome
our first father, he entered upon his rights; he got a power over the elements,
and he had permission to make use of them to solicit men to sin: from hence
proceeds that Praise worthy custom of the faithful, of blessing the fruits of
the earth, to free them from the fury of wicked spirits, and hence does the use
of exorcisme proceed, which makes it appear that all creatures are slaves to
those who have been our undoing.

But it is harder to explain this corruption, then to prove it, and the manner
how it is made is as hard to conceive, as anger some to tolerate. Yet me thinks
a man may say, that divine Justice has changed the Elements, as she has
changed man, that she has disordered the seasons, to punish the disorders of
our passions; that she has permitted the sea to break down her banks to wage
war with the ^infull, that she sends down Thunder to destroy them, and that she
has pronounced curses against the creatures, whereby their virtues are
weakened, their inclinations changed and their Tempers altered. Who Rupti sunt
^ontes abyssi magnae and cataractae coeli ape^tae sunt, and sacta est pluvia
super terram 40 (...), and 40 noctibus. Gen^s. cap. 7.
knows not that 'twas Gods curse which made the earth barren; that 'twas the
decree which he pronounced against man that made him mortal, and who knows not
that it was his anger which drew the rivers out of their channels, which made
clouds melt into rain, and dissolved the vapors into waters, when he would
drown the world by the deluge? is not he absolute in his state? has not he as
much right to Justice as to mercy? if he could favor man in innocence, by
making all creatures subject to him, ought he not to punish sinful man in
making them revolt against him? and if he could change his person, ought he not
also to change his condition. It is then evident, as it appears to me, that
Adams sin caused the corruption of the Universe, that the world lost it is
advantages, when man lost his innocence, and that the creatures forbore to obey
man, when he began to rebel against God.

The third Discourse.
That the Sun has lost much of his Light and and Virtue through sin.

GOd is so jealous of his own honor, and so careful of our salvation, as
foreseeing that the beauty of the creature might make us Idolaters, he has
left some faults in them, which teach us, that they deserve not to have altars
erected to them, and the most illustrious being the most dangerous, since their
beauty which makes us admire them, might make us likewise reverence them, he
has been pleased to abase them amidst their greatness, and to reduce them to
a condition, wherein their weakness as well as their power does appear.

To say truth, that beautiful constellation, to whose heat Nature owes her
fertility, has defaults which make it appear, that his glory is but borrowed,
and that his Luster which procures him so many Idolaters, is but an obscurity
before God. His light which is the greatest part of his beauty, is but a
foreign ornament, it was produced two days before he had a being; God who
would from the very beginning of this world confound the heresy of this age,
Lumen ant^solem productum est: nam^* prima die fact (...) est lux quart^ vero
facta sunt luminaria magna, ut prae essent diei and nocti. Genes. 1.
and teach us that accidents might be unloosened from their substance, did
permit that the light might subsist without any subject, that it might
enlighten nature before it was united to the Sun, and that all men might know,
it was given to that glorious constellation, only out of mere liberality:
before this favor done him, he was but a part of the heavens, which was not
considerable either for his beauty or worth, if he had any motion he had no
influence, and this great body was not admired till after it was in-animated by
light: all his riches derive from that alms which God gave him; he was not
powerful till he was lightsome, and he who had seen him before could not have
discerned him from the other Planets. That faithful Historian, who has so
well described the creation of the world, teaches us that the earth was
fruitful before the Sun had any heat, that it was adorned with flowers and
loaded with fruit before the Sun had warmed it, and that Nature had all her
principal ornaments before the Sun had received light; the third day was
destined for the bearth of Trees; one word made the earth fruitful; this
mother which requires time to bring her works to perfection, did in a moment
thrust out Oaks and Fir-trees; Et ait germ^net terra herbam virentem and factum
est ita, and factum est vespere, and mane dies tertius. Genes. 1.
and wondered that she had produced so many things before she had conceived
them. The fourth day was reserved for the Suns birth; the Father of Trees, and
Flowers, was born after his children; he who does preserve them, did not
produce them, and he who gives them life, did not give them birth; he had the
care to bring them up, but not the glory to place them in the world; he had
order to end a work, which God himself had begun.

But Dixit Deus fiant luminaria magna, and dividant diem ac noctem, and factum
est vespere, and mane dies unus, Genes. 1.
nothing moves more wonder in me then to see that day should precede the Sun,
that before he had done his Career, light had already divided the Evening and
the Morn; that the rising and setting thereof had already made days and nights,
and that time, whereof the course of the Sun is now the measure, had already
marked forth moments and hours. The world was three days old when this
incomparable constellation had his birth; that which holds of his Empire had
received it is perfection, and this visible God made it appear in his birth,
that he did nothing which Nature could not have done without him: as if all
these pre-cautions were not sufficient to stifle idolatry, God would have the
Sun to draw his Name from servitude, and that that language which does so
abound in mysteries, Idem vocabulum apud Haebraeos significat servum and solemn.
Schemes.
should employ one and the same word to signify a slave, and the son. We
learnt from thence, that though he were the original of light, he was not the
Author of Nature: that though he had heat enough to warm her, he had not power
enough to preserve her; that though he were the King of Constellations, he was
a slave to man; that his perpetual motion was a mark of his servitude, that
the difference of seasons was a token of his weakness, and that his Eclipses
did prove that he sometimes lost his light. With what astonishment was the world
struck, when it saw the Sun grow pale amidst his careers? what did men think
when they saw a constellation which was in all things inferior to the Sun,
should obfuscate his beauties, should over-shadow him, that violating all the
laws of Nature, it should put the Sun in shade, and make the night to reign in
day time.

Yet did not this accident detract from his esteem; he had never more admirers
then when he was eclipsed; Sol spectatorem non ^abet, nisi cum deficit. Nemo
observat lunam nisi laborantem. Senec. Quaest. Natural b^. cap. 1.
those who neglected him in his triumph, looked upon him in his combat; men
pray for his victory, and ignorance causing superstition, they imagined that
what was but an effect of nature, was the punishment of some enormious sin.
Those who feared that the Suns swounding did foretoken the worlds end, were
concerned in this change, and were as much rejoiced at his recovery of light,
as they were afflicted at his loss thereof. Good wits did notwithstanding
judge aright, that his eclipse was a proof of his impotency, that he was
subject to such laws as a Sovereign Authority should put upon him, that he
could not be the God of the world, since he was subject to weaknesses, and that
the Tract which he held in the Heavens was but an honorable servitude, since
he could not shun the encounter of a Planet, which bereft us of his beauty.
Though these defaults be visible enough, yet are they natural to the Sun. The
state of innocence, beheld him with all his weakness; and man in the Earthly
Paradise judged aright by his perpetual motion, that he was rather a slave to
Nature, then her Master.

But since man sinned he has received other blemishes, and has lost much of
his power and beauty. For be it that man being become a sinner, may the easier
be brought to idolatry; be it that God would punish him in all his subjects,
and lessen his credit, in weakening his condition; be it that to put the
seasons out of order, that constellation must be altered which caused all their
revolutions; be it that to trouble the order of the Universe, his course was to
be troubled, who was it is Conductour: it is certain, that the Sun was subject
to laws which he had not made trial of in the state of innocence; and that he
partook of the fatal effects of that general curse which was thundered out
against Nature. Soli detractum est aliquid lumin is sui, quod ei restituendum
(...) in die resurrection is hominum Basil. in hexam.
If we will believe Saint Basil, he lost part of his light when man lost his
innocence; he does harden, enlighten the whole world; there are certain places
where night is always mingled with day, and where darkness makes a perpetual
residence; he does no longer distribute his heat equally; he is greedy thereof
underneath the pol^s, and and prodigal underneath the line. He burns up
Africa, and does not so much as heat one part of Europe. There are Countries
where ice is never melted, where the Sea is as solid as the earth, where
fountains frozen Dies nunquam patens sol nunquam libens, unus a^r ^bula, tol^
annus ^ibernum, omne quod ^aver it aquilo, liquores ignibus redeunt, amnes
glacie negantur, omnia torpent omnia rigent. Tertul. contra Marc. lib. 1.
in their head, suspend their running half the year; woeful Countries are
discovered where Trees are always void of leaves, where fruit does never ripen,
where no Flowers are seen but in pictures, and where the Sun shows himself only
to dissipate darkness. He wonders that his beams cannot melt snow there, he
admires to find ice there as firm as crystal, he cannot comprehend how he
should give light to people, whom he cannot warm, and that his heat being
weaker then his light, he makes days there, and no Summers.

People who live under these unfortunate climates, consider cold as their
greatest Enemy, they withstand it is rigor by their hardness, they seek for
that relief from fire which they cannot find in the Sun, and burn their
Forests to warm their fields. In fine, to describe this woeful Country in
Tertullians terms, their sky wants pity, the days are never clear, the Sun is
there always weak and languishing, winter reigns there all the year long, no
winds blow there but the North, rivers held back by cold have not the freedom
of running, the mountains are there always covered with snow, Nature is
slothful there, and frost which extinguisheth her natural heat makes her
eternally barren.

If the bad condition of these Nations, be a proof of the Suns impotency, if
the barrenness of their ground, are a mark of his weakness, Africa is no
less an argument of his corruption; and who sees those dreadful Deserts which
bring forth nothing but sand and Monsters, is bound to confess, that the curse
of God reaches as well to the constellations as to men. For the Sun makes all
the Inhabitants there black, and prints that color upon them, in which we here
paint Devils, he there scorcheth all their Trees, and strips them of their
leaves before they be loaded with fruit. He there dries up brooks as soon as
they are crope out from their Springhead; he leaves them nothing in the
fields, which may lessen his heat; Forests give there no shade, nor do the
fountains afford refreshment. Corri^itur (...) ut qu^ que al^issima tellus,
fissaque agit rimas, and s^is aret ademptis. P^bula canesc^t cum ^rondibus
uritur arbor, (...) ^ue suo (...) seges arida damno. O^d 2. Metam.
Rocks bear nothing but flames in their veins, the earth burns under their
feet that walk upon it, her scorching bowels conceive nothing but sulphur and
pitch. The Summer has banished all other seasons out of this Country, and
reigns there as a Tyrant even from the beginning of the world, suffers no
winds to blow but such as feed his heat, lays waste the fields, and leaving
nothing there but marks of his fury, makes it look like the picture of hell.

For my part I cannot believe that the Sun h^d so unequally dispensed his heat
in the state of innocence; that having one part of the world frozen, he would
have consumed the other with heat, nor thot dividing his heat so unequally to
so many people, he would have made days and nights six months long. Either
those Countries would have had no Inhabitants, or the Sun would have been more
favorable to them, or else that Providence by which the world is governed,
would have made him take another Tract; or equally dividing his heat and his
light, it would have moderated the Summers of Africa, and sweetened the Winters
of Swethland. Since it is the will of God, Cujuscumque rei natura Dei voluntas
est. August.
that makes the nature of all things, since the Elements have no inclinations
but what are his, and that both heaven and earth receive law from his word, it
is not hard to conceive, that the Sun may more justly distribute his heat, and
yet not go out of the Zodiac, and that equally warming all the parts of the
earth, he may either leave useless sands in the edge of Ethiopia, nor yet
mountains charged with snow in the further-most parts of Swethland. That
Sovereign Omni^ s^t Dei facilia potestati, qui mirabili vincente virtute utitur
omnibus ^am mirabiliter quam creavit. Aug. lib. 21. de Civit. cap. 6.
Providence to which nothing is impossible, might well enough have remedied
these inconveniences, which Astrology finds in the equality of seasons. This
absolute Mistress of Nature, might well enough have distributed heat and
light, without changing the course of the Sun. And she who has put the world
out of order, to punish us for our sins, might also have governed it after
another fashion, to favor us in our innocence.

But not to engage my self in making Apologies for her who can defend her
self against the wicked with thunder: it shall suffice me to make it appear,
that that Sun which lights us does dazzle us; and that he who does heat us,
burns us, and that his beams which gives us life, causes also our death.
Before the sin of Adam he had no v^rtue, which was fatal to man; all his
aspects were benign, Astrology had not as yet found out any malign
influences, and whilst this glorious constellation made good his career, he
neither burnt men, nor dried up Trees; but since we are become sinful, through
our Fathers pride, the Sun has changed his qualities, and that Planet whose
only care it was to dispense abroad his heat and light, has received
directions to burn those to whom he gives light, and to make all things die, to
which he has given life. Non ^st qui se ^bscondat a ca^us. P^al.
He exhales up the vapors whereof storms are composed, he makes them distill
down in rain, glis^en forth in lightening, and break out in Thunder. He hardens
hail, to ruin the fields, and reaps the corn with this congealed water,
gathers the grapes, and overthrows the hopes of the Labourer. His heat mingled
with the vapors of the earth, causes contagions, his light which has lost
it is former purity, disperseth the plague throughout the world.

He who gave life, wonders to see he now causes death, he wonders that his
beams should be fatal to those to whom he gives light, he is sorry to undo his
own workmanship, to tarnish the rose and lilly, to be the parricide of those
flowers whose Father he had been. He cannot comprehend how divine Justice
should employ his heat to produce contrary effects, nor how after having
ripened the corn, fitted things for harvest, and gilded grapes, he should
destroy that to which he gave a being, and make a woeful havoc there where the
labourer had hoped to make a happy harvest. Such as are become ingenious since
made miserable by sin, have observed seasons wherein all the influences of this
constellation are mortal, wherein he hurts as many as he touches, wherein he
infecteth all that he gives light unto, and wherein he commits as many murders
as he darts forth beams. Pestilentiam ita solis calor adducit, ut illa nunquam
in ^rigidissimis (...) grass^tur.
The holy Scripture which is so eloquent, mingleth reproaches with the praisss
that it gives him; and makes invectives against the Sun whilst it composeth
his Panegyricks. It blames and praises his light. it admires his efficacy,
and complains of his heat, it adores his power, and stands in awe of his
justice, who can employ the Sun to give light unto the Saints and to punish Sol
in meridiano exurit te^ram and in (...) ardor^ ejus q^s (...)* (...), (...)
m^ntes, ro^os (...) exsu^n and re^gens r^diis o^caecat oculos. Eccl (...). c. 43
sinners. The Spouse in the Canticles complains, that this fair constellation
should have spoiled her complexion, that he should have changed her roses into
marigolds, and that effacing her beauty he should have taken from her that
Luster, which is a woman's principal ornament. Judith in her history
complains that the Sun had made her a Widow, and that his extreme heat
giving upon the head of her dear husband had caused the catar fall which
carried him to his grave. For as he was overlooking his harvest men at full
midday, judging their labor by their sheaves, and according to the custom of
the time mingling trouble with policy through the pleasing diversions of
husbandry, the Sun which spares not Sovereigns more then shepherds, and who
knows that all men being faulty, he may of right punish them, let fly a beam
upon poor Manasses wherein death was mingled with light, (...) and broke the
happiest marriage a Mortuus est Manasses in diebus messis hordeaceae: instabat
enim super alligantes manipulos in campo, and venit aestus super caput ejus and
mortuus est. Judith cap. 8.
that was then in Palestine.

We are taught by these examples that the Sun has influences now which he had
not before the state of sin, that he serves Gods justice to rid himself of men,
that he rules over the life of Monarchs, and that whilst he ends his course, he
measures out the moments and hours of their Empire. If we have any reason to
complain of the Sun, he has a juster cause to wage war upon us, for we force
him to give light unto our faults, we make him a flave to our vanities, and
though he be always on his journey, we force him to be a confederate in our
offenses, but he is not so much afflicted with these injuries as with our
homages, he is less troubled at our outrages, then at our adorations, and is
more sensible of his being our Idol then of being our slave. This disorder is
large enough to furnish matter for a whole discourse, and to serve for a new
proof to Christians, that sin has corrupted all Creatures.

The fourth Discourse.
That there is no Creature which men have not adored.

It Is a strange prodigy that there is not a better established belief then that
of a God, and yet not any one has ever been more disputed. It is written in
our hearts by the hand of nature, Innumeros credere Deus od majorem s^cordiam
accedit, fragilis and laboriosa mortalitas in parts istae digessit suae
infirmitatis memor. Plin. lib. 2. c 7.
time has not been ableto efface it, Ignorance and oblivion which are it is two
greatest enemies cannot weaken it, and falsehood it self which reigns so
absolutely in the world, has not had power enough to banish it. Reason does
herein agree with faith: every man upon this occasion is naturally a Christian.
Let him but consult with nature, and he cannot be deceived; and even when he
offers incense to Idols, and when he builds Temples to the workmanship of his
own hands, he may make amends for his fault, if he will but be advised by his
conscience. For Veritas etiam ex i^itis pectoribus (...). T^ul.
she teaches him this truth as often as she speaks with freedom, and with what
ever falsehood she be forestalled, she always continues this belief. She
apprehends God^ Justice in the faults which she commits, and hops in his
mercies through the virtues she inures her self unto. When she will affirm a
Truth, she takes him for her witness who sees all things. When she is
threatened with any mischief, she invokes him only who is omnipotent; and when
she falls into any misfortune, she seeks for deliverance from none else, but
from him who glories in assisting the innocent, and miserable. If she at any
time speak wickedly, she takes her self up as soon as she is awakened by
affliction, she amends her error when she follows her own light, and as often
as she is rational, she is Christian.

Yet is there nothing more common in the world then Idolatry. This sin was born
in the Terrestiall paradise, and if we will believe Tertullian, the Devil
would (...) insinuate the belief, of Plurality of d In ipsis denique temp^s
D^monum Deum judicem imploras, and neminem de praesentibus Di^ contestaris, in
tuo foro aliunde judicem appella^, in tuis templis ^icuique Deum (...). Tert.
d^ (...). (...).
Gods into our first father, when he persuaded him, that he might become one.
All men being abused by this foolish promise have engaged themselves in
Idolatry, not being able to warrant themselves from death, they have pretended
to immortality, not being able to dispose of Scepters and Crowns, they have
endeavored to dispose of Temples, and Altars. And failing in Credit to make
Kings, they have insolently attributed unto themselves, the power of making
Gods.

But seeing that error has no boundaries, but does increase with time, all
things have contributed fuel to this error, and every sect of Philosophers
have insensibly forged out Idols unto themselves to adore them. Those of them
that were the cleerest sighted were most faulty, and found the subject of their
superstition in God himself. For not being able to comprehend that adorable
unity which binds all these persections together, and who does wonderfully
accord his Justice with his mercy, his love with his Majesty, his immensity
(which fills all things,) with his holiness (which parts him from them;) his
providence, which guides us, with his power, which preserves us, they imagined
that every one of his perfections was a different divinity, and dividing the
divine essence, they did wickedly take in Parts who does reunite all things in
himself. Seneca found out Vis Deum vocare (...)? Non (...), ^st (...) Causa
(...). Vis illum providentiam dicere? recte dices, hic enim mundo providet. Vis
illum Naturam vocare? non errabis; est enim ex quo nata sunt omni^. Vis illum
vocare mu^dum? non falleris, ipse enim est totum quod vides, totus suis
partibus inditus and se sustinens vi sud. Senee. Natural. lib. 2. cap. 45.
this injustice, but did not correct it, and being more careful to build up
his reputation, then to establish religion, he was contented to let posterity
see that he had light enough to discover this Imposturisme. Some others being
passionate for the virtues, erected Altars to them; being ravished with their
loveliness, they strove to make them be adored; they made thereof spiritual
Idols, and false divinities of all the habits which could adorn the mind of
man. They erected Altars to mercy, and believed that a virtue which did assist
the miserable, ought to be worshipped by all those who could become miserable.
They offered incense to clemency, and as if they would side with guilty, they
obliged the innocent to reverence her. They immolated Victimes to wisdom, and
to acknowledge the favors which they had received from her guidance, they
injured her through their superstition, and adored her under the name of
destiny, and image of Fortune. Philosophers excused their Idolatry by these bad
reasons, and would persuade Christians, that that religion could not be vicious
which did only adore virtue: blindness increasing with deceit, they
confounded vices with virtues, H^ virtutes Deos, non veritas, sed v^nitas
fecit. Aug. lib. 4* de Civit. c. 20.
and added to the number of their Gods, to honor their Ancestors debaucheries.
They consecrated incontinency, under the name of Venus, they defied
drunkenness under the name of Bacchus, they did authorize injustice, and the
licentiousness of war under the name of Mars, and not dreaming that Gods could
not be one another enemies, they erected Altars to peace, after having built
others to Bellona.

when Impudency was arrived at it is height, they adored vices without
disguising them, Numina innumerabili^ reperimus, pestes etiam inter ea
descrip^imus (...) dum esse placat^ (...) cupimu^. Ideoq* etiam public e febris
sanum in palatio dicatum est. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7.
and calling them by their proper names, they built Templ^s to fear, to fury,
and to envy. The body being scandalized that the passions of the soul should
be reverenced; would have it is motions and disorders to receive the same
honors, Pallor, or Palenes, was deified to give it contentment. Ignorance and
admiration made an Idol of the Ague, and til Physicians had learnt the course
and fits thereof, ignorant and superstitious peopleimagined it deserved an
Altar; they adored this Divinity, because they dreaded it. They thought
themselves miserable, when they had got it; and contrary to the humor of
Adorers, they sought for nothing more then that a God should keep far from them
who had won himself credit only by the evils that he did. When impiety had made
these trials, she undertook to consecrate men, and to build them Temples, after
having taken them out of their sepulchers. Death which denounced their
weakness, and their sin, could not alter the course of these unjust
proceedings, and all the miseries which they had in their life time endured,
could not extinguish them. Interest and sorrow were the beginning of this
superstition; for subjects to consolate themselves for the loss of a
Sovereign, who by his labors had defended them, and who had taught ^idquid in
(...) tui mortale^at ignis ^ctus tulit, paterna coelo pars data est. ^ammis
tua. Senec. ^n Her^l. O^teo.
them the art of building houses, or of husbanding land, would eternize his
memory by solemn sacrifices, and lodged the same men in heaven whom they had
buried in the earth. They invented Apotheosis to ease their sorrow, they
thought that fire which reduced men into ashes, could change them into spirits;
that that element which does purify all things, had the virtue to in-noble
Princes, and take from them all the impurity which they had contracted in the
world. They thought that Religion knew how to convert men into Gods, that the
Senates decree was as powerful as that of destiny, and that Jupiter was bound
to confirm in heaven what ever a Pope had concluded on earth.

By this means Apotheosis was oft-times the reward of heinous crimes. Princes
who were most faulty were most honored, men granted that to the power of
Successors, which ought to have been refused to the power of their Ancestors;
people were constrained to adore Tyrants whom they had detested, to re-commend
the welfare of the State to those who had been the undoing of it, and to change
their just imprecations into vows as faint as unreasonable. If great men's
violence caused impiety in the meaner sort, love engaged Fathers in the
Idolatry of their Children. For to Acerbo enim (...) dolens pater cito sibi ra*
p^i (...) fecit imaginem, and illum qui (...) quasi homo mortuus ^rat, nu^
t^nquam Deum colere ^pit, and con^ituit interser^s s^ s^ra and (...) Sapi^.
cap. 14.
allay their sorrow for their death, they made their pictures be drawn by
skilful painters, then adding their power to the workmans cunning, they bound
their eyes to behold these images with respect, and to offer up incense to
young Princes whom death had swept away in the flower of their Age. Following
the example of this unjust sorrow, every Son would make a God of his father.
All those who bare any credit with the people, made their Ancestors be adored,
and taking advantage of this false piety, they persuaded weak minds, that they
were descended from the Race of the Gods.

In fine, the natural inclination which men have to Religion caused Idolatry
in the world; for not being able to be without Gods, they forged sensible
deities unto themselves, and wanting souls sufficiently elevated to conceive a
true Quid magis ^idiculum quam quum homo est op ^ex Dei. Basil. in 3. Eia.
Idea of the divine essence, they cut out Idols with their hands: they through
a fearful blindness, put their trust in Gods made of clay and wood, and
consulted with statutes, which being deaf and dumb, could neither hear nor
answer them; oft-times one and the same tree served to make Gods and ships,
both their destinies depended on the artificer, their fortune consisted on his
fancy, and his hand destined the one to suffer shipwreck at sea, the other to
be worshipped on earth. But that they might avoid the pain of making Gods, they
bethought themselves of choosing them; and foregoing the care of forging or
moulding them, they reserved a power unto themselves to declare them; they
deified whole Nature, of every of it is parts they made Gods. Flowers Floralia
instituerunt Romani ex oraculis Sybillae, ut omnia been de^rescerent. Plin.
lib. 18. cap. 29.
were placed in the same rank with Stars, these earthy Stars received divine
honors, they charmed men and purchased themselves adorers by their odor and
beauty; a man might crowd a thousand divinities into one nosegay; they joined
Superstition to Vanity, women satisfied their devotions in dressing themselves;
the most vain amongst them was the godliest, and those who wore garlands of
Lillies and Roses might boast themselves to be in-animated Temples.

Fruits Non cessit floribus Pomo^a, certavit ipsa secum, plusque utilitatis
causa genuit etiam qu^ voluptatis. Plin. lib. 23. pro^mio.
whereof flowers are but ornaments, disputed this honor with them; there were
some men who preferring profit before beauty, judged that Pomona did better
deserve temples then Flora, and that if every creature was a portion of
divinity, trees were more to be considered then plants, since not being less
lovely they were more useful. Men being fantastical in their humors, and
nothing being so deformed in Nature which meets not with some admirours,
Onnions contended with flowers, and whole Nations drew them out of their
Gardens to place them upon Altars, the Egyptians instituted ceremonies, and
Priests unto them; these wise men who having conferred with the I^s, might have
some cognizance of the truth, engaged themselves in this error, and becoming
the talk of all people, placed that in heaven which grew on earth, and profaned
incense to perfume onnions. Foelices populi quibus h^c ^ascuntur in hortis
Numina.
By the same license they worshipped what they feared. Fear infused piety into
these servile souls, they offered sac^ifices to Serpents to be delivered from
them; and toallay their fury, did immolate victimes to them; the Devil
delighted to see himself adored in a Monster, which had served him for
interpreter in the earthly paradise, he would recompense it is fidelity with
this honor and repair the loss which it had suffered upon his occasion by
divine homage.

After this high extravagancy all Idolatry is excusable, and we must not wonder
if metals and stars have had their adorers, since Serpents have had Priests and
Altars: for if Interest be the Rule of Superstition, there is nothing in Nature
more useful for us then the Stars, they are placed in the highest and most
beautiful part of the world, they seem to rule over us, and that their
favorable or malign influences goes to the making of us fortunate or
unfortunate. We Ex syderum levissimis motibus fortunae populorum dependent and
maxima ac minima proinde formantur prout aequum iniquumve sydus incessit. Sen.
ad Marc. cap. 18.
hardly partake of making any sensible favor but by their interposition; and
profane men call them the arbitratours of chance, and the dispensors of good
and evil; Though we be free, they pretend to a certain power over our wills by
the means of our inclinations; a man must withstand stiffly to resist their
impressions, and as most men act more by instinct, then by reason, we must not
wonder if forming our temper and our humors, they govern our designs, and
guide our motions.

Hence it is that all men have reverenced them, that this has been the
commonest Superstition, that the best wits who would not bow to men, have
prostrated themselves before the Stars, and that the Sun has passed amongst
very Solemn mundi esse totius animum ac planius mentem, h^nc principale naturae
regimen ac numen credere decet, opera e^ aestimantes. P^ (...). 2. c. 6.
Philosophers for the visible God of the world. To say truth, we owe all things
to his heat and light, his course governs our seasons, his influences
distribute forth fruitfulness through all the parts of the Universe; Nature
would be barren were it not for his beams; and should this glorious
constellation cease looking on her, she would neither conceive nor produce his
Eclipses though but of a small durance put her in disorder, and the earth
cannot want his heat without witnessing her sorrow by sterility, if he be a
long time hidden from us by clouds, the years are unfruitful; and the
Laborers pains are useless if he do not favor them by his aspect.

It must be granted that he who should consult with nothing but his own sense
would acknowledge no other divinity but the Sun, his very beauty parted from
his advantage, seems to exact some respect from all men, his worth is not
sufficiently known, if he be valued only for his effects. Though he were
barren he would not cease to be wonderful; and if the ripening of fruits and
government of the seasons Ut tamen detra^as ista quae Sol producit, nonne erat
ipse idoneum oculis spectaculum dignusque adorari, si tantum praeteriret. Sen.
lib. 4. de Benef. c. 23.
did not depend upon his heat and course, his very light would suffice Seneca
to adore him, but God being jealous of his glory, and not desirous that the
supremest honors should be rendered to his works; he has revenged himself
upon them for our sins, he has disordered them to punish us, he has taken from
them their advantages to disabuse us; and he has ordered that the noblest
creatures should have their blemishes, to the end that their beauty might not
make us Idolaters; he took from them a part of their perfections, when sin
bereft us of our innocence, and foreseeing that we should through blindness
fall into error, he would not that their Luster should serve us either for
occasion or excuse: he mingled death with life in the Suns beams, he parted his
light from his heat, and did not permit them to join always together in acting
equally, the lightsomest places are not the hottest, and those Countries
wherein the Sun makes the longest days enjoy not the most pleasing Summers. He
for our punishment does corrupt what for our service he had produced, and as
his influences do cause our health, so do they our sickness likewise; if he
dissolve vapors into rain, he makes them break forth in thunder, if he ripen
fruit he dries up flowers, if he form meteors he sets Comets on fire, if he
make the dew fall, so does he also the Sercine or Mildew; and if he deserve
praise for the good he brings us, he merits also blame for the evil which he
sends us.

The fifth Discourse.
That all Creatures do either tempt or persecute us.

SInce Tyranny in Princes causes rebellion in their subjects, we must not
wonder if the Omnis creatura ingemiscit usque adhuc subjecta vanitati non
volens. Romans 8.
creatures do disobey man, who treats them with so much rigor, and violating
the laws of Justice, imployes them in his offenses against their common
Sovereign. For there is nothing in the world which has escaped his fury; the
most innocent creatures in his hands are become criminal, he makes them serve
his unjust designs, and not considering that he has received them from Gods
liberality, he abuses them contrary to his Glory. Whatsoever presents it self
before his eyes, does either flatter his ambition or his avarice; that which in
the state of innocence would have excited devotion in his soul, causes impiety
therein now, he turns all things to his advantage or to his honor, and seeks
for nothing in the use of nature, but his pleasure or his profit. He corrupts
his Judges with gold, he tames his enemies with the sword, he kindles his
concupiscence with wine, and this furious Tyrant abuses all things to undo
himself: his malice reaches even to the most innocent Creatures, making them
confederates in his crime by an ingenious cruelty; for he finds out the means
how to make the chastest serve his unchastity, he assubjects the noblest to his
Ambition, and imploys the holiest in his Impiety.

There Contraria huic causa cristallum facit, gelu (...) concreto. Non al cubi
(...) reperitur^ quam ubi maxim ^ibernae nives ri^ent, gla ^que esse certum
est. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 2.
is nothing that appears to be more cleeer then Crystal, if we will believe
Philosophers, it is a water congealed by cold, light is so inamor'd thereof, as
it cannot see it without penetration, their embraces are so chaste as that their
purity is not therein concerned, their union is so straight as it is hard to
say, whether the Crystal be changed into light, or the light into Crystal.
Crystal becomes lightfull without softning it is hardness. Light becomes
solid without loss of Luster or brightness, their qualities are confounded,
without alteration of their nature; and their marriage is so exact, that they
possess in common all the advantages which nature has given them in
particular; yet impurity makes crystal serve it is infamous designs in
looking glasses: a woman grows in love with herself, by seeing of her face;
she turns the fable of Narcissus into a truth; Se cupit imprudens, and qui
probat ipse probatur; dumque petit petitur, pariterque accendit and ardet,
Ovid. 3. Meta.
she consumes in desires before her Idol, and after being sufficiently in love
with her self, she persuades her self she is able to make all men in love
with her: upon this assurance she undertakes the conquests of all hearts, she
joins art to beauty to purchase her self lovers, and she hazards her honor
to increase her Empire. Who would have believed that impurity could have
corrupted so pure a thing? that the flames of love should be kindled in ice,
and that crystal intermixed with light should carry both smoke and flame into
the heart of one and the same woman.

Looking Glasses were at first invented to the end that men seeing their
defaults, might amend them; many advantages were made of this innocent art;
this faithful Counselor gave good advice, Invent a sunt specula ut homo ipse
se nosoeret. Multa ex hoc consecuta, primo notitia sui, deinde and ad quaedam
consilium. Senec. Nature. Quaest. lib. 1. cap. 17.
his dumb answers were speaking oracles, and whosoever would listen unto them
could not choose but put on good resolutions. A handsome woman learnt by her
looking glass, that she was to shun dishonor; that to become accomplished she
was to join virtue to beauty, and not to be an hypocrite, she was to be as
good, as fair. She to whom nature had not been so liberal of her favors,
learnt by this true friend, that she was to amend the faults of her face by the
perfections of her soul, and that she ought to strive for the advantages of
men, since she wanted those of women. Discebat in speculo famosus ut vitaret
insam^am, deformis ut redimeret virt^ibus quid quid corpori deesset, juvenis ut
fortia auderet, senex ut de morte aliquid cogitaret. Senec ibid.
A young Prince who observed in this true glass, that he was in the Flower of
his age, found himself obliged to undertake such glorious actions as render men
famous; an old man who saw his wrinkles and gray hairs in this crystal,
resolved to do nothing unworthy of his condition, and seeing by his color that
he had not long to live, prepared to die with courage. Thus was the use of
looking glasses a serious study; men learnt virtue by beholding themselves, and
every one seeing his conscience in his face, put on a generous resolution to
acquit himself of his duty; but incontinency has profaned this innocent art;
in this corrupted age if men see their faces in a glass, it is that they may
endeavor to surprise chastity, and women look therein only to entertain their
vanities.

Ambition gives not place to impurity, and if the latter be ingenious in
corrupting the purest things, the other knows how to assubject the most noble.
In effect, she teaches Lions obedience, she fastens them to the Chariots of
Triumphers, and having tamed men, she tames wild beasts. Homo Tyrannus est,
omnibus creaturis ad libitum pro sua ambitione abu^ens. Apul.
She engages Elephants in a fight, she encourages these huge Lumps against her
Enemies, she loads them with Towers upon their backs, she makes use of their
Trunck, and teaches them to war, that she may win battles at their cost: she
makes the ground to groan under the weight of her Engines, the mountains to
quake at the noise of her Cannons, she sends death by their bullets into Towns,
and imprisoning the noblest of Elements in Mines, she forces it to blow up
bastions to recover it is liberty: she tames the Seas haughtiness, she forces
this Monster to bear her ships, to assist her in her Conquests, to open the way
unto her, to lead her into the farthest distant Countries, and to serve her for
a Theater to fight upon, and bear away victory. Thus man instructed by this bad
Mistress, assubjects all the Elements to his Tyranny, he forces the
inclinations of the noblest subjects, he makes them guilty of his offenses, and
strangely abusing his liberty, he makes them mutiny against their Common
Sovereign.

Taking the same freedom, he prophanes sacred things, and makes the worlds most
holiest parts serve his impiety. Coelum seeds e^us; in Sole posuit tabernaculum
suum. Psalm. 18.
For though heaven be the Temple wherein God resides, though the Sun be the
Throne wherein he makes himself visible, though the Stars be open eyes through
which he observes our faults, yet the Libertine abuses all these excellent
creatures in his unjust designs; he disposes of heaven as of the earth, he
promises it unto himself after his death, and imagines he ought to reign
amongst Angels* after having commanded amongst men; he persuades himself that
the Sun rises only to afford him light, (...) tibi etiam imme^ito euntque
sidera ^a causa, etiamsi major illis a^a ac prior. co^ est. Sense. lib. 6. de
Benet. cap. 22.
that the Stars finish their courses only to serve him, that the Planets meet
not but to observe his adventures, and to presage his victories; and being
strangely hoodwinkt* he believes that Nature is only busied to find him
pastim^, or for his honor. He raises up devils by the help of Magic, he
extends his Empire even unto hell; not knowing that he purchases his power by
the loss of his liberty; that he becomes their slave, who obey him; and that
he procures unto himself as many Tyrants after death, as he imployes officers
in his life time.

The creatures to revenge themselves for so many outrages, conspire his
undoing, and declare war against him; he sees no one part in all his Dominions,
wherein he finds not either Rebels, or Enemies; whatsoever he undertakes he
meets with resistance, and his subjects through despair resolve to free
themselves from their unjust Sovereign, though by their own undoing. Of the so
many ways which they find to revenge themselves, or punish him; the two most
remarkable are violence, or cunning. The first is more sensible, the second
more dangerous. Pugnat cum Deo orbis terrarum contra insensatos; ibunt direct
emissiones fulgurum and tanquam a been curvat^ arcu nubi^ extermin^buntur. Sap.
cap. 5.
For no man is so resolute, but that he trembles when he sees all creatures
armed against him; and that wheresoever he turns his eye, he either finds
factions, or revolts in his state. Every Element threatens him with a thousand
torments; he finds no sanctuary amidst so many dangers, and let him be how
careful he can to defend himself, he knows he cannot shun a violent death: for
to understand it aright, no death is natural, and if we give it sometimes that
Title it is either to sweeten the rigor thereof, or to confound nature with sin.

This war which appears so cruel, is not the most dangerous; for to boot, that
we know how to defend our selves from it, and that self-love has found out
remedies for all our evils, it loosens us from off the earth, it makes us abhor
our exile, and love our dear Country; it raises us up gently into heaven, and
we may say, that if this persecution makes not Martyrs, it does at least make
Penitents. But the other is so much more dangerous, as it is more pleasing; it
deceives us so much the more easily, by how much it flatters us more cunningly;
for the creatures are in the devils hands, to seduce us, they are full of
sna^es and nets to surprise us, we can hardly make use of them without
hazarding our welfare. Creaturae Dei in odium factae sunt and in tentationem
animabus hominum and in muscipulam pedibus insipientium. Sap. 14.
This Tyrant who got the Sovereignty of them, when he lost it in Paradise,
makes such cunning use of them, as it is almost impossible to avoid his snares.
To preserve our innocence, we ought to interdict our selves the use of the
world; and not to fall under the slavery of devils, it seems we ought to have
no commerce with his creat^res.

They were formerly faithful Guides, which led us to God, and now they draw us
far from him: formerly they taught us our mysteries, and to know the beauty of
God, a man was only to consider his works; now they engage us in error; the
Prince of darkness imployes them either to abuse Philosophers, or to deceive
the mis-believers: formerly they served us for pastime, wherein pleasure was
mingled with innocence; they charmed our eyes without distracting our minds;
religion and study were not as yet separated, the one and the other of them had
their sweets without bitterness, and made men learned and godly without
labor: I audet te ex c^eaturis anima mea Deus creator omnium, sed non eis
infigatur glu^ine amoris (...) corporis: conscind^t ^am desideriis
pestilentiosis quoniam requiescere amat in ^is quae amat. Aug. lib. 4 Confess.
c. 10.
but now the creatures serve us for pastime only to undo us; the sports which
they furnish us withal, are almost always accompanied with sin; if we exceed
necessity, we fall into intemperance, and if we use them profusely, we cannot
shun injustice.

Every creature bears about it is dangers with it, a man must stand upon his
guard when he intends to make use of them, and who sails upon this sea,
without very much caution, is in danger of shipwreck. We ought most to suspect
such things as are most necessary for us; Necessity, which seems to serve for
an excuse, serves our Enemy for a means whereby to undo us; he has spread
abroad his nets in all creatures, to surprise us; he covers the hook over with
some bait that may allure us, and whilst we think to satisfy our desires, we
inconsiderately engage our selves in his designs.

The use of food, without the which we cannot preserve life, is not void of
danger: if we will not become guilty, we must use them but as remedies; we are
not only forbidden the abuse, but even the love of them: men sin against the
Laws of God, as well in taking too much delight in eating, as in eating too
much. Sobriety is a quaint or nice virtue, which is scandalized as well with
the quality, as with the quantity of Viands: and if it be true, that our sins
bind us to repentance, we ought not only to cut off what is superfluous, but
even what we think necessary. Sleep is not so very innocent, but that it is
sometimes mingled with sloth; all they who sleep to keep themselves in good
plight, and who make their bed a place of pleasure, have found out the secret
of making sleep sinful; and of committing offenses in a condition wherein the
most guilty become innocent, a man must not love reason very much, who can be
content to want the use of it so Hoc me docuisti Demine ut qu^madmodum
medicamenta sic a^menta sumpturu^ accedam. August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 31
long; he must hold correspondency with death, who throws himself so often into
his brothers arms, and he must be very careless of his welfare who loses the
remembrance thereof so often.

Apprarell is no less dangerous then sleep, and though divine providence have
afforded us the hides and skins of the creature to cover us withal, yet we do
we oft-times thwart the designs thereof, by the wast we make. Apparel
Exterior vestium super flu^tas interioris vanitatis indidicium est. Mollia
indumenta animi mollitiem indicant, non tantum curarent corporis cultum nisi
neglecta prius fuisset men's inculta virtutibus. Bernard.
is now no more the invention of necessity, men cloth themselves no longer now
to escape the injuries of the elements, a man must either be unhappy or
uncivil, if in his clothings he endeavor only the freeing of himself from
incommodity. We draw our glory from our confusion, that which caused our shame,
publishes our vanity, and not finding wherein within our selves sufficiently
to glory, we seek for occasion thereof in the creatures; we deck our selves
with birds feathers, the tops of herons, and peacocks tails serve to adorn our
heads, the labor of worms feeds our luxury, we make their graves our apparel,
and that which cost those innocent laborers their life, increases our vanity;
we turn grass into cloth to satisfy our tenderness, we corrupt Nature with
art; and by a piece of extreme ingratitude, we accuse her of want either of
dexterity or power. Thus we hardly make use of any creature, without offending
their Creator, we remedy our needs only by profusions, and we are in danger of
committing some fault, as often as we satisfy any one of our desires.

The Creatures seem to hold intelligence with the Devils to undo us; that they
submit to our wills, only to seduce us, and that as if they were incenst with
anger and hatred against us, they Nemo securus debet esse in ista vita quae
tota tentatio nominatur: Utrum qui fieri potuit e^ deteriore melior: non fiat
etiam ex mesiore deterior. Una spes, una fiducia, una firma promissio
misericordia tua. August. lib. 10. Confess. c. 32.
seek out all occasions to ruin us. They are subjects of Temptation to those
who make use of them, they are nets whereby the un-advised are caught, and
enchanted glasses which deceive those who see themselves in them.

But grant they had not all these evil qualities, they would still be fatal
to us whilst they continue in the power of our enemy; for he has power to make
use of them to abuse us, and since Adams revolt, divine Justice has permitted
him to make weapons of them to beat us down withal. In the Terrestrial
paradise where he assailed all men in their father, he had but a Serpent to
express his mind, but a woman to second his designs, and but an apple to
allure us, all other creatures were exempt from his Tyranny: and how great a
mind so er'e he had to undo us, he durst not employ the beauty of the Stars,
nor the Luster of pearls to corrupt us. Yet an apple satisfied his malice, he
made such use of his power, as he berest us of our innocence, and drove us out
of paradise: we do yet bewail this defeat, we daily feel fatal effects of this
misfortune, and as many ages as have bin since, have not been able to dry our
tears nor lessen our laments. This redoubted enemy upbraids us; that he has
cheated us with an Adam damnatur in mortem ob unius arbusculae del^bationem and
exinde prosiliunt delicta cumpoenis, and per^unt jam omnes qui paradisi nullum
cespi^em norunt. Tertul.
apple, and that with so weak a weapon, he has won a victory which has made
him lord of the whole world. 'Twas easy to defend ones selfagainst an enemy
whom divine Justice held in chains, who had but one way to beat us, and who
having no correspondency in the place which he assailed, could not expect the
victory save from his own dexterity and our dullness, but he is now no longer
laden with Irons, the victory which he got over Adam gives him someright to all
his children, he has in each of them a part of themselves which favors all
his designs, his power is no longer limited, and he has a large permission
to make use of all the Creatures either to seduce or corrupt man. He bears
away almost as many victories as he gives battles; being assisted with such
forces, he meets with few who resists his Tyranny: we are born and do die his
slaves, he makes weapons of whatsoever he meets withal, and fitting himself to
our humors Diabolus quando decipere quemquam tentat, prius naturam unius
cujusque intendit, blandis and leni^us moribus s^pe lu^uriam au^ va^m gloriam
prop prop^t, as^eris vero (...) and (...) cum (...) ^e. Hugo l^b. 1.
and designs, he imployes both heaven and earth to tempt us: by those Stars
which shine over our heads, he makes us either Idolaters or Magicians; by gold,
the richest of all metals, he makes men avaritious; by Iron, he eggs on the
ambitious to war, or the furious to revenge; by wine, he robs drunkards of
their judgments, and gives them as many Masters, as he excites passions in
them; by beauty, which shines forth in women's countenances, he kindles unchaste
fires in men's hearts; and by Man's eloquence, he corrupts women's chastity:
Pearls and Diamonds serve him for Irons to inchain the one and the other of
them, rich stuffs and pleasing colors, are so many charms with which he
inchrnts our senses. In fine, we are forced to confess that the creatures are
his confederates in his designs, that he is only dreadful by means of their
aid, that he wins no victories but by the fights he makes against us with them;
and that some men would be stout enough to withstand his on-sets, were he not
seconded by these faithful officers.

He disposes so Illecebras suggerit, i^sidias parat, cogitationes malas
immittit, and ut ad deteriorem lapsum provocet lucra proponit, damna minatur.
Aug. lib. 14. de Civit. cap. 3.
absolutely of them, as after having employed them to seduce us, he makes use
of them to afflict us; and not being able to make us sin through their
allurements, he endeavors to make us miserable by their persecutions, he has
to do with Fulminibus miscentur daemones, terrae motus excitant, maria
conturbant, and saepe navigia cum hominibus demergunt. Pet. C^init.
Thunder; and causes fear, where he cannot cause sin; he raises storms in the
sea, and buries both men and ships in the waves, if he cannot kindle war, he
excites pestilence and famine, and corrupting the purity of the air, he turns
towns to deserts, and makes the fields barren; he shakes the foundations of the
earth, he over-whelms men under the ruins of their houses, and immolates
victimes to his fury, when he cannot win slaves to his ambition, so as be it in
prosperity, or in adversity, we are bound to confess that by the good will of
God, the elements hold of the Devil, and that the Creatures are corrupted by
sin, since they serve as Instruments to our enemy to sooth us into our
concupiscence and to abase our courage.

The sixth Discourse.
That it is more secure to sequester a man's self from the Creatures, then to
make use of them.

A Man must be ignorant of all the Maxims of christianity if he know not that
he is forbidden the love of the creature, and that we cannot love them without
betraying our dignities or forgetting our duty: for nothing but God Iubet
aeterna lex avertere amorem a tenporalibus, and eum mundatum convertere ad
aeterna. August. lib. 1. de lib. a^bit. cap. 15.
can lay lawful claim to our affections; he is the center of all love, he is
bereft of that love which is not given him, and he is injured in the chiefest
of all his qualities, if one propose any other end unto himself, then God
himself; we are born only to serve and love him: no other object is able to
satisfy us, and our heart is too great to be filled with a good which is not
infinite. We molest the order which God has established in the world, when by
an unjust going less we raise the creatures above our selves.

He who abaseth himself through the meannesse of his spirit, is not less
guilty then he who through his ambition, raises himself up; and he gives
against Gods Providence as well who obeys those creatures which are inferior
to him, as he who would command over those which are his equals, or Superiors.
Man has received an unrepealable law which obliges him to submit himself to
God, because he is his Sovereign, and to raise himself above the other
creatures because they are his Servants: he treats upon equal terms with other
men because they are his equals; he bears respect unto the Angels without
adoring them, because they are his companions, and do in the difference of
their natures aspire with man to one and the same end, and seek out the same
happiness. Whatsoever is not rational is subject to the Empire of Lex ^terna
non est aliud quam divina ratio, vel voluntas Dei ordinem naturalem conservari
jub^ns, perturbari vetans. Aug. lib. 22. contra Faust. cap. 27.
man, and he is not vain glorious, when he thinks the earth is fruitful only
to afford him nourishment, that the Sun rises only to light him, and that the
flowers do display themselves only for his recreation: when he loves them out
of an inclination, or out of necessity, he disturbs the order of God, he
submits himself to that which is below him, he degenerates from his nobility,
and becomes a slave to his subjects, for if he love a creature he must obey it,
he cannot give his love to it and preserve his liberty. Love is an imperious
Amor res est imperiosa. Plato.
passion, it assubjects all those souls which it possesses, it makes as many
slaves as lovers, and reduces them to a condition wherein having no longer any
will, they are not Masters of their desires, they look pale, when in the
presence of those that they adore, they tremble when they come near them, and
the Stars have not so much power over their bodies as those whom they love have
absolute command over their souls: the object of their love Talis est quisque
qualis est dilectio ejus. A^de diligenter anima mea quid dilig^ si terram
di^gis terraes: (...) ^oelum amas c^lum es. Aug. tr^ct 2. in Epist (...) ^n.
is the cause of all their motions, if it be absent, they consume away in
desire, and languish in vain hopes, if it be threatened with any danger they
quake for fear, if it be set upon they pluck up their courage, if it go far off
without hopes of being soon seen again they fall into despair; and if it be
lost without hope of recovery, they give themselves over to grief and sorrow.
Thus these slaves take upon them their Masters livery, these Camelions change
color as often as that which they love changes condition, and betraying their
own greatness they assubject themselves to creatures which ought to obey them.

I know very well that lovers endeavor to throw of this yoke, that they strive
to free themselves from this Tyranny, and that being weary of obeying, they
fain would command their turn about, but all they can do is to no purpose, and
the unalterable laws of love, force them fairly to submit to those subjects
which are Masters of their liberty. The ambitious man would fain be the
Sovereign of honor, but let him do what he can, he still remains the slave
thereof, and whilst he leads on Troops and commands Armies, he is shamefully
enforced to obey ambition which tyrannizeth over him. The Avaritious man would
fain be Master of his riches, what ever pleasure he takes in keeping them, he
would take more in spending them; but he is as it were bound to adore them and
to dedicate all his care and watching to the Devil which does possess him. The
lustful man Homines rerum mortalium servi fiunt, dum imperite Domini esse
desiderant. Aug. lib. de morib. Eccl. cap. 23.
wishes that he were his Mistresses Master, and that he might prescribe laws
to that proud beauty which domineers over him; but his excess of passion keeps
him a servant still, and the nature of love forces him with content, to
renounce his liberty; his slavery is a just punishment of his ambition, and
Heaven permits that he remain a slave to the Creature, because he would have
made himself Master thereof by unlawful means.

This is the cause why he will not acknowledge any thing to be amiss in what
he loves, why he does admire the perfections thereof, and why he does mingle
his vices and virtues together: for to give right judgment of any thing a
superiority is required in the judgment giver. Some advantage must be had over
that whose weaknesses would be known, and lovers being slaves to those they
love, their blindness lasts as long as does their slavery; by a no less
necessary then unfortunate consequence, they assume the qualities of that
object which causes their love, they transform themselves into what they love,
and change nature as well as condition: but that which is most unjust in this
change is, that these wretched creatures take unto themselves the worst of the
qualities of what they love, and cannot take the best; and having a capability
of becoming easily imperfect, they can never become accomplished: a deformed
man loses not his deformity, though he love an exquisite beauty an ignorant
body grows not learned, though he love a Philosopher; an ambitious man mounts
not the throne, though he love a Sovereign; and covetous men grow not rich
though they court wealth, but by a deplorable misfortune, lovers share in the
faults of that subject, whence they derive their love: they put on all the
evil qualities thereof, and having no design to imitate it, they resemble it
in loving it. Ambitious men become as vain as the honor which they idolatrize;
greedy men are no less obdurate, then is the metal which they adore, and the
lascivious are as base as is the pleasure which they so much cherish. Love Noli
amare (...), (...) non vis invenir^tormentum. Aug. S^rm. 105 de diversis.
is the mixture of Lovers, he mingleth their wills in joining them together, he
confounds their qualities, in uniting their minds; but when he grows
irrational, he brings his punishment along with him, and that he may punish
those whom he has engaged in an unlawful affection, he permits them to
communicate their defaults, and forbids them to communicate their advantages.
Thus man cannot love the creatures unless losing the privileges which nature
has given him, he renounce his Greatness, in loving his Slaves, and as the
Scripture says, he become abominable in worshipping of Idols.

From this just punishment another does derive, which is not much less
rigorous; for Divine Justice which cannot let a fault pass unpunisht, permits
that men find their punishment in their love, and that the object which ought
to cause their good fortune, cause their torment, for though love boast of
allaying pains, and of making the wildest things that are, loving; yet does he
attribute unto himself a power which only belongs to charity, his deeds are
not answerable to his words, and when lovers abused by his promises have
engaged themselves on his side, they find by experience, that that which ought
to cause their happpinesse, is the original of their punishment. And that they
cannot love the creature without becoming miserable. There goes more care Miser
^ram and m^ser est om^s antimus vmctus amore rerum mortalium, and dila^atur cum
eas (...), and tunc s^t miseriam qua miser est, antequam amittat cas. August 4.
Cor fell. cap. 6. 1 Majore torme^o pec^ia possi^etur quam quaeritur. Sen.
to the preserving of riches then to the getting of them; it is more painful to
be rich, then to become rich; and that metal which seems to be the reward of
the avaritious man's labor, is only the increase and the redoubling thereof:
he has past the seas to find them out, he has dug into the bowels of the
earth to seek for them, he has engaged his freedom to become Master thereof,
yet is the keeping of them more vexatious, then the acquiring: he is more
troubled in hiding them, then in heaping of them together, and he confesses
that riches threaten more mischief to him then poverty does, he runs more
hazard in his own house then on the sea, he fears Partners more then Pirates,
and is not so terrified with Tempests, as with Suits at law.

The ambitious man finds his punishment in glory and honor, this vain Idol
which occasioned his desires, occasioneth his complaints, he repents his having
courted so ungrateful a Mistress, and knowing that she has nothing
wherewithal to reward those that serve her, but wind and smoke, he never
esteems himself more unfortunate then when most honored. Thus it fares with
whatsoever else we love; Plerumque cum adsunt nobis putamus quod ea non
diligamus, sed cum abesse coeperunt invenimus qui simus. Hoc enim siaeamore
aderat quod sine dolor discessit. Aug. lib d^ vera Relig. cap. 47.
Divine Justice does minglegall with honey in them, to wean us from them, and
makes use of our delights, to increase our annoyes, the house which we have
built for our diversion, will prove our anxiety, yea even, though it suit in all
things with our desire, 'twil cease to give content, when it cease to be new,
we will wonder that not having changed aspect it shall have lost what was
pleasing in it, and that contrary to our expectation, it should become our
punishment; when it ought to be our delight. Those pictures which we send for
out of the warehouses of Italy, which we have bought at so dear a rate, which
we have with such impatiency looked for, and been so well pleased when they
came, cease to ravish our senses when they are once seated in the places
appropriated for them; they lose their value together with their novelty; it
must be the admi ration of those that never saw them that must make us esteem
them, and we must look upon them through other men's eyes if we will value them:
they serve us only to incense us against a servant who has not been careful
enough of them, or to make us curse time which has effaced their colors.

The pain which all these things cause in us, and the undervaluation we have of
them, is not able to make us forbear loving them, we are fastened to them
without our knowledge, we love them, whilst we think not on it, and because we
forego the further desire of them when we are once possessed thereof, we think we
cease to be kin thereunto. An avaritious man who sees his cofers full, who
receives his rents duly every quarter, and who never knew what belonged to
being bankrout, or unfortunate, cannot believe that he loves his riches so
excessively; the sorrow he feels by their losses must make him know the
contentment he had in their possession, he must judge of his engagement by his
grief, love is better known by privation then by enjoyment, and the
irregularity of affection is not better discerned, then by the absence of the
object which did entertain it. We are not troubled with the u (...) Quantum
amando peccaverunt, perdendo sens^runt. Lib. 1. de Cant. c 9.
loss of what we were not pleased (...) Quantum amando peccaverunt, perdendo
sens^runt. Lib. 1. de Cant. c 9.
with the possession; we judge of the excess of our love, by the like of our
sorrow; and we are never so sensible of the love we bear to perishable things,
as by the sorrow we conceive for their loss; we are sensible of our captivity,
after being set at liberty; we consider the weight of our Irons, when we are
freed from them; and we know we were miserable when we think our selves to be
most happy.

To find a remedy for these evils, Saint Si autem ista d^ligis ut subjecta
dilige, ut famulantia dilige, ut arrham sponsi, ut munera amici, ut beneficia
Dei. Non ista propter se, sed propter illum, nec ista cum illo, sed ista
propter illum, and super ista illum diligas. August. in Med^tat.
Augustine teaches us that we must make use of the creatures without loving
them, and we must be very careful lest whilst we touch them with our hands,
they corrupt our hearts. He will have us to look upon them as slaves which
ought to obey us, not command us; he will have us to love them, as they are the
pictures of God, and as Lovers love their Mistresses pictures, he will have us
to esteem of them, as the favors of our God, and that considering his beauty
in his images, and his goodness in what represents him, we should neither
love the one nor the other but merely for his sake.

Did I not doubt lest men might think me too severe, I would add that all these
precautions were not sufficient; and that the Son of God not content to have
taught us that perishable things cannot beloved without danger, he would tell
us that they may be despised without vain glory, for although his Commandments
do only forbid us any excess in the use thereof, his counsels do permit us to
wean our selves from them; and all christian virtues are so many holy pieces of
cunning which teach us how to set by the creatures. Fasting Abstinentia est
quando quis pro ^more Dei and salute propria, non ab illicitis tantum, sed
interdum a licitis atque concessis cohi^et. Greg. 5. Moral.
in^erdicts us the use of meats, it raises man to the condition of Angels, by
cutting of such things as are necessary for the preservation of life, it
contents it self with bread and water; nay there have been some Penitentiaries
and Anchorets, who have passed over whole weeks without eating any thing, lest
whilst they would feed their natural heat, they might increase the heat of
their concupiscence. Poverty is a general foregoing of all worldly things,
those who make greatest profession thereof, live in the world as in a desert;
whatsoever self-love judges necessary, seems useles or superfluous to them;
the arts are not troubled with dressing nor with nourishing them; they find
that in deserts, which we want in cities; and the bounds which they have
prescribed to their desires renders them content, in the midst of want, the
same tree may cloth and feed them, the leaves thereof serve them for coverings,
and the fruit for nourishment. Fortune Amate and nolite amare, ad aliquid
amate, and ad aliquid amare nolite: est enim quod ad profectum ametur, and est
quod adimpedimentum non ametur. Aug. Sermon. 105. de diversis.
can lay no hold upon their persons, wheresoever they go they carry all they
have with them, and Famine which does depopulate whole towns, cannot make the
earth barren enough to infuse fear into them, they are grown acquainted with
hunger, and cannot fear an enemy with whom they have so often fought. Penitency
has less need of the creature then poverty has, she takes some pleasure in
contemning them, she rather loves to be persecuted then to be served by them,
and knowing that this world is but a banishment, she despises whatsoever can
retard her return into her deer country; she incourageth penitents to fight
against sin, and sorrow, to destroy the Father by his Daughters means, and to
procure Heaven by the loss of Earth.

Thus all the virtues teach us that all the creatures are corrupted; that it is
better to pass by them, Non est in carend^ difficultas, nisi cum est in amando
cupiditas August. lib. 3. de Doct. Christ. cap. 6.
then to make use of them, that it is safer to contemn them, then to employ
them, and that if Philosophy teach us the use of them, Religion counsels us
their privation.

The seventh Discourse.
That Deluges and Earthquakes are the punishments of the World become corrupted.

WE must not wonder if Philosophers have argued so weakly upon the disorders of
nature, their not knowing the the true cause thereof, being by reason of their
ignorance of Adams sin: they were of opinion that the evil was occasioned by
the corruption of humors, and raising themselves to no higher a consideration,
they took the punishment of our sin for a condition of Nature; they thought
that death was rather a law then a punishment; ^ex est, non paena perire. Senec.
and that the two parts whereof man is composed were severed when their chains
were worn to pieces through the long use of time, or broken by the violence of
sorrow: they thought that the bodies rebellion was a necessary consequence of
it is constitution, and that the slave being of another nature then his Master,
it was not to be wondered at if he had other inclinations; they were persuaded
that the revolt of wild beasts was a mere effect of their fury, and that man
had no reason to complain thereof, since he neither wanted Force to tame them,
nor Address to reclaim them.

Learning upon the same principle, they thought that Earthquakes and Deluges
were only accidents which found their causes in nature, and which were as
ordinary to the earth, as heats and colds to those that are sick, Suas ista
causas habent, net ex imperio saeviunt, sed ex quibusdam vitiis, ut corpora
nostra turbantar. Senec. Quaest. Natural. lib. 6. cap. 3.
they thought that the wind or fire enclosed in the bowels of the Mother Earth
caused the agitations thereof, and that these two Elements endeavoring their
liberty, did their utmost to break prison, that those constellations which rule
in chief over waters, made the rivers swell, and drawing the sea out of her
bed, covered the earth with her waves. They prepared themselves for these
accidents, as for disorders, which were inevitable; and not troubling
themselves with appeasing divine Justice, which chastises men by these
dreadful punishments they remained opinionated in their Errors; Ignorance
would not suffer them to profit by these disorders, and not knowing that they
were Punishments, they thought that Patience and Fortitude were the only
Remedies.

The common people whose opinions were not so corrupted because they were less
proud, Nihil borum sine timore mirantur populi. ^n. lib. 6. Q^aest. Natural.
lib. 6. cap. 3.
reverenced the heavens anger in her severe punishments, and finding no means
how to obviate so strange disasters, they sought for safety in superstition,
and endeavored to appease the evil spirits with sacrifice: but this new sin
augmented the rage of heaven, thinking to avoid it is Justice they provoked it is
indignation, and through a blind ignorance they incensed their Sovereign by
fawning on their executioners. Christians who are instructed in a better
school, confess that these great disorders are the punishments of sin, and
that divine Justice made no use of them, till we through our offenses had
despised his mercy; indeed there was nothing but the hand of God alone, which
could overthrow his workmanship, and loosen the earth from it is foundations, to
affrighten the guilty. Were not the winds in-animated by his Justice, they
could not shake the center of the world, the weight of this great frame would
stop their fury, and nature which loves to preserve her parts, would not permit
mere exhalations to commit such havoc in her state, she would open new
passages to them to allay their violence, and preventing these extraordinary
convulsions, she would either rend open her own bowels, or else dissolve those
vapors into rivers. Potes autem a terra omnem spem atque omne desiderium
removere, hoc fac ut securus vivas, eaque vel tremente, vel ruente consistas.
Stultum est firmam in re tremula spem habere. Petrarc. Dialog.
But God takes delight to agitate the world, that he may intimidate men, and
that he may teach them by these Earthquakes, that the earth is not so much
their abiding place, as the place of their punishment.

Of all the animadversions which his Justice gives them, there is none more
horrid or less evitable then this: for what assurance can we hope for here
below, if the earth quake under our feet? where can we think to escape danger,
if the most solid thing of all the world do shake? and if that which susteins
all things threaten us with sinking under our feet? what Sanctuary shall we
find to defend us from an evil which does incompasse us round, and whither can
we withdraw if the gulfs which open themselves shut up our passages on all
sides? with what horror are men struck when they hear the earth groan, when
her trembling succeeds her complaints, when houses are loosened from their
foundations, when the roof falls upon their heads, and the pavement sinks under
their feet? what hope is there to be had in so general a disorder, and what
comfort can be given or received in so universal a disorder, when fear cannot
be fenced by flight? Quid tebi esse non dico auxilii, sed solatii, ubi timor
fugam perdidit. Senec. quaest. Natural. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Fortune is never so cruel, but that she opens unto us some out let whereby to
escape the evils which she sends us; an enemy is beaten from the bulwark
which he had possessed himself of, earth-works are opposed to the thundering
cannon, winds which raise Tempests deliver us from them, and after having a
long time tossed us too and fro, they cast us upon the shore, houses serve us for
sanctuaries against the injuries of the air, and shepherds cottages which are
only made of leaves and moss save them from storms; Firings which are so
hideous, follow not them that fly from them, though fire be never so light it
becomes slothful when it betakes it self to a combustible matter, and if man
will resign his goods unto it, he may secure his person. Nullum malum sine
effugio est, nunquam fulmina populos percusserunt: pestilens coelum exhausit
urbes, (...) abstulit. (...).
Thunder hurts not those who hide themselves in caverns, it is boult does only
grate upon the earth but does not penetrate it, it is stopped with the least
resistance, and some trees have the virtue to appease it is fury; when the
plague infects whole cities, it may be shunned by going into the country,
change of air is a remedy for incurable evils, and when Physicians cannot cure
a stubborn sickness, either by diet or letting blood, they cure it by waters
or by traveling.

There is no disaster so general as does assail the whole world at once,
Thunder frightens more then it hurts; the plague, whose mischiefs are so great,
may well dispeople towns, but does not throw down the houses; though tempests
do shatter ships, yet some do escape their fury; but the earth quake does
enclose whatsoever it overthrows, it opens the earth wide as it swalloweth
down whole towns, it wageth not war with some few houses only, but with whole
provinces, it leaves nothing behind it which can inform posterity of it is
outrages; more insolent then fire which spares rocks, more cruel then the
Conqueror who spares walls, Hoc malum latissime patet; non enim domus solum aut
familias aut urbes singulas haurit, sed gentes totas regionesque subvertit.
Idem ibid.
more greedy then the sea which vomiteth up shipwracks, it swalloweth and
devoureth whatsoever it overturneth. Whatever steadfastness the places have
wherein we live, we cannot say they are exempt from this so dreadful accident,
what has befaln some parts of the earth, may befall all the rest, those which
never were yet agitated are not unmovable, their condition is not better
though they have been preserved from this disorder; they ought to apprehend it,
because they have escaped it, and those parts which have undergone it ought to
fear it the less, because nature has consumed the forces thereof in shaking
them. Self-love does abuse us, if we persuade our selves that there are some
parts of the world which are exempt from this mischief, they are subject to the
same laws, nature cannot defend her workmanship against the justice of her
Sovereign, Omnes sub eadem lege jacent. Nihil ita ut immobile esset natura
concepit, alia temp^lus aliis cadunt* Idem. ^i.
what happens not at one time, may happen at another; as in great towns one
house falls after another, so in the world does earthquakes succeed, and France
will one day suffer what Italy has suffered; the bravest parts of the world
have not been able to secure themselves from it, those which have been most
populous and most abounding in fruit have been most subject thereunto; and Asia
whose beauty may make Europe jealous, has often been the Theater of famous
Earthquakes; she lost twelve towns in one day, Achaia and Macedonia have been
sensible of this disorder, and the most delightful parts of Italy have seen
their walls thrown down and their houses swallowed up amidst their greatest
felicity. Circui^ ^atum* and si qu^ diu praeteriit repetit, quaedam ^rius
sol^itat, quaed^m saepius, nihil immune esse and innoxium si^t. Idem ibid.
Destiny seems to make the circuit of the world, it sets upon those parts which
it has a long time spared, and teaches all sorts of people that no force can
resist it is fury. The Sea is subject to it is Empire, and Mariners confess
that those storms are most dangerous, which are occasioned by earthquakes; the
Ocean is astonished when the element which serves it for it is basis will forego
it, it grows incensed and breaks it is bounds when the earth sinks under it is
waters; and goes to seck out another bed, when that which nature has given it
appears willing to be it is Sepulcher.

In fine, this misfortune is common to all kingdoms, N^o quidquam esse quietis
aeternae, quod and p^rire non potest and perdere. Idem ibid.
since man became criminal, all parts of the earth are become moveable, the
parts thereof do dis-unite themselves, since the division of the body from the
soul, and steadfastness must no longer be looked for in the world, since
innocence is banished thence by injustice. This disorder is the punishment of
our sin; and reason together with faith does sufficiently persuade us that the
universe would never have been agitated with these furious accidents during the
estate of original righteousness. Wherefore should Gods anger, have armed the
elements against his faithful subjects? wherefore should it have overthrown
all his works to destroy innocent men, why should it have overwhelmed the
inhabitants of the earth with the ruins thereof, if they had not been sinful?
why should it have buried those in the bowels of the earth, who were not to
die? Nullo modo peccati ded^us est sine deco^e (...). Aug.
Let us then conclude that Earthquakes are the effects of sin, and let us
also make it appear that Deluges are also the just Rewards thereof.

We are bound by the holy Scripture to believe that that dreadful disorder was
not so much the effect of Nature as of Divine Justice, that it was to punish
man's insolency that the flo^ds forsook their channels, and that the world would
never have been drowned had it not been infected with man's sin. ^inis universa
car^ ven^t coram me, repleta est t^a iniquitate a facie eorum, and ego
disperdam eos cum terra. Genes. cap. 6.
Nature could not have furnished waters enough to cover the mountains had not
Gods anger imprinted in her a new fertility, she could not have wrought so
powerfully toward her own ruin, unless he whose motions make her
inclinations encourage her against her self; all the Seas put together could
not have covered the face of the whole world, though their banks should have
been broken down, and that they should have been set at Liberty by the hand
which holds them in, they would not have had waves enough to have overflowed
all the earth: if those rains which made the waters swell came not from out the
bosom of the clouds, a Sovereign power formed the vapors which did produce
them. The same Voluntas Dei causa miraculorum omnium, quae vel ob^jus gloriam,
vel o^ peccatorum ultionem fiunt.
Justice which shall burn the world, did drown it, and let Philosophers say
what they list, that prodigious accident was not a mere effect of nature.
Nature is not powerful enough to destroy what she has not made; that hand
only by which she is guided can disorder her, those great disorders which draw
along with them her general ruin could have no other cause but the will of
God.

Philosophy has not been able to find out a cause for it, she speaks of the
deluge as of a fable, and has rather chosen to give all antiquity the lie then
to betray her own ratiocination. To say truth, he that knows not sin cannot
comprehend this disorder of nature, to the belief thereof, a presupposition is
requisite that man is guilty, that God is angry with him, and that he will make
use of his absolute power to punish him. All other reason is too weak to prove
so strange an accident: though the world subsist by change, and that the
elements whereof it is composed are only preserved by their opposing one
another, yet do not their combats tend to the ruin of nature: the peace of the
Universe is entertained by their divisions; they sacrifice themselves for the
public good, and violate their particular inclinations to prevent a general
disorder. Fire descends to assist nature, when she is set upon; water mounts
aloft to supply the place of vacuum which is the common enemy to all elements,
the earth opens her bowels and loosens her self from her foundations to
suppress the disorders which sin has caused in the world; but it is not to be
comprehended how all the parts of the world should conspire natures ruin, nor
by what secret veins the sea could issue forth so much water as could drown
her: the sea even when incensed uses violence upon her self not to overflow
the earth; Usque huc venies and non procedes amplius and ^c c^stringes tume^
^uctus tuos. J^ 38.
it remembers what order it received from God in the beginning, it uses
violence upon it self, in it is greatest storms, not to out-passe it is bounds;
it takes nothing in one place which it repayes not in another, it restores to
Swethland, what it has taken from Holland; and foregoes our coasts when it
intrencheth upon our neighbors: if the ebbing and flowing thereof be sometimes
irregular, they never move to such a height as to threaten the whole world,
it is inroads are rather for pastime then mischief, and should it have taken that
liberty in the state of innocence, man, who very well knew the nature thereof,
would neither have been surprised nor astonished thereat.

But if it now spread it self over the fields, if it cover the highest steeples
with it is waves, if it turn populous towns into lakes or ponds, if it bear it is
Empire beyond it is bounds, and if breaking the banks which are made to oppose
it is fury, it threaten us again with an universal Deluge, it follows rather
the motions of Divine Justice then it is own, and this prodigy is rather an
effect of Gods anger, then of Nature.

Thus ought we to argue of that general inundation which destroyed the whole
world, two thousand years after it was first made, the cause came from heaven,
the decree was pronounced by Gods own mouth, the execution thereof was given to
the evil spirits, and the Elements received a new commission to obey their new
order. The earth furnished part of the vapors which were Non est tanto ma^o u^
causa, sed omnis rati^ consentit, and simul imbres cadunt, ^mina increscunt,
maria sedibus suis excit^ per^runt, and ^mnia uno agm^ne (...) exi^ium hum^i
generis incumbunt. Senec. Quaest. Natural. cap. 27.
to drown her, the vapors distilled down in rain, rivers being swollen with such
fall of rain, broke their banks, the sea not able to contain so many floods,
forewent its bounds; Towns were changed into ponds, their streets were turned
into rivolets, their inhabitants quitted their houses; the walls whereof were
undermined by waters; and equally fearing two contrary evils, they know not
whether they were to perish by the fall, or by the drowning of their houses;
Torrents were seen every where, which charged with booty did at the same time
carry down the seilings of palaces, and trees out of gardens; all rivers lost
their names and channels, the Rhine was confounded with Rome, Euphrates and
Ganges were mingled together, all those great rivers which had won fame by
reason of the towns which they watered, found their loss in their greatness,
and ruined themselves that they might ruin the whole world; I am omnia quae
prospici possunt aquis obside^tur, omni^ tumul^ i^ profundo late^ and immensa
ubique ^titudo est: tantum in s^mmis montium jugis vad^ sunt. Idem ibid*
the tops of mountains made Islands in this wast Ocean, which being by little
and little quite effaced, left the world at last drowned in waters: there was
then but one only Element seen. Whole Nature became a Sea, in the which the
winds guided a vessel which carried in it the worlds only hope, and which
preserved eight people amidst this deluge which were to re-people the world.

It is very likely that so great a spoil was not made without Thunder, and that
to make this punishment the more dreadful, the Sun (...) ^tissimis (...)*
adhaerebant reliquiae ^neris ^umani, q^us in extre^ perd^s, hoc ^num sol^tio
suit, quod trans^rat in (...) metus. Senec. ibid.
hid his face, that the day gave place to night, that the world was covered
with darkness, and the Lightening was the torches which did attend the
funeral pomp, whilst any mountains were yet uncovered with water, the
remainders of mankind were fixed there; in this extremity no comfort but
astonishment remained, fear was changed into stupidity, and the wonder which
they conceived at this so hideous an accident did so possess their spirits, as
they saw the sea without fear, had not feeling of the mischief, and perished
without complaining. Who will not confess that so strange an accident, could
be no natural effect? who will not judge, by the greatness thereof, that it
was a miracle of divine Justice? who will not confess that these disorders
which tend to the ruin of mankind, are the punishments of sin? and that
nature would never have conceived so much indignation, against her own
children, had she not believed to revenge their father by their death, and to
repair his honor by their punishment.

The eighth Discourse.
That Thunder, Plagues and Tempest are the effects of Sin.

WHen I consider the worlds condition since sin, me thinks I see a combat
between self-love and divine Justice, and that these two parties do with equal
courage endeavor to win the victory. Divine Justice disorders the seasons to
punish sinful man, alters the nature of the elements, robs the earth of
flowers, and covers it over with thorns; makes the winters longer, and Summers
shorter, and mingling the saddest of our seasons with all the other, makes snow
be seen in the spring, and thick fogs in Autumn, arms savage beasts with new
fury, and draws them out of their forests to set on sinners in towns,
destroys her own workmanship, ruins the beauties of the world to take revenge
of the Lord thereof, and raises up as many enemies against him since his sin,
as he had Subjects during his innocence. Self-love Amor sui deliciarum omnium,
and proinde peccatorm author est.
imploys all it is industry to to repair these disorders, and by tricks which
seem to augment it is sin, withstands all the designs of Divine Justice; it
cultivates the earth, and by it is labor makes her fruitful, it ingrafts roses
upon thorns, and indevours to make the place of it is exile a stately palace, it
has had such good success in it is enterprises, as the sinful world comes not
far short of the world when innocent, did our first father live again, and
partake of our contentments, he would not so much lament the loss of the
earthly paradise, but blaming the tears which his banishment drew from him, he
would pass his time merrily away with his children, in so pleasing an abod^*
In effect, all things are refined by time, solitary places are inhabited,
forests which infused horror into those who saw them, furnish hunters with
pastime, the barren sands are sowed upon, vines are planted upon rocks, Marish
grounds are dried, that they may Sylvas (...) domuer^t, fera^ peccora
fug^verunt, arenae ser^ntur, saxa panguntur, paludes ^liquantur, tant^ urbes
quantae non cas^ quo^dam. I am ne^ i^sulae ^rrent nec scop^li ^orrent. Ubique
domus, ubique populus, ubique respublica. Tertul. de ^ma.
be plough'd up, and provinces are now fuller of palaces, then formerly they
were of cottages; Islands are no longer un-inhabited, and those famous rocks
which made the Pylots tremble, now bear high Towers for Landmarks unto them,
and Towns to receive them: all the parts of the world are peopled, nor are
there any deserts which have not some Inhabitants and houses.

But let self-love use all the cunning that it can, there are some mischiefs
which we cannot she* and there are some disorders in the world which will
oblige us to confess, that the wisdom of man cannot defend it self against
Gods anger. Thunder is of this sort, and one must have lost his reason, not to
fear a cause which produces such strange effects. All Poets have armed the
hands of God therewithal, and nature which is the Mistress Sum^am petit
arduus arcem, unde movet tonitrum, vibrat^que fulmina jactat. Ovid. Metamor.
of Infidels, has taught them, that he makes use thereof to punish offenders:
the lightenings which fore-run it, the noise which does accompany it, and the
prodigies which follow after are undeniable proofs of this truth. Let
Philosophy defend her self against it by her vain reasons, let her oppose her
pride to our fea^, let her destroy religion by her libertinisme, she cannot
keep reasonable men from redoubting thun-Thunder, and from confessing by the
fear which siezeth them, that without the reading of Genesis they know the
whole story of our misfortune. To say truth, who would not fear a punishment
against which Nature affords no temedy? who will not dread a disaster which
sets upon Princes in their Palaces, and upon Conquerours amidst their Armies?
the stateliness thereof is able to frighten even Philosophers; Non maximum ex
perculis, sed speciosissimum fulmen est. Sen. lib. 2. quaest. Natural. cap. 59.
and though they say this be not the greatest danger, though the most specious,
yet they look pale when the Thunder roars over their heads, and that the
Echoes which answer to the voice thereof makes the ground quake under their
feet. Then their constancy forsakes them, and nature which forces them to
speak truth, makes them make vows, and repent them of their insolence. The
haughtiest of all the Stoics has been enforced to confess, that there was
somewhat of divine in Thunder, that it was not the mere workmanship of nature,
and that the flames and water whereof it is composed made but the least part of
it is power. Caeterum mira fulminis si intueri velis opera sunt, nec quicquam
dubii relinquentia quin divina insit illis and subtilis potentia. Senec.
quaest. Natural. cap. 31.
It is truth, that pride has made him speak another language, and that after
having with reason admired Thunder, he has the impudency to laugh at it; he
believed that since the claps thereof were not certain, they were not darted
out from a divine hand, and that since it spared the guilty, and struck the
innocent, it was guided by fortune, not by providence: Then destroying religion
under a pretense of establishing it, Utile erat in tanta aud^cia scelerum
aliquid esse adversum quod nemo sibi satis potens videretur. Ad conterendos
itaque eos, quibus innocentis nisi metu no^ placet, posuere super caput
vindicem and quidem armatum. Senec. lib. 2. q. Natural. c. 42.
he adds that Politicians had wisely handled this accident, to keep people
within their duties, that it was requisite, that where the faulty take so great
a freedom, there should be an inevitable punishment, and against which the
power of Kings should be of no use; that to intimidate men who could not
beperswaded to innocence, but by fear, it behooved to place a revengefull hand
over their heads which should always be armed with Thunder.

But let this proud Philosopher say what he please, all men will not alter
their belief upon so weak reasons. Non potest in nos tuum errare falmen
quis^uis e nobis cadet, nocens pe^bit. In Medea.
Thunder cannot be mistaken when it falls upon the ground, it is not necessary
that he who darteth it forth should measure his strokes; since whosoever he
hits, is sinful.

The Decree of our death is pronounced before we are born, it little imports
whether the execution thereof be left to thunder or deluge, and whether the sea
or the earth serve as a Minister to Gods Justice: if he spares sinners in this
world, it is that he may punish them the more severely in the other world; if he
snew favor unto sinners, it is either to recompense their good deeds, or the
good deeds of their Ancestors; and if he punish the innocent, it is either to
exercise their patience, or to increase their merit. Loculis integris ac
illesis conflatur arg^ntum, manenta vagina gladius liquescit, and inviolato
signo circa pila se^rum omne distillat. Statfracto dolio vinum Senec. quaest.
Natural. lib. 2. cap. 31.
But certainly of all the punishments which he makes use of to make himself be
feared, there is none more strange then Thunder; the effects thereof are
miraculous, it plays so many several ways, as it is easily seen that he who
guides it is Natures Master; it melts the money of the avaritious without
breaking the cofer wherein it is locked; it breaks the sword without hurting the
Scabbard wherein it is; it melts the iron ends of Pikes without burning the
wood whereinto they are ingraffed; it consumes the Cask without shedding the
wine; but what is yet most miraculous, it kills a child in the mothers belly
without hurting the mother, and of a living cradle, makes her an animated
Sepulcher. Is it not easy to judge by all these effects, that so prodigious a
cause would have been useless, in the state of Innocence? for what need was
there to govern them by fear, who suffered themselves to be charmed by love?
why should the Thunder have roared over the heads of the innocent? wherefore
should God have armed himself, not having as yet any enemies? and to what end
should he have vented his fury upon the tops of mountains, since if he punish
insensible creatures, it is to astonish those who are rational? In this sort of
punishment there is also observed a certain malignity, Inest fulmini vis
pestifera. Senec. ibid.
which witnesses that it is the work of God; for it corrupts what ever it
touches, it imprints evil qualities in the body that it burns, and wine
which is the best Antidote, turns to poison, if it be struck with Thunder; it
leaves an ill odor, where ere it goes, and it cannot be a mere effect of
nature, since it destroys all the works thereof.

We are bound to be of the same belief touching the plague, and to confess
that this sad sickness which has so often unpeopled the world, has no other
father then sin. O^erosi sumus mundo, vix nobis elementd sussiciunt, re vera
lues and fames pro remedio deputanda, tanquam consura insol^scentis generis
humani. Tertul^ deanima.
Tertullian who isas full of mad wh^sics, as of errors, thought, that the
plague was a providence of nature, which to case the earth which was not able
to support her children, bereft her of some of them; and that like those
Gardiners who use to prune such Trees as bear more fruit then they can nourish,
she lessens the number of men, and reduces them to a condition of not being
burdensome to their common Mother. Though I confess that divine mercy does
oft-times turn our punishments into favors, and that it may as well turn the
plague to a remedy, as death to a sacrifice, yet I look upon it as one of the
strangest Punishments ordained by divine justice to punish men withal.

I must in reason confess that it is a general corruption of nature, that it
assails all the parts thereof, and that it disperseth venom into all the
elements to cause death to the sinful; it infecteth the air which we draw in
with our breath, it gets into our bowels with the meat which we eat, it makes
the earth barren by it is bad influences and passing from men to beasts, commits
as much havoc in the fields as in towns: this malady surpasses the Physicians
skill, it laughs at all antidotes, it is not to be shunned but by flight, and it
is sometimes so universal as men meet with it in the very places which they
have chosen for their Sanctuary. We bear the seed thereof along with us, which
it in time hatches forth, and shows it self as fire does when we think it is
extinguished.

It is the most perverse and least respectful punishment of all those that
befall sinful man, for it is a rebel to all remedies, it turns antidotes into
venom, and when it does reign absolutely any where, it is fed with whatsoever
is given to allay it, it assails Monarchs amidst their armies, the Laurels
which fence their heads from Thunder, cannot keep them from the contagion
thereof, and that Sanctity which receives respect from other diseases cannot
stop it is progress. The most August and holiest of all our Kings died of this
disease in Africa, his valor and his piety which had freed him out of prison,
could not deliver him from his sickness, but after having triumphed over vice
and infidelity, a period was put to all his conquests by a contagious death.

The holiest of all the Kings of Judah, knowing that heaven was offended at
him, and that the anger thereof was not to be appeased but by a general
satisfaction, chose the plague before either war, or famine, out of a belief
that this scourge might as well light on him as on the meanest of his subjects.
In effect, it spares no man, neither youth nor age can allay the rigor, nor
stop the progress thereof, it mows down more soldiers then war does, it cuts
off more Commanders then the sword, it boasts of ending the differences between
Kings, and of making them make peace by taking from them the means of making
war. There have been some so contagious plagues, as have dispeopled the
greatest part of the world, the seas did not stop their Conquests, and this
vast element which serves for a stop to the ambition of Conquerours, could not
dissipate the fury thereof; the winds served them for posthorses, and they
crossed the seas to carry infection into the utmost parts of the world without
either oars or fails: the number of the dead was so great as the Dcest terra
tumulis, jam rogos sylvae negant, non vota, non arsulla cor reptos levant,
cadunt medentes. Senec. in Oedip.
earth was not able to cover them, nor yet the forests to bury them,
Physicians died together with the sick; Children dropped down after their
fathers, and lost their lives in doing them their last duties. A man need only
to consider the horror of this malady to acknowledge that it is one of the
punishments of sin: during the time of innocence, the air was not corrupted,
the earth brought forth no fruits which could breed bad humors, death did not
reign where there was no guilty persons: Heaven, which breeds contagion by it is
mortal influences, did not punish those which it had not as yet Scilicet coeli
reus sperare poterat sceleribustantis dari regnum salubre, fecimus coelum
nocens Senec. in Oedipose.
condemned; our sins must have provoked it to have made it our enemy, we must
have lost our innocence to incur the dis-favour thereof, and sin must have
wounded our soul, before the plague had seized on our bodies.

One may say that the same thing which causes contagion on the land, causes
tempests at sea, that it conspires together with sin to undo man, that it
unpeoples the earth to people hell, and that it holds Intelligence with the
winds to sink ships. Some Philosophers have been of opinion that the sea did
not belong to the Empire of man, that this element was reserved for fishes, as
the air for birds, that it was an usurpation to sail thereon, to cut through
the waves thereof to discover it is champians, and to penetrate the depths
thereof, that Nature which punishes all injustice had raised up storms, and
formed rocks to revenge his Tyranny; but certainly reason binds us to believe
that there was nothing in the world which was not put under ^he power of man,
that his authority had no other bounds then those of Nature, and that God who
had placed him in the world to admire his works, had left to him as well the
disposal of Dominamini piscibus ma^is, volatilibus coeli and animantibus
terrae.
the sea, as of the land: but when through rebellion he became gnilty of high
treason, his Empire was divided, his subjects contemned his power, and every
part of his estate brought forth Monsters to destroy him. The sea is so
fruitful herein as the most of her productions are monstrous, every fish is
an enemy to man, they are not to be tamed by art, and violence bereaves them
rather of their life then of their fury. It seems that being by divine Justice
employed against men in the deluge, they retain yet some remembrance of that
first employment, and that they think to revenge God as often as they punish us:
they by their strength overturn great ships, they leap into lesser vessels to
assail us, they make storms in the midst of calms, and being living rocks do
oft-times cause the skilfullest Mariners run shipwreck.

This great danger is accompanied by the like of Tempests, which seem to enrage
the Sea only that she may drown the Land, or bury mankind in her waves. This
disorder is good for nothing but to undo us; profane Philosophy finds no
other cause for it; the more it considers the strange effects thereof, the more
is it obliged to adore Gods Justice, and to condemn man's sin. Hinc procellae
and turbines hinc plurima mortalium mala and rerum naturae pugna secum. Plin.
lib. 2. c. 38
The wind purifies the air, and disperseth the clouds; the rain waters the
earth, and vapors which are the original of Air make the fields fruitful;
fire does not much consume the wealth of nature, it betakes it self to
buildings, and punishes our vanity in destroying our workmanship. The plague
it self which violating all the Laws of Nature, sweeps away the Son together
with the Father, and buries in the same grave the Physician and the Patient,
does oft-times by the havoc which it makes, prevent the cruelty of war, and
kills men to hinder them from committing parricide; for when it sees the earth
groan underneath the burden of her children, that she can no longer nourish
those which she has brought forth, that the scarcity of victuals makes people
take up arms, and prepare for war to free themselves from famine; it
dispeoples Towns, dis-burthens the fields, and bereaves men of their lives,
only to preserve their innocence; but Tempests are only fit to punish either
our avarice, or our ambition; the Seas rage is only useful to make us know our
offenses, the deeps which open themselves beneath ships, the mountains of water
which raise themselves above the Sails, the lightnings which mingle themselves
amongst the waves, and threaten us at the same time both which being drowned
and burnt, are formed by the hand of Nature only to make us die with more of
pomp, and more of horror.

And certainly it was very just, that the Theater of our Ambition should be the
like of our punishment; Piratae prinum coegere mort is periculo, in mortem
ruere and hyberna experiri maria; nunc idem avaritia cogit. Plin. lib. 2. cap.
47.
that the winds which we make slaves to our avarice, should become the
Ministers of Gods anger, that those Spirits which put life into our ships,
should inanimate storms, and that they which fill our Sails should make our
designs give against the rocks; for it must be confessed, we are more insolent
in our abusing this Element, then the rest; and that we do more unjustly employ
the winds then all other things in the world. Nature has produced them for
our service: they are of use to us even in rebellion whereinto sin has thrown
us, and we cannot sufficiently praise providence which has drawn them out of
her Treasures to fit them to our needs; they purge the air by fanning Venti
utiles^, ut era non sinerent pigrescere, ut imbres terris subministrarent,
iidemque nimios compescerent. Nam modo adducunt nubes, modo diducunt^, ut per
totum orbem pluviae dividi possint. Senec. Natural. quaest. lib. 5. cap. 18.
i^, and trouble the repose thereof, only to preserve it is purity, they gather
vapors together and then scatter them abroad, they separate rain by dividing
the clouds, and if they hide the heavens from the earth, it is to adorn her with
flowers, and enrich her with fruit; they entertain commerce amongst nations,
they make that common to the whole world, which nature had appropriated to some
one province, they help us to go round the world, and husbanded by our
dexterity they Ventus omnibus inter se populis commercium dedit and gentes
dissipatas locis miscuit. Ingens naturae beneficium s^illud in injuriam suam
non vertat hominum furor. Idem Ibid.
discover unto us all the beauties thereof, without their assistance we could
not know the customs of Forraigners, we should be ignorant of what is done
underneath our feet, and the Antipodes would pass for a fable, had not these
faithful guides brought our Pylots thither.

This good turn would be rare did not man's fury abuse it; but we make them
serve our avarice or our ambition, by their means we seek out new dangers and
new enemies, we load our ships with soldiers to pillage strange countries, we
commit our life to the infidelity of the sea, and the lightness of the wind,
we endeavor to overcome tempests which astonish nature, we run upon death
without hope of a grave, and we seek out a doubtful Non erit tanti si ad pacem
per ista veberentur hune autem cum exaserimus tot sc^pulos latentes and
insidias vadosi maris, quis nos fessos tot malis partus excipiet. Senec. ibid.
war upon such conditions as would seem unjust to those who would undertake an
assured victory: what blind madness does possess us? wherefore do we raise
troops to carry them through rocks and tempests? wherefore do we trouble the
Seas quiet, for our unjust designs? are there not hazards enough on the earth,
but that we must seek for new ones in another Element? whether do we complain
of Fortunes favors, or of natures goodness? is the former too faithful, or
the latter too indulgent? are our bodies so strong, or our health so certain,
that we must go seek for sicknesses, and dangers amongst the waves? do we
desire to assail the destinies in the midst of their Empire? to declare war
against them, then where their power does most evidently appear? is not death
terrible enough on Land, but that we must provoke it on the Sea? shall we not
find it soon enough in a house, without seeking for it in a ship? Quid maria
inqu^etamus? p^um videlicet ad mortes nost^s terra late patet, nimis dura dedit
nobis corp^ra. Itaque camus in pelagus and v^mus in nos (...) cessan^ia. Senec.
and is not our life short enough but that we must make it yet shorter by the
accidents which are subject to those who sail upon the Ocean? must not a man
have lost his reason to expose himself voluntarily to dangers unnecessitated?
to fight with men without any cause, and conquer Countries without justice?
wild beasts war not one upon another until enforced by hunger, or provoked by
injuries; and we who take our name from humanity, are profuse in shedding of
humane blood; we come aboard frail vessels, we trust our safety to the fury of
Tempests, and wish for fair winds to carry us into foreign Countries, where
we must either because of death, or die our selves.

We think not any one part of the world a Theater large enough for our
ambition. Every one will have his madness manifest, and that it have as many
witnesses as it has made men miserable. Thus the King of Persia entered Greece
which he could not overcome, though he covered it all over with Soldiers.
Quosque nos (...) mala n^stra rapuere, parum est intra orbe^ suum ^urere. Idem
ibid.
Thus would Alexander pass over unknown seas, carry his forces to the utmost
parts of the earth, and after he had overcome so many Kings, vanquish Nature
her self: Non horrebit Crassus revocantis diras Tribuni non tempestates
longissimi maris, non circa Euphratem pr^saga sulmina and De^ resistentes.
Idemibid.
Thus did Crassus strive to enrich himself at the cost of the Parthians, and
would enter the large deserts which border upon their State; he despised the
Tribunes who opposed his voyage, he laughed at the Tempests which shattered
some of his ships: the Thunders which foretold his bad success could not stay
him, and not withstanding that both God and man were offended with him, he
would go whether his avarice called him, and seek out the death which destiny
had prepared for him. Had not Nature been more favorable unto us, if she had
caused the winds to cease, and if to hinder the execution of so many unjust
designs, she had forced all Conquerours to keep peacefully within their own
dominions? should not we be much beholden to her, if interdicting us to enter
on the sea, we should have nothing but our own misfortunes to fear and undergo?
and if the winds made us not dread those unknown waves, which bring war,
servitude, and death to the Countries whereon they coast? we are not the more
secure for the distance of places, there is no enemy how far off so ever he be,
who may not surprise us, as often as the winds blow we have cause to fear lest
they bring either enemies or Tyrants upon us. The Tempests which they raise are
the least evils which they threaten us withal; Shipwracks which fear makes
appear so terrible unto us, are but the first trials, they expose us to those
dangers when they carry us to war, and the evil which wait for us on the
shores whither they (...) Cui itaque non vita tormentum est? Nihil invenies tam
manifestae utilitatis qu^d non in contrarium transferat culpa. Senec. quae
(...). N^tural lib 5. c. 1^
conduct us, are more vexatious then those which assail us at full sea. Thus
are all things in the world armed against us. Every Element is become an
executioner, since we are become male factours; Nature is plentiful in
punishments, and all the pieces whereof she is composed, are so many faithful
Ministers, which serve God, in taking revenge upon his rebels.

The ninth Discourse.
That Monsters and Poisons are the workmanship of Sin.

DIvine Providence knows so well how to husband the defects of creatures, as
most men take them for perfections, and we gather such advantage from our
misfortunes by it is guidance, as we should be unfortunate, if we had not been
so. Death, which is sins severest punishment, is so precious in it is hands, as
it seems rather a favor then displeasure, and a reward then a chastizement.
Sicknesses are cause of so much good unto us by bereaving us of our health, as
it were to be wished that most men should fall sick, and that pain might make
them out of love with their bodies, to make them be the like with the earth*
the injuries of the Elements are of such use to the faithful, as they ought
rather to be praised, then complained of by them; when they with patience
suffer all the pains which sin has occasioned, they may make a happy use
thereof to destroy Supplicium (...) ^
sin, and a sweet smelling Sacrifice to Gods Justice.

Hence it is that Philosophers who know what advantage we draw from our
misfortunes, persuade themselves that Nature is not corrupted, and account her
disorders advantages; they term death a law more necessary then rigorous; they
call sickness the souls salve, the trial of virtue, and the exercise of
patience; they call poverty a dis-ingagement from useless things, a nearer cut
to virtue, a help to argue with more freedom, they term the persecution of the
Elements an innocent war which causes the worlds peace, a hatred which
conduces to a perfect friendship, or an excellent picture of music, whose
harmony is composed of the differences of voices, and contrariety of tones.

By the same reason they justify the disorders of nature, and call Monsters
irregularities which heighten her other works; they plead in the behalf of
poisons, and make them pass for remedies, whose use we are yet ignorant of. In
effect, Monsters seem to serve for ornament to the world, Monstra sunt
ornamenta universi. Arles.
that they contribute to the beauty thereof, that they constitute that
admirable variety wherein consists honest men's most innocent delight, that they
are in the world what shadows are in Pictures, and that not to excuse them they
are handsome faults, and pleasing debaucheries. This wise Mother has her
serious businesses, and her serious diversions; she sports her self after
having labored, and to recreate her self after the pains which those wonders
have occasioned her which she has continued since the beginning of the world,
she goes astray for sports sake, and for her pastime commits faults, yea her
disorders are oft-times useful to us; she produces Monsters to fore-shew
things to come, and goes out of her ordinary course to advertize us of Gods
anger. Thus we may observe that in all ages, the birth of Monsters have been
followed with some disasters, and the worlds irregularity has Monstra sunt
prodigia divinitus missa, per quae non praesentia modo, sed etiam futura
declar^ntur atque praedicuntur. ^amblichus de mysteriis.
presaged the like in kingdoms, All the predictions of Pagans were grounded
upon these prodigies; they studied the guidance of Empires in that of nature,
and judged of the ones disorder by the others debaucheries. When Caesar and
Pompey fought in the Pharsalian fields, and that the Roman Common wealth, was
upon the point of being changed into a Monarchy, beasts were the interpretors
of nature, the Elements violated their qualities, it rained blood, and a
general confusion did foretell the alteration of that state. As famous Princes
have had new constellations which have discovered them, Tyrants have had
Monsters to proclaim them, and the Births of the one and of the other have had
these Fortunate or Unfortunate Predictions.

Poisons are not so mischievous but that some good use may be made of them when
they are prepared by physic, Omne medicamentum medium est inter alimentum and
vene^um.
good medicines are made of them; there are some sicknesses which cannot be
cured but by corrected poison: the greatest part of those drugs which we make
use of to assist nature when she is weakened by sickness, partake more of
poison then of nourishment, and only help the natural heat by provoking it
and by contesting with it. If they be contrary to our constitutions, they are
good for and do preserve some creatures; and if they be averse to man, they are
favorable to the asp and viper: their venom is not to be taken from them
without taking away their lives; the Antidotes which preserve us, kill them;
and as if they imprinted their qualities in us when they sting us, their
stingings are not to be cured but by their poison. Who knows not the virtue of
venomous plants, is ignorant of the half of Nature: she subsists by
contrariety, and as she indues her works with differing qualities, she must
preserve them by contrary remedies; that which is hurtful for some is good for
other some, and amongst the infinite number of creatures Quin and ven^ nostri
misertam natur^n instituisse cred^ potest, ^e in t^dio vitae dirae famis mors
le^ta nos consumeret tabe. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 61.
whose Constitutions are so different, there is nothing which is absolutely bad
or unusefull,

These are the usual reasons which Philosophy makes use of to defend her
error in maintaining Natures part, but being pressed by truth, she must confess
that these Monsters are the products of sin, and that the earth never bore them
till since it was covered with Thorns, the motions thereof were too regula^ in
the state of innocence, to commit any faults; the heavens were too favorable
to it in their aspects, to corrupt it is workmanship: this charitable Mother
would rather have been barren, then fruitful in Monsters, and all her children
were so beautiful, as she was not bound to make any ilfavoured, to set the
others off: she has placed variety enough in her productions, without being
forced to transgress, that she might vary them; though she be not always
serious, she had never been debauched, and before she was corrupted, she would
not have found her diversion in her disorder. Who knows not that Monsters are
the errors of Nature? Monstr^ sunt peccata natuae nec ea ^acere intendit: ideo
ej^ finis non est monstra procre^re. A^les 2. Physic.
that she had no design in making them? that she is sorry she has produced
them, that she treats them as illegitimate children? that she shortens their
life to efface her own shame? that repenting her of her fault, she speedily
corrects it, and re-assumes her ordinary Tract which she went not out of, but
only for want of heed, or being surprised. It Is chance and sin that produces
Monsters, they are not born but by unlawful coupling, they are always barren,
to the end they may have no posterity; their Species is never preserved:
Monstris vit^ (...) ^vem ded^ natura ho^inum a (...). Philo^ph.
and let men who delight in Natures debaucheries, use their utmost skill, they
could never perpetuate Monsters, nor make them generate. We behold them with
horror, the delight which they cause in us, is mingled with aversion; if their
novelty do delight us, their strange shape does displease us, and after having
for a while admired them, we are scandalized and nauseated with them. These
just resentments are infallible proofs that sin is the father of all Monsters,
and that as we detest the father, so do we his children.

But that which confirms our belief therein the more is, the rarity of them
amongst beasts, and their frequency amongst men; for these innocent creatures
being only so far guilty of our sins, as they are subject to our power, they do
not stray so often as we in their productions: there is but one part in the
world, where they commit these faults; and set aside Africa, where Monsters
are common, Europe and Asia do scarce produce two in one age; but men are
irregular in all places, Africa sola (...) est (...), vix in Asia and Europa
reperi^ Aristotele^ and Plin.
the greatest part of their productions are monstrous, all their children bear
the marks of their debauchery, and the punishment of their sin; we see the
mothers wishes stamped on their childrens faces, some tokens of their parents
incontinency are seen in the bodies of these Innocents; and generation is so
corrupted amongst men, as they cause either horror, or pity in Natures self;
some of them cannot stand upright by reason of the weakness of their legs, and
are enforced to seek for help for their infirmities, unless they will make
their house their perpetual prison; some carry mountains on their backs, and
makes some that see them doubt; whether not having the shape of men, they be
endued with the judgment and reason, or no; some are so deformed in their
faces, as one would rather take them for Munkeys, than for the Images of God;
others speak with such confusion, and with so much difficulty, as Parrots may
teach them our language; some are born blind, and are condemned to darkness
all their life time; M^, ^urdi, (...), (...), d^versa sunt ^onst. or^ genera,
(...) in^er (...) q^am (...) fre quentia.
others cannot explain themselves, and their tongues not being able to speak
cannot be the Interpreters of their thoughts; others cannot understand those
pleasing discourses which fill the souls of those that listen thereunto, with
the light of truth; they rather guess at our intentions, then understand them;
to make them capable of them, we must speak unto them with our hands, and make
them understand that by the eyes which cannot be infused into them by the
ears. In fine, the greatest part of men are Monsters; Nature mistakes her
self oftener in them then in beasts, and be it that their intemperance causes
these disorders, be it that these irregularities are produced by the
imagination which is more quick in them, be it that their Temper which is more
refined, is more easily altered; we see that most children inherit their
Parents defects as well as their sins, and that they are not born monstrous,
till they be born sinful.

If Monsters be the productions of sin, poisons are likewise the workmanship
thereof; Maledictus ^s inter omnia anim^ntia and bestias terrae, super pectus
tuum gradieris, and terram comedes cunctus di^bus vitae tuae. Genes. cap. 3.
though they seem natural to some creatures, I conceive they did not make any
part of their Essence, till after they had served the Devil for an Organ to
deceive our first mother; all insects which bear in them any poison, are kinds
of Serpents; God curses them to revenge us, they creep upon their bellies in
memory of the fault which our Enemies committed by their interposition, they
feed upon the earth for the punishment of a sin, whereof they were but innocent
Accomplices; as their sight causes horror in us, so does ours cause fear in
them; the heavens have put a secret enmity between them and us; if their venom
be fatal to us, our spittle is mortal to them; Hominis (...) ^aliva
serpentibus omnibus mortifera. Plin.
and if they with their teeth give us incurable wounds, we with our feet give
them mortal Catches. The same justice which would condemn them to all these
punishments, confined their venom to some parts of their bodies, to make them
more odious; she would have their very looks to be contagious, to make us shun
them; Basi^sci quos etiam serpents ipsi fugiunt, hominem vel si tantum
aspiciant, di^untur ^terimere. Plin. lib. 29. c 4
and instructing us by sensible things, she secretly imprinted in our hearts a
hatred against the Devil, whose image they are: she teaches us by this
example that we cannot hold innocent commerce with one that is sinful, that
that proud fiend which could inspire us with nothing but pride, and that there
was more danger in communing with him, than in treating with aspes and vipers,

And certainly venom must needs be a punishment of sin, since all sorcerers
make use thereof in their charms, and in all the mischief that they do employ
those poisons which hature has produced to undo us; these things seem to be
abandoned to their fury, that they have some jurisdiction over them, and that
they are permitted to assail their Enemies with these weapons. In effect, all
the harm they do to men is by this mingling of poisons; the words which they
use are of no efficacy, Addit venenis verba non ^stas minus metuenda. Senec. in
M^daea.
they cannot hurt us by their curses; it is a trick of the Devil, whom his
weakness will imitate the power of God, and persuade us that words uttered by
those whom he imploys, change nature, and work miracles. We are taught by
reason, and by faith, that only God can act by speaking, and produce things by
his will; The Angels which are the noblest Subjects of his Empire, can alter
nothing in the world, but by the mediation of the Elements; they are forced to
employ their qualities, to bring to pass their own designs, and to make use
of their heat, or of their cold, to hasten Winter or retard Summer; they assume
bodies in the clouds to make themselves visible, they speak by the means of the
air to make themselves be understood, and make use of vapors to form storms,
and Thunder: but the devils, who are rebels to Gods Kingdom, having no designs
but what are pernicious, they employ venom to execute them, they gather up the
foam of Dragons, and Serpents slaver, and compose drinks of all these differing
poisons; they mingle a thousand deaths together to revenge themselves of their
Enemies; but say they, did not make use of these things to satisfy their fury,
is it not sufficient to know that these things are averse unto us, as to judge
that they have been altered by divine Justice for our punishment? or does not
the knowledge of their being altered by divine Justice for our punishment,
suffice to ascertain us of their aversion to us?

In Gods first design, all Creaturae omnes cedunt aut utilitati aut
delectationi hominum, quae porro utilitas venen^s*
creatures were tied to serve man, they were to contribute either to his
pastime, or to his profit; they had no other end but his pleasure, or his
advantage; and had they been able to express their meanings, they would have
witnessed that their being in the world was only to follow his inclinations.
What place should poisons have held then in this world? how could they have
been serviceable to man in the state of innocence? could he have taken any
satisfaction in the sight of creatures whose qualities were fatal to him?
could he have treated with the Basilisk, whose looks cause death? could he have
approached Serpents which poison the air with their breath? could he have
communed with him who was the cause of his undoing, had he suspected either his
breath or his looks? and ought we to imagine that there was any creatures which
could offend man in a time, when not having committed any fault, he was not to
fear any punishment? what delight could he have taken in the company of those
beasts which are fatal to all other beasts? what sport could he have taken in
Monsters which carry death in their eyes or mouth, and from whence a man must
fence himself as well as against the plague or war? But it may be objected,
Original righteousness served him for a safe-gard, he saw the danger with
delight, because the sight thereof caused no apprehension in him; he was well
pleased to to handle poison; the efficacy whereof was taken away by his
innocence, and to touch venom which had not power to hurt him. Divine
Providence which prescribed bounds to the raging of the sea, gave laws to the
Terra dum parit venena non est noxia, nostris eam criminibus urgemus, culpamque
nostram illi imputamus: genuit venena sed quis invenit illa praeter hominem
Plin. l^. 18. c. 1.
malice of Serpents; and the same power which hindered the Sun from burning
men, when he gave them light, would not suffer the Basilisk to poison them by
his looks, but who perceives not how weak this answer is, and how it compares
Creatures which do no ways resemble one another? the Elements hurt not us but
only through their disorders, the seasons annoy us not but by their
irregularities. All things in their purity are useful to us, we dread not
nature for them, but her corruption, and even in the very state of sin, we make
use of them without either fear or danger. Owls only complain of light,
Harmony is only hated by Savage beasts, a man must either be sick or mad to
detest food which preserves life: but every body apprehends poison, it must be
corrected by art before the malignity thereof be taken away; to make any use of
it, it must be destroyed, and it is so dangerous, as it oft-times kills those
Etiam venenorum odores pestiferi; tanta est eorum subtilitas ut etiam ferrum
penetret. Plin.
Physicians who prepare it. The smell of poison is as pernicious, as the
substance, it poures forth it is malignity throughout all the Senses, penetrates
all the pores of the body, and there are some so subtle poisons, as even Iron
is not solid enough to fence us from them.

Let us then conclude, that the earth bore not those unlucky plants, which seem
to conspire man's ruin, till that made barren by Gods Curse, it was bound to
turn it is roses into Thorns, and it is fruits into poisons. Sin was the occasion
of this disorder, Divine Justice the cause, and the same power which caused the
earth to open underneath the feet of Dathan and Abiram, caused wolfes-bane and
Hemlock to come out of her bowels, to hasten his death who had lost his
innocence.

The tenth and last Discourse.
That God will consume the World corrupted by Sin, that he may make a new
World.

THough Sin has wrought such havoc in man as it has brought darkness into
his understanding and malice into his will; that it has effaced out of his
soul those inclinations which she had to virtue, and that corrupting his
nature, it seems to have destroyed Gods goodliest workmanship, yet do some
glimmerings of light remain in the bottom of his soul, which sin could never
darken. Idolatry, which has so long reigned in the world has not been able to
blot Unitatis Dei cognitio imo and fides omnium hominum pect^ribus a natura
ins^rta est. Lactant.
out the belief of the unity of God; the Pagans have preserved this opinion
amidst the worship of their Idols, words have escaped from them which have
given their actions the lie, and when they followed the mere motions of Nature,
they spoke the same language as christians do. Though Poets made Hell to pass
for a fable; and that their pleasing fictions made a prison be despised, whence
Orpheus had escaped by music, and Pyrithous by force, the people ceased not to
apprehend eternal pains after death: s Deum praedicab^s, (...) anima and non
requ^ebas, daemo^ia abominal a^s and illa (...): judi^iam Dei appellabas nec
esse credebas, inferna supplicia p^aesumebas and non praecavebas. Te^. de
^estim an^ae i^ne.
they had already cognizance of Devils under the name of revengfull furies;
they knew that the fire wherewith the sinful were burnt could not be quenched,
that it was preserved without nourishment, and as serviceable to the power of
God, it had operation upon the soul. Though the Devil to introduce
licentiousness amongst men, made them hope for impunity for their faults, and
that r Minos and Rhadamantus had not credit enough to terrify Monarchs, Nature
more powerful then fiction, had imprinted in all men an apprehension of an
universal Judgment; there was no guilty person who did not fear it, nor none
miserable who did not hope it; every one in the belief of this truth found
either punishment for his fault, or consolation in his misery, when the
oppressed innocents could not defend themselves against their Enemies, they
implored aid from that rigorous Judge which punishes all sins and rewards
all virtues. In fine, though the earths solidity might have made men confident,
though the water which does inviron it might have freed them from the fear of a
general consuming by fire, though so great a disaster had no certain proofs
nor assured predictions, yet they believed that the world Esse quoque in satis
rominiscitur affore tempus, quo mare, quo tell us correptaque regia coeli
ardeat, (...) mundi moles operosa laboret. Ovid. 1. Met.
should be consumed by fire, that the seas should not be able to extinguish the
flames thereof, and that nature which had been cleansed by water, should be
purified by fire; but they knew not the cause of this prodigy, and the vanity
wherewith they were blinded, would not permit them to believe that this
disorder should be the punishment of their sin: yet the holy Scripture gives no
other reason for it, nor did it threaten us with the worlds ruin, till it had
acquainted us with the story of our misfortune.

As Adam had never lost his life had he never lost his innocence, the world had
never lost its adornment had it not lost it is purity. As death is the
punishment of sinful man, water and fire are the punishments of the corrupted
world: for though insensible creatures commit no sins, Diabolus Dei aemulus
universam conditionem (creaturam intellige) homini^mancipatam cum ipso homine
corrupit. Tertul. de cerona militis.
and that guiltiness presupposes rationality, yet do they contract some
impurity by our offenses: the Sun is sullied by giving light unto the sinful,
the light which shines as bright upon a dirty puddle, as upon the cleerest
river, and which is not more undefiled in Crystal then in mire, is endamaged
by our sins, and cease to be innocent, when it gives light unto the guilty:
the air is infected by our blasphemies, the earth cannot be the Theater of our
vanity without sharing in our offenses: whatsoever is serviceable to our
misdemeanors is polluted; though the creatures are scandalized to see
themselves inthral'd to our insolency, yet do they incur heavens displeasure,
and deserve punishment for having been employed in our offenses; hence does the
sterility of the earth proceed, hence was occasioned that deluge which did bury
it in it is waters; and from hence shall arise that universal fire which shall
consume it in it is flames.

For Divine Justice seems to deal with sinners as humane Justice deals with the
greatest offenders: the latter is not contented to punish the guilty party in
his own person, but vents it is anger upon his Children, and servants, it
believes that whatsoever touches him is defiled, that those who converse with
him are either his Copartners, or confederates, and that to be allied to him,
is sufficient to share in his sin, Deorum laesae ma^estatis poena usque ad
filios and nepotes eorum descendit apud Persa Ca^t.
it mingleth the blood of the children with that of the father, it wraps up the
innocent and the guilty in the same punishment, and to make the fault appear
more odious, it punishes whatsoever does appertain unto the offender: it
spares not even unsensible things, it sets upon the dead after having punished
the living, for it pulls down the houses, and demolisheth the castles of the
enemy; it makes rocks and Marble feel it is anger, burns what it cannot throw
down, and as if the party offending did live in every thing that was his, it
thinks to kill him as often as it beats down his buildings, or cuts down his
forests, it endeavors to rob him of his reputation, after it has bereft him
of his life, and not to leave any token that may renew the memory of his
person, or of his crime. Thus does Divine Justice deal with sinful man, and
Adam must confess that heaven has used this rigor in punishing his sin. For
after having past the sentence of death upon him, it will have his grave to
serve him for a funeral pile, that time consume what the flames could not
devour, and that nothing remain of that body which was the prime piece of it is
workmanship, then either worms or dust, it condemns all that come of him to the
same punishment, their whole guilt consists in their birth, it is enough to
make them guilty, that Omnes nascimur filii irae.
Adam was their father, God waits not till they have broken his Commandments
to punish them; he forestals the use of their reason, and makes them miserable
before their time, to the end that they may be known to be guilty before they
be born; by an ingenious yet just rigor, after having punished this father in
his children, he punishes him in his estate, he makes his subjects revolt, and
because they are sometimes serviceable to him in their rebellion, he bereaves
them of their excellentest qualities, and makes them, together with their
miserable Sovereign unfortunate; he takes from the Sun, part of his light; he
takes the Government of Nature from the Stars, he makes the earth barren and
moveable, he hides rocks in the sea, and troubles the calm thereof by storms;
he forms malign rain in the middle region of the air, and corrupts the purity
thereof to infect the whole earth, he makes use of fire in Thunder, and ordains
it to punish offenders; he inforceth this noble Element to descend contrary to
it is inclination, and fastening it to the matter which serves for nourishment to
his anger, he makes it the terror of all that are faulty.

But after having had this service from it, Humor mundi primordi^m and ignis
mundi exitus. Senec. Q^aest. Natural. lib. 3. c. 13.
he reserves it for the general ruin of the world, and to consume that proud
building which was the Palace of sinful man. For when the number of the elect
shall be accomplished, when the thrice happy ones who shall fill up the places
left void by the Angels rebellion, shall have finished their course and their
labors, and that Christ's mystical body shall have all the number which ought
to compose it; Divine Justice, which cannot be satisfied but by the ruin of
whatsoever has been serviceable to sin, will command the fire to consume the
world, and will drown all his works in a deluge of fire. Then this Element
mixing it self with the clouds, will kindle lightnings in all parts, the air
being set on fire by so many flames, shall burn the whole earth, which shall
open her entrails, to let loose those intestine flames, which have devoured it
for so many ages: from the mixture and confusion of so many fires, the general
burning of the world shall arise; the mountains shall melt with heat, and those
great r^ks where coldness seems to make it is residence, shall be turned into
Vesuviuses, and Aetnaes: the flames inanimated by Gods anger, shall lay all
Champians waste; Ignis ante ipsum praecedet and inflammabit in circuitu
inimicosej^, Illuxerunt fulgura ejus orbi terra, vidit and commotaest terra,
Motes sicut cera fluxerunt a facit Domini. Psalm. 96.
walls which resist the Thunder of the Cannon shall not be able to defend their
Inhabitants from it is fury: all the dead shall be made equal, the guilty shall
burn in one and the same fire; and shall be reduced to the same ashes: the Sun
shall be darkened with smoke, and did not the flames serve for torches, the
world should burn amidst darkness; all the rivers which bathe the earth, shall
be dried up in their Spring-heads; The fire shall triumph over the waters in
their channels, and this victorious Element shall make it is Enemy, which has
had so many advantages over it, feel it is power. The Ocean it self whose
extents are so vaste, shall see her waters converted into fire; and the Whales
burn in the midst of it is abysmes: Forests shall help to consume the little
hills, which bear them, those proud mountains whose tops are always covered with
snow, to which the Sun in his greatest heats bears a respect, shall vomit up
flames together with their bowels, and all those eminent places which command
over the valleys, shall see their pride buried in ashes; all the guilty shall
perish amidst this fire, they shall find hell upon earth, and shall wish that
the mountains Superest ultimus and perpetuus judiciidies, ille nationibus
insperatus ille de risuscum tanta ^aeculi vetustas, and tot ejus nativitates
unoigni haurientur. Tertul. de spectaculis in fine.
might overwhelm them in their ruins to quench the fire which shall devour
them; The just shall be astonished to see the fire spare them, to see the
heavens work the same miracle for them, as they did in days of yore for the
three unjustly condemned Children, and imitating the piety of those Innocents,
they shall sing Canticles of praises, whilst the wicked shall vomit forth
blasphemies. Quod fuit caminus regis tribus pueris, hoc erit ardens mun dus
Justice in Trinitate signatis. August. in Genes. 1.
How horrible will the spectacle be to see the earth burn, the sea consumed,
and whole Nature buried in a Sepulcher of fire; this is the revenge which God
will take of sin, this is the satisfaction which his Justice will exact for our
insolency, and this is the last punishment which the creatures shall suffer for
having been confederate with man.

The very Stars shall not be able to escape the rigor thereof; Expectantes and
properantes in adventum diei Domini, per quem coeli ardentes (...) entur, and
elementa ignis ardore tabescunt. 2 Petri cap. 3.
that solid matter whereof they are composed, shall be dissolved by heat, and
those beautiful parts of the world, having the same destiny, as gold, and
brass have, shall trickle down drop by drop upon the earth, their having been
serviceable to us in their light, suffices to make them guilty; their having
received homage from us, and accepted of our sacrifices, is sufficient to make
them receive this punishment: God will not permit that that which has been
corrupted should rest unpunished, and his holiness joined to his justice,
cannot tolerate that in Eternity, which has been profaned in Time. Jesus
Christ himself was of this opinion; he taught that this world did not belong
unto him, he imprinted in the Souls of his Disciples the horror and contempt
of this present Age, and obliged them to wish for the Age to come, of which he
made himself be called the Father. All the perfection of Christianity consists
in these two points; ^ota nostra ^spirant in sa-cu^i hujus occa^, i^transitum
^aundi, ad d^em Domini magnum, di^ (...) and retribution^s. Tertul. de
Resurr^ct. (...) cap. 16.
all virtues are composed of these two points, and he is perfect amongst the
faithful, who contemning Adams world does incessantly thirst after Christ
Jesus his world.

Though God be the Author of them both, he detests the former since it was
profaned by sin, and since the devil has submitted it to his Tyranny: he
has given over the Sovereignty thereof unto his Enemies, he suffers the Turk
to possess the best part thereof, he permits his most faithful servants to be
persecuted, he will not have us to receive more glory there than he does, and
if we will follow his counsels, and his instructions, Nihil interest ubi (...)
se-culo, qui ex^ (...). Tertull. ad (...). cap. 2.
we must look upon it as a place of exile, or as an Enemies Country. I very
well know he gives Crowns to Sovereigns, Laurel to the victorious, that he
makes the Angels fight for Christians, and that he arms the Elements for the
defense of his Church: but in fine, his Kingdom is not of this world, he will
not govern in a world which he will destroy, he pretends not to command in a
State, where his Enemy is worshipped; and we must not love a world which he
will punish, because we have made it sinful. Let us expect that which he will
give us, let us long after that world which will arise out of the others ashes;
and let us not fix our fortunes in a Kingdom which shall perish, Haeredes
Christianus queret saeculi totius exhaeres, habet fratres, habet Ecclesiam
Matrem. Tert.
when Jesus Christ shall revenge himself upon his Enemies.

It Is true, that it is ruin will be useful to it, and that it will reap
advantage by it is loss; for all Gods punishments are favors, he puts
obligations upon those that he punishes, his goodness turns their sufferings
into salves; and to be stricken by the hand of God, brings both honor and
advantage with it. Death, which destroys the body, prepares it for the
resurrection; it changes it is grave into a cradle, and as the corruption of
corn is the cause of it is re-assuming life; we may say that the putrefaction of
the body is in some sort the seed of it is mortality. Purgatory which burns the
souls of men, does purify them; the flames whereby they suffer prepares them
for glory; that which we esteem a punishment, is a lovely penance; and that
which seems to retard their contentment, serves only to advance their
happiness. So shall the Diluvium and incendium duo Naturae baptismi. Primum
sequutum est peccatum, secundum vero sequetur. innocentia.
fire which shall burn the world contribute to it is perfection, it shall perish
only to become more perfect, it is beauty shall arise from it is being consumed
by fire, and this last deluge shall be of more honor and advantage to it, then
was the former; the waters purified the world by drowning it, this great havoc
was Natures baptism; and the same Element which did bereave her of her
children, did restore unto her her purity; but the fire shall alter (...)
qualities, she shall be no longer subject to the Empire of (...) Consistency
shall succeed the change which has preserved her* she shall no longer groan
under the Devils Tyranny, nor under the injustice of sinners; she shall lose
all the qualities which she has co^acted by sin, and shall recover all those
which for our punishment she had lost: not unlike the blessed, she shall enjoy
the glory which she is capable of; every Element shall be purified by flames,
all parts of the world shall be reformed by the fire which shall consume them;
the Sun shall suffer no more Eclipses, the luster of his light shall dissipate
all the obscurity of darkness, his influences shall exhale no more malign
vapors, Heaven shall be no longer an enemy to earth, this overworn mother
shall be freed from her care of nourishing man, and her substance being
purified by fire, shall be changed into crystal, or into diamonds; all her
parts shall be delightful, and those great rocks which do sustain her shall be
turned into Columns of Marble, or of Porphiry.

In fine, Nature shall receive her last perfection by fire, and the blessed,
meeting with no rebellions nor weaknesses in their bodies, shall find no more
irregularity nor disorder in the Universe. Jesus Christ shall reign together
with his elect, Novissima autem inimica destru^tur mors. Cum autem subjecta
fuerint illi omnia, tunc and ipse filius subjectus erit ei qui subjecit sibi
omnia, ut sit Deus omnia in omnibus. 1 Corinthians. cap. 15.
in his world; the track of sin, nor footsteps of death shall be no more seen
there; Death shall destroy these two Enemies, and their Reign being finished,
Punishment shall withdraw it self to hell, there to afflict the Damned to all
Eternity.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 18 line 36 for force r source. p 19 l 11 (...) Aethyopians r blackness.
ibid. l. ult. f does r does not. p 25 l 28 f creature r Creator. p 3^ l 22 f
afflictions r affections. ibid. l 25 f she r she be. p 35 l ult. f losing r
looseneth. ibid. after engage r them. p 37 l 17 f prayers r praises. ibid. f
Statutes r Statues. p 40 l 28 f we r we are. p 45 l 3 f this r his. p 48 l 15 f
its r it. p 51 l 33 f basest r Basis. p 55 l 23 f of grace r Grace. p 57 l 2 f
Lord r cord. ibid. l 6 f of r as if. p 59 l 1 f felt r felt-love. ibid. l 18 f
faculty r faulty. p 60 l 15 f and not r and could not. p 62 l 24 f contrary r
more contrary. p 65 l ult. f certainly r certainty. p 78 l 5 f keep it r
escape them p 80 l 8 f praising r bruising. ib. l 11 f changed r change. ib. 21
f which so r which we so. p 89 l 24 f they familiarly r they treat familiarly.
ib. l 37 f reduced r seduced. p 90 l 26 for peaceably usurped r peaceably enjoy
usurped. p 92 l 16 f the r their. p 96 l 15 f reviling r in reviling. p 121 l
16 leave out the second was. p 124 l 32 f against them r again. ib. after
loss, insert of his life. p 125 l 17 for in r into. p 126 l 6 dele not. p 129
l 17 f his r this. p 130 l 22 f steps r stops. ib. 32 f upon r who upon. p 131
l 13 f not an r not be an. ib. l 14 dele not. p 132 l 3 f ement r cement. ib. l
6 f less r less weighty. p 133 l 29 f longer r no longer. p 135 l 12 f often r
not often ib. l 26 f known r none. p 139 l 22 f envade r evade. p 141 l 6 f
surprisal r by surprisal. p 142 l 10 f to Falisci r to the Falisci. p 143 l 7 f
his r her. p 146 l 1 f one r one crime. p 151 l 22 f looks r took. p 156 l
ult. f party r parity. p 167 l 36 dele not. p 170 l 23 dele rather. ib. l 26 f
if quenched r if they quenched. p 174 l 23 dele love. p 175 l 33 f lead r
leading. p 176 l 6 f with one r without ib. l 18 dele an. ib. f hopes r hops. p
185 l 13 f out r not. p 186 l 30 f notwithstanding r not notwithstanding. p 187
l 32 f designs r desires. p 192 l 7 f impeaceable r impeccable. p 200 l 26 f
countenance r contemn. p 201 l 26 f one r none. p 202 l 24 f always r feeds
ib. l36 f of r with. p 204 l 7 dele that. ib. l (...) for adopt r adapt. ib. l
24 f to r by. p 205 l 14 for ruled r rule. p 206 l 18 after has r or injured.
p 207 l 13 f reduced r be reduced. p 213 l 16 f Spring r Off spring. p 215 l 5
f consecrated r he consecrated. p 222 l 29 f smallest r usuallest. p 224 l 27 f
securely r be securely. ib. l 28 f sigh r sigh for. p 225 l 15 f had r has. p
230 l 18 f profession r profusion. p 233 l 17 f untoucht r uncouth. p 235 l
ult. f ought r ought not. p 236 l 36 f unworthily r worthily. p 239 l 15 f
Capres r Cypress. ib. l 83 f the r though the p 244 l 28 f imagine r l
imagine. ib. l 34 f had r have. p 246 l 6 f draws r drowns. ib. l 14 f wars r
wards. ib. l 21 f men be r me to be. p 248 l 7 f as r a. p 252 l 18 f truth r
extort truth. p 253 l 31 f fore-light r foresight. ib. l 36 f with r which. p
256 l 15 f been r been too regular. p 258 l 26 f amongst r most. p 264 l 33 f
This r Thus. p 265 l 36 f with r which. p 266 l 26. f renew r review. p 275 l
16 f could r could not. ib. 119 f and r one. p 277 l 25 f the r this. p. 279 l
22 dele who. p 289 l 1 f were r we were. p 290 l 25 f infused r insued. p 291 l
7 f call r called. p 295 l 15 f linifying r finifying. p 301 l 3 f was r was
not. p 304 l ult. f withstood r withdrew. p 307 l 22 f every r every one. p 310
l 24 f comfort r consort. ibid. l 31 f for served r severed. p 313 l ult. f
gain r game. p 314 l 14 f break r betake. p 317 l 2 f excuse r Defense, ibid. l
15 f Privatives r Privacie. p 327 l 3 f it r of. p 330 l 23 f with r with our.
p 333 l 24 f earth r World. p 336 l 14 f don r begun. p 337 l 32 f harden r
hardly. p 342 l 37 f take r take him. p 343 l 10 f with r with them. ib. l 20 f
defied r deified. p 346 l 14 dele making. p 351 l 34 f he r we. p 357 l 24 f
perfections r imperfections. ib. l 25 his r it is. p 359 l 34 f kin r knit. p
362 l 12 for learning r leaning, p 363 l ult. for combustible r solid. p 366 l
6 leave out if. p 372 l 28 for his r. this, 374 l 35 for which r with, p 376
for then r there, p 382 l 7 for whom (...). who in.

Printed or sold by William Leake at the Crown in Fleetstreet, between the two
Temple Gates: these Books following.
YOrks Heraldry. Folio. Orlando Furioso. The Spanish Mandevile. 4o. Pareus
Chyrurgery. Fol. Callis learned readings on the Statute 23 of Hen. the 8th Cap.
5 of Sewers. 4o. Perkins on the laws of England in Eng. 8o. The Parsons Law.
8o. Topics in the laws of England. 8o. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs, with
Court Leet and Baron. 8o. Vade mecum, of a Justice of Peace. 12. Sken de
significatione verborum. 4o. The Book of Fees. 8o. The Mirror of Justice. 8o.
Mathematical Recreations. 8o. Delamans use of the Horizontall Quadrant. 4o.
Malthus artificial fireworks. 8o. Nyes Gunnery and fireworks. 8o. The
History of Lazarillo de Tormes. 8o. Wilbyes second Set of Music 3 4 5 and 6
parts. 4o. Garden of Natural contemplations by Dr. Fulk. 8o. Cato Major, with
Annotations, by William Austine of Lincolns Inn, Esquire. 12. Mell
Helliconium, by Alexander Rosse. 8o. Cordelius gramatically translated by John
Brinsley. 8o. The Fort Royal of the Scriptures, or a vade mecum concordance,
presenting unto the world a 100 heads of Scripture, most of them common placed
for public use. 8o. by I H. Noscere Ipsum, by St John Davies. 8o.
Animadversions on Lilly. 8o. Excercitatio Scholastica. 8o. By Beamont and
Fletcher.
Philaster, or love lies a bleeding. Maids Tragedy. 4o. King and no King.
The strange discovery by Jo. Gough. 4o. The grateful Servant. 4o. The
Hollander a play. 4o. Hero and Leander, by Christopher Marlow and George
Chapman. 4o. Alcillia or Philotas loving folly, 4o. Epigrams divine and moral
by St Tho. Urchard.

