THE HISTORY OF That Great and Renowned MONARCHY OF CHINA.

Wherein all the particular Provinces are accurately described: as also the
Dispositions, Manners, Learning, Laws, Militia, Government, and Religion of
the People. Together with the Traffic and Commodities of that Country.

Lately written in Italian by F. ALVAREZ SEMEDO, a Portughess, after he had
resided twenty two years at the Court, and other Famous Cities of that Kingdom.

Now put into English by a Person of quality, and illustrated with several
MAPPS and FIGURES, to satisfy the curious, and advance the Trade of Great
BRITAIN.

To which is added the History of the late Invasion, and Conquest of that
flourishing Kingdom by the TARTARS.

With an exact Account of the other affairs of CHINA, till these present Times.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler for John Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Present thee with that long exspected, most exact History of the Laws,
Government, Manners, and present state and condition of that great Monarchy of
China; in its circuit little less then all Europe; Heretofore (as zealous of
its rare treasures) shut and locked up from the curious eyes of strangers: so
that this book (first) yields to thee a full discovery thereof. and (I dare
say) the most valuable, that this our world has been acquainted with, since
that of America; whereby now the furthest East, as well as West, is disclosed,
and laid open to the present age. For, as for some former relations, thou may
have seen thereof, thou will by this discern them to be as fabulous, as they
are compendious and imperfect.

It was written by one, who, after, first, a strict education in all sorts of
learning, for two and twenty years space lived in that Kingdom, was resident
at the Court, and in the greatest Cities thereof: and in all that time (as
designing such a work) was a diligent Observator and Collector of all their
manners and customs; as likewise (after much pains taken in the Language) a
great student of their Histories, and Writings. Whose laborious work, after it
had already bin clothed in many other Languages, besides the Authors, and
welcomly entertained in most states of Europe, it was thought fit no longer to
be concealed to a Nation, either for curiosity of knowledge, or industry of
foreign commerce, no way yiedling to her neighbors.

The variety of the subjects handled therein is so great (as comprehending the
whole fabric of that nation; their Politics, Oeconomicks, Sciences,
Mechanics, Riches, Merchandise, etc.) that those of whatsoever profession, may
reap no small benefit in reading the designs, managements and practices
therein, of so ingenious a People. Whose manners also (as their site) are so
remote and different in most things from ours, that (I may say) in this piece
is happily united, with the truth of History, the delight of a Romance: where
it will be no small pleasure to thee to see their brains, as well as their
bodies, as it were of a several mould from the Europeans, and their inventions
in many things, to walk antipodes to us, and yet in these no way below us, but
in many superior; or what in them appears less complete, yet will the
knowledge thereof not be ungrateful unto thee, because it is new and singular.
As for many moral virtues, thou will find them so far to transcend us therein,
that they may be proposed as an excellent pattern, (as also they are a shame)
to Christian states. Lastly, to correct and reform any their defects, and make
the nation perfectly happy, the light of Christianity has of late visited this
people, who sat in darkness: so that now (after America also enlightened) there
is no end of the world left, wherinto the sound of the Gospel is not gone
forth. The foundation of which being (there) already laid, there is great hopes
that it may sooner come to a full purity, reformation and perfection, and the
indefatigable pains and undaunted courage of those laborers who cultivate it in
the East, provoke a greater diligence andemulation therein, in our planters in
the West; where the Gospel (as following a conquest) may be advanced both with
much more safety and authority.

To the end of this Treatise, I have added the History of the Tartarian
invasian of China, much enlarged and freed from diverse Erratas of the former
Edition; which gives thee an account of the Chinesse affairs till the year
1653. (Reader, thus much I thought good to advertise thee in the front of this
Book, that thou may not be so great an hinderance to thy self, as not to be
acquainted with so curious and beneficial a discourse. Farewell)

The Preface.
WHo writes of things far remote, does almost always incur the
inconvenience of many, and those no small defects: hence it is, that we see
many Books, whose Authors, for their personal Qualities, might deserve more
credit than may justly be given to their writings. As for those, who have
written of China, I have perused some of them, who leaving in oblivion almost
all Truths, take the liberty to wander in discourses altogether fabulous: for
this Kingdom being so remote, and having always with much Care avoided all
Communication with Strangers, reserving only to themselves the knowledge of
their own Affairs, with a most particular Caution: hence it follows, that
nothing is known without the Confines thereof, but what does, as it were,
overflow into the skirts of the Country of Cantone, (a part of this Empire,
whither the Portugheses have been suffered to come) so that the most internal
and secret knowledge thereof has been reserved, either for the Natives of the
Country, who know well enough how to conceal it; or for those, who, upon a
better Motive, have, to discover it, little less then forgotten their own
nature, their language, their customs, and manner of living, and transformed
themselves into the natural humor of that Country.

Now this last has by divine dispensation, fallen to the lot of the Religious
of the Company of Jesus; who although they came late to the Culture of the
Church, are, notwithstanding, arrived to that honor to be reckoned among the
first, that after Saint Thomas the Apostle, did cultivate those remote Confines
of the world.

It is now fifty eight years, that they have labored under this so distant
Climate, where directing all their force and endeavors, to the conversion of
Souls, they account it a manifest Theft, to employ any otherwise that time
which they owe to the Service of God, and is of so much importance for the
Eternal Salvation of men. Hence it is, that never any yet did, or would it
have been permitted him, if he had desired it, to employ himself in writing
the Relation of this Kingdom; except it were Father Nicolaus Trigalzius, after
he had by permission withdrawn himself from the culture of Christianity among
the Chinese, and passed from thence into Europe.

Upon the same occasion I have undertaken to give a brief account thereof,
sufficient at least for the instruction of those, who desire to be informed
concerning those parts: forbearing to make a more large discourse at the
present* but reserving it for another time; which may be, when we shall
return to that vast Country, with new Laborers in so great a number, that
some of the greatest Authority and Experience among us, may find leisure and
convenience to undertake a perfect Relation.

In the mean time, abbreviating, as much as it is possible, this Information,
without rendering that knowledge confused, which we pretend to gratify the
world with, we shall divide the work into two parts. The first contains the
material part of the Kingdom; that is, the Provinces, Land, and Fruits; and
in a manner, the formal part too; that is, the people, their learning, and
customs. The second, the Beginning of Christianity there, the progress
thereof, the persecutions suffered therein; and finally the condition, wherein
I left it, at my departure thence. I hope this work shall gain some esteem and
credit, if not for the greatness of the Appearance, at least for the certainty
of the reality of it; having taken what I write, from the infallible Testimony
of mine eyes; which though they may not be of the quickest sighted, yet have
had the advantage to reiterate very often their speculations. And if he which
vieweth for a long time, although his sight be not of the best, does commonly
see more, then he who looks in haste, be his eyes never so good: I, who, for
the space of two and twenty years, have had the opportunity to observe all
Passages of China, have certainly seen so much what I write, and what others
have written, who have not seen them sowell, that I must necessarily speak of
them with more Certainty then they, although with less Eloquence.

The Table of all the Chapters contained in the first part of the History of
China.
Chap. 1. OF the Kingdom in General Fol. 1. Chap. 2. Of the Provinces in
particular, and first of those of the South. fol. 8. Chap. 3. Of the Northern
Provinces. fol. 15. Chap. 4. Of the persons of the Chinesses: of their nature,
wit, and inclination. fol. 22. Chap. 5. Of the manner of their habit. fol. 29.
Chap. 6. Of their Language and Letters fol, 31. Chap. 7. Of their manner of
study, and admittance to examination. fol. 35. Chap. 8 Of the manner of their
Examinations, and how their degrees are conferred. fol. 40. Chap. 9. Of the
degree of Doctor. fol. 45. Chap. 10. Of the Books and Sciences of the
Chinesses. fol. 47. Chap. 11. Of their Sciences and liberal Arts in
particular, fol. 51. Chap. 12. Of the Courtesies and Civilities of the
Chinesses. fol. 58. Chap. 13. Of their Banquets. fol. 65. Chap. 14. Of the
Games which the Chinesses use. fol. 68. Chap. 15 Of their Marriage fol. 69.
Chap. 16. Of the Funerals and Sepultures of the Chinesses: fol. 73. Chap. 17.
Of the Funeral of the Queen Mother. fol. 78. Chap. 18. Of the several sects
of Religion in China. fol. 86. Chap. 19. Of their superstitions and sacrifices
in China. fol. 93. Chap. 20. Of the Militia and Arms of the Chinesses. fol. 96.
Chap. 21. Of the war which the Tartars made upon China, fol. 100. Chap. 22. Of
the Kings and Queens of China, and of the Eunuchs fol. 106. Chap. 23. How the
Kings of China are married. fol. 119. Chap. 24. Of the Nobility of China. fol.
121. Chap. 25. Of the Government of China, and of the Officers. fol. 124. Chap.
26. Of the Government of the thirteen Provinces. fol 128. Chap. 27 Of the Badge
of honor, or Ensigns of the Mandarines. fol. 132. Chap. 28. Of the Prisons,
Sentences, and Punishments of the Chinesses. fol. 135. Chap. 29. Of some
particular things, which do facilitate and rectify the Govenment in China.
fol. 144. Chap. 30. Of the Moors, Jews, and other Nations which are in China.
fol. 151. Chap. 31. Of the Christian Religion planted many ages since in China:
and of a very ancient stone lately discovered there, which is an admirable
testimony thereof. fol. 154.
A Table of the contents of the Chapters in the second Part of the History of
China.
Chap. 1. OF the first beginning of the preaching of the Gospel in China fol.
166. Chap 2. Of the proceedings and Persecutions of the Fathers before they
arrived at Nankim. fol. 172. Cap. 3. Of what happened after, till the Fathers
entered into Pekim. fol. 177. Chap. 4. The Fathers enter into Pekim and settle
there. fol. 183. Chap. 5. Of the proceedings and ruin of their House at
Xaocheu. fol. 187. Chap. 6. Of the progress of the Christian Religion at the
two Residencies at Nancham and Nankim, and of the death of Father Matthaeus
Riccius. fol. 192. Chap. 7. Of the burying place, which was bestowed upon us by
the King, and of the progress of the Christian Religion, until the time of
the persecution at Nankim. fol. 197. Chap. 8. A fierce persecution is raised
against the Christians in Nankim, fol. 205. Chap. 9. The continuation of the
Persecution and the Banishment of the Fathers out of China. Fol. 214. Chap. 10.
How things began to be calmed again after the persecution; and of the
foundation of several Residencies. fol. 220. Chap. 11. Of the second
persecution at Namkim, and of the martyrdom of a Christian named Andrew. fol.
226. Chap. 12. How things began to be quiet and settled, and how the Fathers
were sent for to Court by order of the Mandarines. fol. 232. Chap. 13. The life
and death of Dr. Leo: and the conclusion of this History. fol. 239. After which
follows the supplement to these present times, wherein is contained the
Chinesses most cruel war with the Tartars, by whom they are now conquered.
fol. 249.
An Exact MAPP of CHINA, being faithfully Copied from one brought from Peking
by a Father Lately resideent in that City. 1655 IC

A King of China
portrait

A China Man
portrait

A China Woman
portrait



THE FIRST PART Of the Temporal State of CHINA.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Kingdom in General.
CHina in its extent is one great continued Continent, without having any thing
which devides it: and taking it from the latitude of Haynam (which is not far
distant from the Continent, and lies in nineteen degrees) it extends it self
twenty four degrees, inclining toward the East; and ending in forty three
degrees, it comes to make a circuit so much the more spacious, by how much the
coasts thereof run along in various and unequal windings; and so comes to be
the chiefest kingdom of the world in greatness, and almost equal to all
Europe. On the west side thereof are many small Islands, but so near together,
that they seem all to Compose but, as it were, one body.

All this Monarchy is divided into fifteen Provinces; each of which is a
spacious Kingdom, and so they were all anciently; each having a King of its
own. Of those nine, which they call the Southern Provinces, the greatest part
of them are watered with large rivers, and some of those, having so great
plenty of water, that in many places the opposite banks are out of sight, one
of the other; and elsewhere, that which appears, is hardly to be
distinguished what it is. They are all navigable, and are frequented with so a
great concourse of diverse sorts of vessels, that what might be said upon this
occasion, will hardly seem credible: I shall only say, that in this, they do
exceed all other rivers of the world. In an Arm of the river of Nanchim, which
with a moderate breadth runs down to Hamchen, I stayed eight days for a
passage through that wonderful concourse of vessels: and whilst an
houre-glasse of sand was running out, I counted three hundred small ships,
reckoning only those which came up the river. It is a mavelous thing, there
being so many, that all are so well accommodated for Merchandise, and so
convenient for passengers; They are all covered and kept very neat, and some of
them so beautified and adorned with pictures, that they seem rather made for
the recreation, than the traffic of Merchants.

The manner, after which they are governd is very notable: for the Mariners
keep all without the place, where the passengers make their abode, there being
space enough without for them to run up and down, that trim the Sails and
guide the Bark, without any disturbance of the others, who enjoy a pleasant
ease and rest. In which the Barks of the province of Hanceo exceed the rest.

The six Northern provinces, as they come nearest to our latitude, do most
resemble our climate, and are more dry and healthful than the rest. But in all
of them (more or less) there are not wanting many of a long and happy life;
there being to be found many, and very vigorous and lusty old men.

Of the same more particularly.
This Kingdom is so populous, that not only the Villages, but even the Cities
are in sight one of another; and in some places, where the rivers are most
frequented, the habitations are almost continued. Of these there are four
sorts; great Cities which they call Fu: the lesser, which they call Cen,
(concerning these, Writers have somewhat differed in their Relations:) Towns,
which they call Hien; and Castles, which they call Cid. Besides these, there
are Villages and Hamlets almost innumerable. Of all these the Walls are kept
night and day with a fourfold Guard at the sound of a Bell, even to the
innermost City of the Kingdom, as if they were always in a condition of War:
showing, that to prevent the least imaginable danger, which may fall out in an
hour; it is good to stand, during life, upon our guard: for ordinarily all
sudden ruins proceed from a long confidence. The streets are kept by Courts of
Guard and Sen^inels, with so much rigor, that if they find them asleep, or
stragled from their Post, or that they do not speedily answer, they are
presently condemned to the Bastinado, which is immediately executed in the same
place. The public gates are shut every night with great care, and if there
fall out any accident, they are not opened, til they are satisfied, how the
Fact was done. In the year one thousand six hundred thirty four, I was in the
City of Kiamsi, where thirty thieves broke prison, and having routed the
guards, wounding some and killing others, set themselves at liberty. The Fact
was known; and the opening of the gates being suspended according to their
inviolable custom, before next night the Malefactors were all taken, nor could
the greatness of the City hide any one of them.

This Kingdom is so exceeding populous, that I having lived there two and
twenty years, was in no less amazement at my coming away, than I was in the
beginning, at the multitude of the people: certainly, the truth exceeds all
Hyperboles; not only in the Cities, Towns, and public places, (in some of
which one cannot walk without great violence of thrusting and crowding;) but
also in the Highways, there is as great a concourse, as is usually in Europe
at some great feastivall, or public meeting. And if we will refer our selves
to the general register book, wherein only the common men are enrolled and
matriculated, leaving out women, children, eunuchs, professors of arms and
letters, (almost an infinite number) there are reckoned of them to be fifty
eight millions, and fifty five thousand, one hundred and fourscore.

The houses, where they inhabit, are not so sumptuous and lasting, as ours:
yet are they more convenient for the good contrivance, and more pleasant for
their exquisite neatness. They use much in their houses Charam, an excellent
vernish, and painting of an accurate diligence. They build them not very high,
esteeming them more convenient for being low, as well for habitation, as for
good accommodation. The richer sort of people do plant the courts and
approaches to their houses with flowers and small trees; and, toward the
North, they use fruit trees. In like manner, where they have room enough, they
set greater trees, and raise artificial mountains; to which end they bring
from far, great pieces of rocks: They keep there several sorts of fowl; as
Cranes and Swannes, and other beautiful birds: and also wild beasts, as
Stagges, and fallow Dear: They make many fish ponds, where are to be seen
gliding up and down painted fish with gilded finns, and other things likewise
of curiosity and delight.

Their way of building is in this manner. They frame first exactly the roof of
the house, which they set upon pillars of wood, the which by how much the
bigger they are, are so much the more esteemed: after they fit up the walls
with brick, or some such like matter. There is a Tradition, that, anciently,
they made their buildings according to exact rules of measure and proportion;
of which Art there are yet some books remaining; but those rules are now only
observed in the Kings palaces, and in public works; as, towers of Cities and
Towns, which they make of several forms; as round; square; octangular; very
beautiful, with stairs, some winding, some plain, and Balansters on the
outside.

In the vessels and utensiles of their house they are both very curious and
expensive; using much the abovesaid Charam, a sort of vernish, which is taken
from certain trees, proper only to that, and the neighboring, Countries: and
in truth it is an excellent thing, as well for the perfection of the matter,
(as may be seen in the works which come from thence) as for the easiness in
working it, as well in making new things, as in retrimming the old, and
reducing them to their former beauty.

As for plenty; whereas this kingdom, by reason of its large extent, does
participate of diverse latitudes and climates, it produces and enjoys so
great variety of fruits, that nature seems there to have laid upon heaps,
what she but scatters through the rest of the world. It has within its own
doors all that is necessary for man's life, together with all superfluity of
delicacies: whence it has, not only no need to take alms of other Countries;
but, with what it is able to spare, (which is both much and very good) it
satisfies the desires of the neighboring and remote kingdoms, who have
always a longing desire to see and enjoy it. Its chief sustenance is that
which is most used throughout the world, to wit, wheat and rice; some Countries
making most use of the one, and some of the other. China produces both in so
great plenty, that a Pico of each (a Pico contains 125 pound of our weight) is
commonly worth five Reals, (that is, about half a crown of English money) and
if it comes to seven and a half it is counted a dearth.

The Northern Provinces use for their proper sustenance Wheat, Barley, and
Maiz; eating Rice but seldom, as we do in Europe; leaving it for the Southern
Provinces; Which although they have Wheat in great plenty, make use of it with
the same moderation, as we do of Rice, or any other sort of fruit. They have
Pulse of diverse kinds, the relief of the poorer sort of people, and the
ordinary provinder, in stead of Barley, for the Beasts of Burden. They use
Herbs much; they being the food of the ordinary people, almost all the year
throughout; and the chief Inventorie of their Apothecaries shops, for their
physic; which is founded only upon Herbs and very safe physic. Yet they
want both Endive and Carduus, but have in stead thereof others, which we want.

Flesh they have every where plentifully, even in small villages. That which
they use most constantly throughout the year, is Hogs-flesh, Beef is sold
there without any bones, they taking them always out, first. Venison they have
not so plentiful: nor do they much affect it; although they have there the
same which here afford us so much recreation; as, wild Boares, Stagges, fallow
Dear and Hares, but no Conies. Of foul there is great plenty, they have all
ours in great abundance: Partridges of two sorts, one whereof differs not
from ours, but only in their call. The Nightingales, though they are bigger
than ours, have the same voice and manner of singing. Other birds there are
which we have not here, and are in great esteem, as well for their beauty to
the eye, as for their excellent taste to please the Palate. The birds which we
see painted in their works that come into Europe have, without doubt, for the
most part, the resemblance of those there. Art always favoring nature, or but
little altering from her. They are excellent in bringing up of tame foul, and
have of every sort without number; Geese they have in so great quantity, that
they feed up and down the fields in huge flocks. That which is reported of
their hatching eggs by art, is very certain; but it is only in the spring
time, and then they have no need of the dam.

Wild Beasts, as Tigers and Wolves there are in abundance throughout the
kingdom, though they do not much hurt. There are Elephants always to be seen
at court, but they are brought from other Countries. For tame creatures they
have all ours, as well for burden (without using Oxen for this, as they are
feign to do throughout all India) as also for tillage of their land, in which
they make use of Oxen. In the Southern parts the Bufolo's undergo the chief
labor. They have store of horses, but without mettle, and little worth.
Coaches were formerly much in use with them, and growing out of fashion there,
we took them up, being first used, in Italy and Spain, in the year 1546.
Since they have only used Chaires and Sedans, finding them of less pomp and
expense, and of greater convenience; wherefore to this day in all their
journies they serve themselves with litters carried by Mules, or Chaires borne
by 4, 6, or 8, men, according to the quality of the persons. Those which they
use most in Cities are in form not unlike unto ours. Those in which the women
are carried, are bigger, more convenient, and more beautified; and also the
manner of carrying them is different. In the two Cities of Penckin and Nanckin,
where there is a greater concourse of all sorts of people, they have in all
public places a good quantity of Horses and Mules, with handsome furniture,
and very well fitted with bridles and saddles, standing ready to be hired by
such persons, as are desi^ous, with more ease and less expense, to travel up
and down the City upon their occasions.

In the Northern provinces, they have but little fish, (except it be at the
Court; which, for being such, wants nothing.) The reason is, because in those
parts there are no many Rivers: yet they cause great store of fish to be
brought from the Southern P^ovinces, (which very much abound therein, taking
them on the sea coasts, in lakes, and in pooles in great plenty) dried and
accommodated in diverse manners, so much as is sufficient. In the River of
Nanckin there is every year a fishing for the Kings use; and till that be
done, there is a prohibition upon a rigorous penalty for any other person to
fish: and the voyage being between five and forty and threescore days journey,
yet it is brought fresh and sweet, without salting it. Troutes are not there so
much esteemed as with us; but Sturgeon every whit as much; which, when it is
sold at the dearest, does not exceed five-pence the pound: By which you may
perceive the cheapnesse of all other things.

Among fruits; Cherries, and Mulberries have there no esteem, for their taste
is not very good; they use the greatest part of those fruits we have in Europe:
but they are not comparable to ours, neither in quantity nor quality, except it
be the Oranges of Cantone, which may well be called the Queens of Oranges: and
are by some esteemed to be, not so much Oranges as Muscatell Grapes, disguised
in that form and habit. The Southern provinces have the best fruit of all
India; particularly Cantone; for they have Anans, Manghas, Bananas, Giachas,
and Giambas; and above all, there are some fruits proper to them of a
particular excellency, such as in Cantone are the Licie, (so the Portughess
call them; but the Chinese, Lici.) These on the outside are of an Orange
color, and when they are ripe do very much beautify the trees they grow on.
They are made like chastnuts, in the form of an heart: when the shell is
pilled of, which is only contiguous to it, the fruit remains like a pearl in
color, very pleasing to the sight, but more to the taste.

There is likewise a fruit called Longans, named by the Chinese, Lumien, that
is, Dragons eye, they are in figure and greatness not much unlike a small nut,
but the Pulpe is very little, and different; but between the shell and the
stone it is sweet and wholesome: this fruit is found in Cantone and Fokien.

Throughout the kingdom there are red figs, (a name put upon them by the
Portugheses: for in the Chinese tongue they are called Suzu:) it is a fruit
very different from figs in color, figure and taste; the color on the
outside is red, on the inside like gold; the figure is of the bigness of an
Orange, bigger or lesser; for there is as much diversity of them, as there is
among us of figs. The rind is very thin, and is of so extraordinary good
taste, that in my opinion it may be reckoned among the chiefest in the world.
They have one or two seeds, which are like unto blanched Almonds: the best are
in the cold Countries. The provinces Honan, Xiansi, Xensi, and Xantum enjoy the
best in quality, and in great quantity; and dry enough of them to serve the
whole kingdom. When they are dry, they are better than our dried figs, to
which they have some kind of resemblance.

The province of Hamcheu produces a particular fruit, which they call Iammoi,
as big as a plumbe, round, and in color and taste like unto the best
Mulberries: but the tree is very different.

Peaches there are none, unless it be in the Province of Xensi, where there
are some of a notable bigness: some are red both within and without; others of
a yellow color, of the same figure and taste with ours.

There are Melons every where in great abundance: but the best are not to be
compared to our good ones: there are water melons in great plenty and very good.

Grapes are very rare and scarce, and grow only in Arbours, and close walks,
except it be in the Province of Xensi, where they are in abundance, and where
they also dry them in great plenty. They make not their wine of Grapes, but of
Barley, and in the Northern parts, of Rice; where they also make it of Apples,
but in the Southern parts of Rice only; yet this is not ordinary Rice, but a
certain kind of it proper to them, which serves only to make this liquor,
being used in diverse manners.

Vinegar they make of the same ingredients as their wine; and, in the Western
Provinces, of Millet; which notwithstanding is sharp and well tasted.

The wine used by the common people, although it will make them drunk, is not
very strong nor lasting, it is made at all times of they ear: but the best only
in the winter: It has a color very pleasing to the sight; nor is the smell
less pleasing to the sent; or the Savor thereof, to the taste: take
altogether, it is a ve^^ment occasion, that there never want drunkards; but
without any mulct of shame; for they have not yet placed it in that
consideration. Winter and Summer they drink it warm.

Flowers are in singular esteem with these people; and they have some
exceeding beautiful and different from ours; which (yet) they do not want.
They have Clove-gilleflowres, which have no smell at all. They endeavor to
have, the year throughout, flowers for every season in their gardens, in which
they are very curious. They have some flowers, which in their duration exceed
the ordinary style of nature; in which they seem to be exempt from their
common tribute of a short life. For when these plants have no moisture left for
the nourishment of their leaves, and exposed to the cold, these do fall off,
then do new flowers sprout again, and those the most odoriferous, during the
greatest inclemency of the frost and snow. These are called Lamui, more
pleasing to the sent than the eye; their color being not unlike that of
Beeswax. They have other flowers like Lillies, called Tiaohoa, which they keep
in the house, because that being carefully taken up with their roots entire and
well cleansed from earth, they live and flourish in the air.

Their Garments, as also the furniture of their chambers and houses, they make
of wool, Linen, Silk and Cotton, which they make great use of an weave
thereof many fair and curious stuffs.

The riches of that kingdom is admirable: for besides that the earth is so
fruitful in all kind of sustenance, and what ever is necessary for man's life,
as may be perceived by what has been already said; they do vend unto strangers
the best and richest merchandise of all the East; such as are Gold-threed; Gold
in the leaf and Ingot; Rubies; Saphires; small Pearl; Musk; raw silk; and
wrought silk quicksilver, Copper, Tin, Tomnaga, which is a kind of metal
more fine, and as hard as Tin; Vermilion, Salt-nitre, Brimstone, Sugar, and
other things of less importance.

Their gilded works for household stuff, ornaments and jewels for women,
both for necessity and curiosity, are sufficiently known to the world: nor
does all this issue out at one port, but by many in a great and perpetual
commerce. In all this abundant riches of the Country, industry of the
inhabitants, Arts and means of gaining their living to an excessive plenty,
they do not let pass any other thing, that can bring them any profit; and
notwithstanding the sight of so great afluence of noble commodities, they make
a profit of their Beefe-bones; Hogges-haires; and of the smallest ragge, that
is throne into the streets. There reigns among them that only pledge and
surety of the duration of Empires; that is, that the public is rich, and no
particulars. They are not so rich there as in Europe, nor so many which can
properly deserve that name: nor are the poor here so many, nor so poor; as
those there. The people is infinite, nor can they have a capital, or stock,
sufficient for so many; or money to fill so many purses. Hence it comes to
pass, that the partition among them is such, that much comes to few, a
mediocrity to not many, and a little to almost infinite. Their money is much at
one stay, which may be perceived by the same low price of things, salary of
servants, pay of workmanship, and stipend of public Ministers.

So that even to this day, at least in diverse of these countries they live, as
they did formerly in Portugal; when a Maraved is, which is worth a farthing
and a half, divided into six blanes, would buy six several things. So was it
also in Castile, not only in ancient times, but even to the reign of Don John
the first: the records of which are still preserved: but such temperance and
plenty long since are gone out of the world. From hence it is manifest, how
much that admirable duration of the Empire of China depends on observing its
laws and ancient customs, without ever opening a gate (that the great ones
might seem greater, and the small ones, great) to luxury in apparel, and
excess in diet; which are the irreparable ruin of Common wealths.

A pound of mutton is worth a penny, a pigeon a farthing and a half, the hire
of a manservant for a year two hundred farthings, and his diet and lodging.
But there is a great difference betwixt some places and others, those of the
South, as they have the advantage in commerce, so they exceed the rest in
money; and the price of things; which continually rises, as we find every day
by experience: but even there to this day, the rate is very moderate.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Provinces in particular, and first of those of the South.
THis kingdom is divided into two parts, South and North; and both these
subdivided into fifteen provinces, as is abovesaid. To this Southern part
belong nine; which are Cantone, Quamsi, Yunnam, Fukien, Kiamsi, Suchuem,
Utquam, Chekiam, Nankim, we will treat of these in this chapter, and of the
rest in the next. That we may proceed distinctly, speaking of them in the same
order that we have named them.

Cantone is the first, and lies in that part of the South, that is properly
named Quantum. It is in the latitude of twenty three degrees, it is large,
rich, and abounding in wheat and rice; of these it produces each year two
harvests, though for the most part they are of a several grain. There is
store of sugar, copper and tin, materials, which they work, with great
variety, into innumerable sorts of vessels; as also, works made with Charam,
an excellent vernish, and with guilding, some whereof are transported into
Europe.

The Jesuits in this province had two residencies with their Churches and
houses, which perished by reason of Several persecutions, as you shall find
hereafter.

The people are able Mechanics, and though of small invention, yet they
imitate excellently whatsoever they find invented. To the City called also
Cantone (though the proper name thereof be Guamcheufu) the Portugesses go
twice every year with their marchandice. It is distant from Macao an hundred
and five miles: and Macao is distant from the first Islands, and from the
greater Cities of that Empire fifty four: The circumference thereof is 15 good
miles. The concourse of merchants thither is very great and therefore it is
more peopled than many of the other Cities. The most and best commodities of
that Kingdom are brought thither, because it is the most open and free seat of
trade in that nation. And to say nothing of the six neighboring kingdoms,
from whence all sorts of merchandise is brought thither, as well by natives as
strangers: only that which the Portugesses take in for India, Giappone and
Manila, comes one year with another to five thousand three hundred chests of
several silk stuffes; each chest including 100 pieces of the most substantial
silks, as velvet damask and satin; of the slighter stuffes, as halfe-damasks,
painted and single taffities 250 pieces of gold 2200 Ingots of 12 ounces weight
a piece; of musk, seven Pichi: which is more then 35 Arrova's every Arrova
weighing 25 pound, of 6 ounces to the pound; besides small pearl; sugar;
Porcellane dishes; China wood; Rhe^barbe; and several curious gilded works;
and many other things of less importance; it being hard to name them all even
in a longer relation.

To this Province belongs the Island of Aynan, where pearls are fished in
great plenty. It is sufficiently populous, by one city, it has Several
villages on the North part thereof: toowards the South there lies a barbarous
people, which admit the Chinesses only to traffic and commerce, without
submitting to their dominion. It produces that precious wood of Aquila and
that sweet wood, which the Portugeses call rose-wood, and the natives, Hoalim;
and other things of less importance.

On the North side of Cantone the Province of Quamsi extends it self to the
latitude of 25 degrees: it enjoyes the same climate without any considerable
difference; (so that it has nothing particular, which is notable;) and is
counted the second Province.

Yunnam is the third; and lies in the latitude of 24 degrees, and is the
furthest distant of any from the Center of China: it is a great country, but
has little merchandise, I know not any thing is brought from thence, unless
it be that matter* whereof they make the beads for chapplets, which in
Portugal they call Alambras; and in Castile, Ambares; and are like Amber, they
are counted good against the catarre; it is dug out of mines, and sometimes
in great pieces: it is redder than our Amber, but not so clean. In this
province is violated that custom of the Kingdom that women do not go to the
market to buy or sell, as in other countries of the world.

On the other side of Cantone is the fourth Province called F^kie^, or by
another name Chincheo, in the latitude of 26 degrees: it is for the greatest
part Mountanous; and therefore not so well inhabited. Contrary to the laws of
the Kingdom, the Natives of this Province do go into the countries of the
neighboring strangers, which are upon the seacoasts. It yields gold, good
sugar in great quantity, good Canvas-cloath; for other linen there is none in
China. There is made excellent paper of diverse kinds, which for plenty,
goodness, and cheapnesse, is very remarkable, They make use of printing no
less conveniently, and (as it appears) more anciently, than in Europe,
although not in the very same manner: for here, after the printing of each
sheet, the letters are taken asunder: there they carve what they would print
upon boards or plate, so that the books are still preserved entire in their
workhouses; and therefore as often as there is occasion, they can reprint any
book, without the expense of new setting the letters. This country is situated
upon the Seaside, and is another eminent port, from whence are issued out of
that Kingdom, infinite Merchandise, which are carried by the people of this
country, that are industrious, and brought up to it, to Manila, Giappone, and
particularly to the Island Formosa, which is even in the sight of the land,
(for with a a good wind it is not above 24 hours voyage thither) where they
trade with the Hollanders.

There are two houses and Churches there belonging to our company; under whose
Government and direction are a great number of very good Christians; who have
about ten Churches belonging to them, the which are visited by us very
diligently at set times. Two of their chief Churches are in the City of Fucheu
which is their Metropolis: another in the City of Cieumchu, the rest in other
Cities. There are (besides) many particular Oratories.

The Island Formosa lies in the Latitude of 22 degrees, it is situated between
the Kingdoms of China and Giappone: before you come thither you must pass by
a great number of Islands named Liqueu: the length of this Island is 150 miles,
the breadth 75.

The Hollanders have there a fort placed in a sandy vale, under which lies the
Port, which is encompassed with banks of sand, and if it were not
distinguished and secured by certain posts set up in the water, the entrance
would be very difficult even to those of the Country. On the other side of the
Island toward the East, the Spaniards have a fort, distant from that of the
Hollanders 90 miles by sea, and by land 45, as is reported. The soil of the
Island is so fruitful, that it produces grass nine or ten palms high (a
palm is nine inches, English measure) where the Hollanders feed their cattle.
There is so great abundance of Stagges, that it seems incredible to him that
has not seen it. Father Albertus Miceschi, (who lived there in the condition
of a ^lave) relates, that, riding to the next woods with leave from the
Governor, to gather some medicinal herbs, he saw by the way so great a
multitude of Stagges, that he judged them to be the herds belonging to the
people of the Country, dispersed up and down the fields, till coming nearer he
found with his eyes the contrary. There are also many of those Animals called
Alces or Elkes, the which, I did hitherto believe, were only to be found in
Lituania and the adjacent Countries. There are also many other Animals wholly
differing from ours, and altogether strange to us. It is the likest Country to
Europe of all India: it enjoys an healthful air, and cold, like ours. It
produces some spices, but not in great plenty; as Pepper in the woods, and
Cynamon on the mountains, and Camphire trees of a notable bigness, China
roots, and Salsapariglia, in great quantity. There are also gold mines, but
the Hollanders have not yet opened them.

The people of the Country wear no manner of clothes; nevertheless both men
and women do cover that, which in all the India's uses to be hidden from
sight, by the instinct of nature. They dwell in round houses made with
Bulrushes of several colors, beautiful to behold a far off. Their ordinary
food is Stagges flesh as fat as porke; and Rice; of which also they make very
strong wine. Many of them do turn Protestants by the persuasion of the
Holland Ministers, and live verteously. They are tall and active of body, so
fleet in running that they are able to single out, and run down a Stagge in
their hunting. Their Lords do wear a Crown of dead men's skulls, stitched
together and embellished with silk: and these are the heads of their enemies
killed by themselves. Their King wears two wings of various feathers upon his
head: others crown themselves with apples of gold, others make themselves
horns of a certain straw, made up with Bufolo's hair: They gird themselves
also about with a girdle of young Bulrushes curiously woven. They carry hanging
at their breast two Tortoises and a wooden mallet, which serve them in stead
of a drum. There is likewise another Island near to it, inhabited by fierce
savage people, who kill, whosoever goes thither. The abovenamed father
Miceschi saw one of them taken by the Hollanders, who was fifteen palms high,
as it seemed to him.

The fifth place we will give to the Province of Kiamsi, which is contiguous to
that of Cantone toward the North, in the latitude of 29 degrees. It takes its
beginning from a great ridge of mountains, which rear themselves upon the
confines of Cantone, from these Mountains two Rivers have their original;
one, which runs toward the South, and is presently navigable; the other
toward the North; which after it has watered a good part of this Province
receives into his channel another large River of the Province of Huquam, and
then runs forward with the name of the famous Nankim. The skirts of these
Mountains are considerable for the good Cities that are situated thereon;
very convenient for the passage of travailers, and for the conduct of
Merchandise; which for the most part passes upon the backs of men and boys,
according to the abilities of each, learning this trade from their youth, which
is the most usual employment of that Country. The voyage is but of one whole
day, and it is very much to see what passes by in it. For there being no other
bridge; and these Rivers being the most frequented passes of all China, it is
almost incredible, how great a concourse of people there is, and what a
multitude of commodities, which go and come without intermission. The
Merchandise is all put in one storehouse, and is received by weight into
another with so much fidelity, that it is not necessary the owner should be
present, because upon all accidents the Hosts are bound to make good
whatsoever is wanting. They are obliged also to give to every guest of
quality, or Merchant two banquets, or one at least, as also to their servants;
and if they be not satisfied therewith, they tell them of it, expostulate, and
threaten not to frequent any more their Inn, there not wanting many others.

By this Government they make their covetous Hosts very sumptuous and
bountiful. The Hosts are also obliged, as soon, as their guests are
embarked, (for if they go by land this privilege cease) to send them a
present of two things, or of one at least, as fruit, two fishes, a little
flesh, a couple of pullets; and this without paying, either at your entrance,
abode, or departure; for there is nothing to be paid, either for the lodging or
bedstead, I say bedstead, because the Host allows you no bed but every one
carries one with him at his back, when he has no other convenience; but they
are not so big as our beds, but much lighter. The profit of the Host
consists in so much percent, which is paid them by the Boateman for such
persons, or goods as are carried by water; and by the porters for such as pass
by land; and as the concourse is great, the profit cannot be little. Every
thing passes through the hands of Insurers, so that if any thing be wanting,
they supply it and make it up.

In the Custom House (for there is a very famous one here) there is not so
much honor done the Merchant, but more favor. There is no house where the
Merchandise is deposited, weighed or visited; neither is it taken out of the
bark; but only a moderate rate is paid for it by the eye, and according to
the Merchants book of accounts. If the passenger be no Merchant, although he
go alone in a Bark with his servants, and carry five or six chests, and
several other things, which are usually transported from one Country to
another, they are not searched nor opened, neither do they pay any custom. A
good example for the Custom and Gabell-houses of Europe, where a poor
traveller is so beastly and barbarously, robbed and spoiled; when all he
carries with him is not worth so much as they ask him for custom.

For strangers ships, which come into the Port of Macao, as soon as any
arriveth, they unlade their Merchandise as they please, without any hinderance;
and when the customers come, they pay them according to the content of the
vessel, without making any enquiry into the quality of the Cargazon.

But to return to the Province of Kiamsi, (of which we were discoursing;) it
particularly abounds in Rice and fish, but most of all in people. So that the
Chinesses call them Laochu, that is to say, Rats. Whereof, we have a
resemblance in Portugal, in the Country that lies between the Rivers Duer^
and Migno; which, where it confineth upon Gallitia has so great multitude of
people, that it is therefore called by the same name; although learned men do
derive it from Rates, an ancient part of that Country.

Now this people running over the whole kingdom, like swarms of Bees, do fill
it with several Trades whereunto they apply themselves, and for the greatest
part they lead a miserable life, and are therefore so penurious, niggardly, and
dry in their presents, that they pass, in ridiculous proverbs, through the
rest of the Provinces.

It is famous for Sturgeon, which it has of very great bigness; and more for
the Porcellane dishes (indeed the only work in the world of this kind) which
are made only in one of its Towns: So that all that is used in the Kingdom,
and dispersed through the whole world, are brought from this place: although
the earth, whereof they are made comes from another place: but there only is
the water, wherewith precisely they are to be wrought to come to their
perfection, for if they be wrought with other water the work will not have so
much gloss and luster. In this work there are not those mysteries that are
reported of it here, neither in the matter, the form, nor the manner of
working; they are made absolutely of earth, but of a neat and excellent
quality. They are made in the same time, and the same manner, as our earthen
vessels; only they make them with more diligence and accuratenesse. The Blew,
wherewith they paint the Porcellane, is Anill, whereof they have abundance,
some do paint them with Vermilion, and (for the King) with yellow.

This Province, and that of Chincheo and Cantone, which border one upon
another, do unite, as it were, in an angle, with many Mountains between them:
In the middle of which Mountains there is a small Kingdom, which has a
particular King of its own without any subjection to the Chinesses; from whom
he does defend himself, if they pretend to assault him; nor is the defense
difficult, there being but one entrance into that kingdom. They admit of the
Chinesse-Physitians in their infirmities, but not of their learned men into the
administration of their government. If they have an ill Harvest, and that there
is like to be a scarsity they go out, and rob in a millitary order, to the
sound of the drum. So in the year 1632 they gave no small trouble to this
province of Kiamsi.

The last account shall be concerning the Christianity there, which has
prospered very well, being also beneficed with two Churches and houses which we
have in that Province, the one in the City of Nauchan, which is the Metropolis;
The other in the City of Nauhium.

The sixth Province is called Suchuen, in the same parallel with that of Kiamsi,
and in the same latitude of 29 degrees, nor has it any thing in particular
differing from the former, worthy the relation.

The Province of Huquam is the seventh in Situation, it lies more to the
North, in the height of 31 degrees, it exceeds the whole Kingdom for the
abundance of Rice. The Chinesses say, that that whole Kingdom is able to give
but a breakfast in respect of Huquam, which provideth for the whole year. It
has store of oil, and no less Fish, by reason of the rivers, which it
enjoys, and the lakes, which seem rather Seas. In the Metropolis of this
Province there was a Residencie begun at the time of my arrival.

The province of Cakiam, which is the eighth, lies in the Latitude of 30
degrees: it is for the most part situated by the Seaside, fertile, plain, and
almost all divided by several rivers, some whereof run through their Cities
and Towns. In riches it exceeds many of the Provinces, as being, the Fountain,
from whence the best Commodities of that Monarchy do flow: it is singular in
silk, which it distributeth through every part, whether it be raw, or wrought;
in Balls or in Stuff. All that goes out of the Kingdom any way, comes from
this Province: though all China has the benefit of the Silk-worme, yet all the
rest would not serve them, to make them Scarfes: the name of the Metropolis is
Hamcheu. Here we have two houses, which upon certain good considerations are
reduced to one; where there is cultivated a copious and good Christianity, and
also much honored, by reason of the number of people of quality that are in it,

Finally, this Province is famous for many things, but particularly for three.
The first is a lake called Sihu, which is one of the rarest in the world. It is
in circuit Thirty Lis, which are six miles: it is set about with excellent
Palaces, and these environed by pleasant Mountains clothed with grass,
plants, and trees: the water is always running, for there coming in a current
at one and side, issueing out at the other; it is so clear, that it inviteth
one to behold it with great delight, the smallest sand, that lies at the
bottom, being to be discovered. There are certain ways paved with stone,
that do cross over it, offering passage to those that travel over it, either
upon their occasions or curiosity: there stand ready small Barks of a
considerable burden which are made for recreation and banquets; the kitchen is
in the steerage, or the forecastle, and the middle space serves for a hall.
Above higher, there is a place for the women, covered with lattices, that they
might not be seen. These Barks are painted and gilded after a curious and
various manner, and are provided in great abundance with all things necessary
for the navigation which is short and free from wracks of water, but not so
well from those of wine; there happening many: as also shipwrackes of estates
very often; there being scarce any in the whole kingdom that has any thing,
that does not come to spend in these delights, either part or the whole; and
sometimes more than his whole stock is worth.

The second is, the excellency of the silk, as well for the plenty abovesaid,
as for the curiosity of the Art, with which a good part of it is wrought,
engrayling it with precious and beautiful works of gold. This is only after
their manner and gusto; and is not sent out of the kingdom, but as a singular
work is reserved for the Kings Palaces, who every year buyeth up all that is
made of this sort.

The third is, the worshipping of their Idols; in which is particularly to be
perceived whence the fabric of their Temples proceeds, which are without doubt
very famous.

The last of these nine Southerly Provinces is Nankim, situated in 32 degrees
of latitude, and is one of the best Provinces of the kingdom, and the
perfection of the whole realm. It sends abroad its commodities, or works of
importance, to no part; as if they were unworthy, to participate of its
perfection; which is most rare in all sort of variety, and so much exceeding
all the rest, that every one, to sell his commodities the better, pretends,
that they are of Nankim, and so passes them off, at a greater price.

That part which is toward the West, is the most rich, and makes so much
Cotton-wool, that those of the Country affirm, that there is only in the town
of Xanuchi and the precinct thereof, which is large, 200000 Loomes for this
stuff; so that from that place only the King draws 150000 crowns yearly.

In one house there uses to be many of them for they are narrow, as the stuff
is. Almost all the women are employed in this work.

The Court did reside in this Province for a long time; and even to this day
all the Courts of justice and privileges thereof are conserved in the City of
Nankim, whose right name is Umthienfu; and it seems to me to be the best and
greatest City of the whole Kingdom, both for the form of the building, the
largeness of the streets, the manners and dealing of the people, and for the
plenty and excellency of all things.

It has admirable places of recreation, and is so populous through its
confines, that the villages succeed one another, in a manner, from three miles
to three miles; although at this day, by reason it wants the presence of the
King it is, in its self less populous; nevertheless in diverse parts thereof
it is yet troublesome to walk the streets for the crowde of people that one
meets. Besides, the many Palaces, Temples, Towers, and Bridges do render it
very considerable. In the wall thereof there are twelve gates, barred with
Iron, and guarded with Artillery: a good way without runs another wall with
no small ruins. The circuit thereof (for I was desirous to know the measure of
it) is two days journey on horseback: That of the inner wall is eighteen
miles; both the one and the other have within them many populations, gardens,
and fields which are tilled, the bread whereof uses to be applied to the use
of the soldiery within the City, to the number of forty thousand.

In one part thereof there is cast up an artificial Mount, on the top whereof
there is seen a wooden sphere, not armed, although the circles thereof are
placed at the latitude of the same City, which is 32 degrees; a small latitude
in respect of the great colds, but a very large one, for the great heat which
it suffers: The sphere is in circumference of a notable bigness, and is a
very complete piece of work.

It has moreover a Tower divided into seven stories of singular beauty for
the workmanship thereof, it being full of figures, and wrought like
Percellane: an edifice, which might be ranked among the most famous of ancient
Rome. The river comes to kiss the feet of this City, and sends up some
arms of it self into it. The name of the river is Yanchukiam, that is to say,
the Son of the sea; nor vainly is it so called, it being the most abundant
in water, of any that is known in the world. There is also great plenty of
fish.

We have four Churches in this Province, the first in Nankim, with a house of
Jesuits, and is of a very ancient, and exercised, Christianity: having
suffered four persecutions, and come of from each of them with more vigor.
The second, in the Town of Xamhai, with a great number of believers. The third
in the City of Xamkiam. The fourth in the Town of Kiatini: beside these
Churches there are many Oratories. And so much shall suffice concerning the
nine Southern Provinces,

CHAP. 3.
Of the Northern Provinces.
SIx are the Provinces, which are called Northern, and their names are Honam,
Xemsi, Kiansi, Xantum, Pekim, and Leaotum. The first lies in the latitude of
35 degrees, as center of the Kingdom, and produces most gallant fruits, as
well those that are proper to the Country, as ours in Europe; nor is the
cheapnesse of them less: I bought for a farthing and a half 88 Apricocks; it
has nothing else notable, except a Son of the Kings called Fovam, the last of
those which came out of the Palace. He lives with so great splendor and
authority of a King, that to be such, he only wants the name and
jurisdiction. In Caifum, the Metropolis thereof, we have had only for these
few years, a Church and house, but a good plenty of Christians.

The second is Xemsi; it lies in 36 degrees, and more, to the West: it is very
large, but dry for want of water, as also are the three neighboring Provinces:
notwithstanding it does abound in Wheat, Barley and Maize, of Rice they have
but little. All winter long they give wheat to their Beasts; which are many;
particularly their sheep, which they sheare three times a year; once in the
Spring, another time in the Summer, a third in the Autumn; but the first time
of shearing yields the best wool.

From hence comes all the wool, of which are made the felts and other things
used, either in this Province or elsewhere. They make there of no sort of
cloth, not using to spin wool, but only Goats-hair; of which they weave
certain Stuffes for the hanging of their rooms, in so great perfection that
the most ordinary are better than ours, and the Best are esteemed more precious
than silk. They make likewise of Goats-haire a very fine Felt, which they call
Tum, and is made use of for garments: But this is not made of every sort of
Goats-hair, but of a very fine hair which lies under the first. They pull it
out with great care, and make it up in certain bals of the bigness of an
ordinary loaf, and then put it out to be wrought with singular skill.

Musk is proper to this Province; and because it is in question, after what
manner this excellent perfume is made; I will give you account of it according
to the most diligent enquiry I have made concerning it. It is the Navel of an
Animal about the bigness of a small Stagge, whose flesh is very good meat;
and only that part is taken containing that precious matter: but all those
Cods, which are brought hither to us, are not true and perfect Navells; for the
Chinesses have learnt to falsify them, by stuffing some pieces of the skin of
that Animal with musk, that is vitiated, and mingled, with some other things,

Here is also Gold found, but not in Mines (for though there be Mines both of
Gold and Silver, the King does not suffer them to be opened) but out of Rivers
and Eddies: and although it be found only in small pieces and grains, yet being
put together, it amounts to a great quantity, there being Infinite people both
young and old, which go in search of it.

There is Rubarbe and Profumo, which are not found in any other part; for that
which comes from Persia does not seem to be natural, to that place; for, of
as many as have traveled through that country, there is not any that gives an
account to have seen there that healthful plant. It is something tall, with
leaves bigger than Cole-worts: it does not grow wild, as some have imagined,
but is Cultivated in gardens with a great deal of care.

In this Province is opened the third Gate, the which, as I said above, is a
seat of much Merchandise: for it has two Cities in the borders thereof,
Gaucheu and Sucheu toward the West, (as Machao is in the Province of Contone
toward the South) from whence come numerous Caravans of above a thousand in
company, of several Nations and Provinces, but for the most part Moors, Thus
far came Brother Benedict-Goes to seek for the Kingdom of Cathaya (which is no
other than China it self) whose voyage we will here breefly relate,

He departed in lent, the year 1603 for to find out the truth of what was
reported of the Kingdom of Cathaca, by order of the superiors of India, from
the Kingdom of Mogor and the royal City of Laor in the Habit of an Armenian
carrying Merchandise, as well to live, as to pass with the more facility. The
whole Caravan consisted of 500 Persons (for the most part Sarasens) and used to
go every year from this royal City to another in another Kingdom named Cascar.
After a months voyage he arrived at a City named Athu, of the same province
with Laor: thence in two months and a half, to Passaur: and after another month
and a half, sometimes traveling, and sometimes resting, he came to the City of
Ghideli, where he wanted little to have been slain by thieves. And finally
after 20 days more he came to the City of Cabu* the most noble Merchant-towne
of all the countries subjected to the Mogor, from hence after some stay, he
passed to Parvam, the last City of the Kingdom of Mogor; then traveling for 20
days over very high Mountains he came to Calcia, a country of faire-hayred
people; and in other 25 days to Chema, where he was forced to stay a month by
reason of Civil broils; and after many troubles and dangers of thieves and
Banditti, and having passed many countries of the Kings of Samarhan, they came
into the country of Tengo, and at length he entered into the Metropolitan City
of the Kingdom of Cascar, called Tanghesar, in the month of November, in the
same year.

At this City, which is, a noble seat of Merchandise for those Kingdoms, the
Caravan of Merchants which come from Cabull, ended their voyage, and a new
Caravan sets forth from thence to go to China. But our Brother remained here
(first) many months, expecting the time of their departure, and having in the
mean time made himself known to the King of the country, he obtained letters
of favor and recommendations, to all places whither he should go.

The time therefore being come, he departed with ten horses, for to carry
himself, his companion and his goods in company of the whole Caravan toward
Chathyaya, tha^ is China, in the month of November the year following; and
having traveled 25 days with a great deal of difficulty, over stones and
sand, he came to the City of Aesu, part of the Kingdom of Cascar: after having
passed a desert, called Caracathai, that is, Black-earth; and gone through many
Cities, at length he came to a City called Cialis in the same Kingdom of
Cascar. Here whilst he fitted himself for his journey, there arrived Merchants
which came from China, of whom Brother Benedict learned some tidings of the
City of Pekim, and of our Fathers, which had been there seen by these Sarasen
Merchants. So that he was satisfied, that Cathaya was nothing else but China;
and the royal City, named by the Sarasens Gambalu, was Pekim. From this City
of Cialis, Benedict departing with a few in company* came in twenty days to
Pucian, and afterward to Turphan, Ar^muth, and Camul the last City of the
Kingdom of Cialis. From Camul after nine days journey, they came to the wall
of China, at a placc called Chiacuon: and so had entrance into China, which he
sought under the name of Cathaya. Excepting therefore eleven days journey,
which was through a country peopled by Tartars, all the rest of his voyage was
through countries inhabited by Moors, or Mahumetans.

Now to return to our story: with these Caravans come Ambassadors, which the
Princes of the Moors send to the King of China, making every three years a
small Embassy, in respect both of the Persons and the presents; and every five
years a great one. The most part of the Caravan remain in the two abovenamed
Cities; (which are upon the Frontiers) trafficking there with their
Merchandise, The others go to comply with their charge, and to offer the
present in the name of five Kings, which are the Kings of Rume, Arabia, Camul,
Eamarcan, Tursan; The first four know nothing of this Embassy: the fifth,
although he know of it, does not make the present, nor send the Embassy; but
has only this advantage, that he names the Ambassadors. The present is made
by the Merchants among themselves, and these coming to the Viceroy of those
parts, the King has advice given him of their arrival by a paper, called a
memorial or petition: as soon as they have leave from the Court, and that
their names are enrolled, there depart 40. or 50. of them, besides many more
added to them; who, to have leave to enter into the kingdom to trade, and to
eat at the Kings expenses, give the captain a Bribe of about a hundred or
six-score crowns a man. There goes a long with them a Mandarine, who
entertaineth them of freecost, while they travel: But if they make any stay
(as they did in the Metropolis of the province, for more than three months
space) the Kings expense cease, but not the benefit of their traffic, for
all that while they follow their Merchandise.

The Merchandise which they bring, are Salt- Armoniak, fine Azure, fine linen,
carpets, called Raisins, knives, and other small things. The best and greatest
Commodity is a certain stone, called Yaca, which they bring from the Kingdom
of Yauken; the worst is of a whitish color, the finest is green, it has been
of great price formerly in China, and is still of good value. They make thereof
diverse sorts of Jewels for the ornament of the head, and it is much used in
the palaces: the girdle, which the King gives to the Colai is embrodered with
the finest sort thereof; which no other is allowed to use in this ornament. That
which they carry back in exchange of their commodities is Porcellane, Rubies,
Musk, raw-silk, silk-stuffes, diverse other rarities and medicinal drugges, as
Rubarb; And this I do imagine is the same which is transported from Persia to
these parts.

The Ambassadors being arrived, they offer their present, which consists of
a thousand Arrabas of this precious stone (whereof we have spoken) which makes
1333. Italian pounds, whereof 300. pounds are of the finest sort, 340. horses,
which are to be left upon the frontier, 300. small poynted Diamonds; twelve
Cattes of fine Azure, which is about 100. Italian pounds; 600. knives, and as
many files. The last present seeming to me improper to be presented to a King,
Ienquird what use the King made of them, but I could not meet any one was able
to inform: only a Captain told me, that it was a very ancient thing for that
present to be composed of such things, with so much infallibility they durst
not make any alteration. Of the rest of the commodities which they bring, if
the King desires any thing, he sends to see and buy it. At their return the
King rewards them with two pieces of cloth of gold for each horse; 30. pieces
of yellow silk, 30. pound of Cha, ten of Musk, 50. of a medicine called Tienyo,
and as many of Silver. These Saracens told me, that the present, which they
gave the King, was not in their country worth above 7000 Crowns, but what was
given them by the King for their Embassy and voyage, was noe less worth then
50000 Crowns: a pretty good gain, but ordinary from those Princes.

From this Province goes another Caravan for the powerful Kingdom of Tibet;
See a larger discourse of the ordering of this leaf, and of the many virtues
of the drink in the voyage and missions of Alexanderd Rhodes (printed at Paris
1653. 1 part. 13 cap. its called also Tay.
which carries diverse things; in particular, Silk-stuffs, Porsellane and Cha.
Cha is a leaf of a tree, about the bigness* of Myrtle; in other Provinces, of
the herb Basil; and in others, of the small Pomgranat. They dry it over the
fire in iron-sives, where it hardens and sticks together. There is of many
sorts of it, as well because the plant is various, as also that the upper
leaves do exceed the other in finenesse; a property almost of all plants. There
is of it, from a Crown a pound to four farthings according to the quality of
it, there being so many differences thereof. It being thus dried and cast into
warm water, it gives it a color, smell and taste, at the first unpleasing,
but custom makes it more acceptable; It Is much used in China and Giappone, for
it serves not only for ordinary drink in stead of water; but also for
entertainment to strangers when they visit them, as wine does in the Northern
parts; it being throughout all those kingdoms esteemed a wretched
niggardliness to give only good words to those that come to their house,
although they be strangers: at least they must have Cha; and if the visit be
any thing long, there must be added some fruit or sweet-meates: sometimes they
lay the cloth for this, and when not, they set it in two dishes upon a little
square table. Many virtues are related of this leaf: certain it is, that it is
very wholesome; and that, neither in China nor Giappone, there is any troubled
with the stone; nor is so much as the name of this disease known: from whence
may be inferred, how great a preservative against this evil the use of this
drink is: it is also certain, that it powerfully delivers from the oppression
of sleep, whosoever desires to watch, either for necessity or pleasure; for
by suppressing the fumes it eases the head without any inconvenience: and
finally it is a known and admirable help for students. For the rest I have not
so great an assurance of it that I dare affirm it.

There is found also in this Province a most evident sign of the ancient
Christianity, which has been there, as we shall relate in its order.

In the great Metropolis thereof we have a Church and a house, with a well
founded and fruitful Christianity; by whom also many particular Oratories are
frequented.

Riansi is the third of these six Northern Provinces, which we are now
discoursing of: It lies in the Latitude of thirty eight degrees; it has many
mountains, which makes their Harvest but poor: there is little wheat, less
Rice, but most Maiz: it is so abundant in grapes, that it serves the whole
Kingdom with Raisins, and might furnish, at least it self, with wine; as it
succeeds in a Residence, which we have there, where we make now only enough for
to serve the Masses, but send also sufficient to the next Residencies. It has
wells of fire for the use of their houses as we have of water in Europe, they
seem to be Mines of sulphur set on fire; so that opening a little the mouth of
the well, which must not be very large, it sends forth so great a head, that
they roast and boil therewith whatsoever meat they desire. Their ordinary
fuel, as likewise in all the confines thereof, Stone-coale, not small ones,
such as are found in some of our Countries of Europe; but of a very
considerable bigness: There are Mines very fruitful of this matter, which
burns with a great deal of ease. In some parts, as Pekim and Honam they lay
it together in such manner, that the fire lasts day and night; They make use
of Bellows to kindle it.

We have a house and a Church in the City of Kiamcheu, another in that of
Phucheu; which are visited at their set times; both the one and the other have
a good and numerous Christianity, and among them, many of the Nobility. There
are not wanting Oratories, (as in other Cities,) by which the scarsity of
Churches is supplied.

The fourth Province which is Xantun, in the Latitude of 23. degrees, lying
betwixt Nankim and Pekim, is very poor; it suffers many times a loathsome
and malignant Infestation by Grillo's or field-Crickets, and by consequence,
the terrible horror of famine.

In the year 1616 a dog bought to be eaten, was worth more than a young man
sold for a slave; it produces store of Cattle, and of our fruits; great
pears, many and good. There grows here in great number and variety a fruit,
which seemed to some of us to be a pear of a good kind, in so great
abundance, that filling the Kingdom, they overflow even to Macao although it
be a great way off; and that there are three large Provinces betwixt.

Pekim is the fifth Province, situated in the Latitude of forty degrees; it
enjoys the privilege of having the Court in a City of the same name. Though
the proper name of it be Xunthienfu: by the Sarances called, Lambalud. This
good fortune befell it, (for so I may call it) at the death of Humvu, when a
nephew of his, named Vunlo, who dwelt in this Province, and was very potent,
usurped by violence the crown against the right heir: And so confiding more
in them, with whom he had always lived, as also to be the better able to make
resistance against the Tartars which border upon him, he removed the Court from
Nankim and planted it here. The people are less ingenious, as commonly all
Northern people are, but more apt for labor and war.

The soil is very dry, and favorable for health, but barren of fruits for
the common sustenance: But this want is supplied by that general prerogative
of Courts which draw all to them, and overcome in this the proper nature of the
place. It has Maiz, Wheat, and little Rice, only for the use of the people of
the Palace, which is very numerous, the Mandarines and Soldiers being many
thousands. The King keeps in those rivers a thousand vessels, flat-bottom'd
by reason of the shallowness of the water, which only serve for the bringing
of victuals to Court; which they lade in the South: And in Nankim there is
sown a certain Rice for the King in particular, of such a quality, that being
sodde in water, without any other addition it makes a very savoury dish.

The City is not so big as Nankim, but in that press of people much exceeds
it; in a word, it is like the Court of so powerful a Prince. The walls are
broad enough for twelve horses to go a breast; They are guarded night and day,
as well in time of peace, as if there were war. At every gate they keep a
continual watch, which is the profit of the Eunuchs, which the Queen allows
them for their wages; and they make good store of crowns of this exercise: For
all those which enter, and bring any thing with them, pay toll; and those of
Cantone are used with most rigor, just like Spaniards in a french Inn: I know
not the reason of this, but only a certain indignation, which they have
against them.

The Magistrates of this Court are quite contrary to those of other crowns and
Commonwealths of the world, and are therefore a pattern of that uprightness,
which ought to be found in all: I mean, concerning the pomp and equipage of
their persons, which is very moderate. They are not allowed to be carried in a
Sedan, or Chair, unless it be some few of more particular dignity: The
greatest part ride on horseback, and because they are ill horsemen, their
horses are guided by two servants, that go by them, one on each side the horse,
least their master should fall.

Each Judge of a Village, without the precincts of the Court, use more state,
than the most eminent Ministers in the Court: They walk in the streets with
their faces covered, as well by reason of the dust, which is very much, as also
for convenience, and to avoid both expense and ceremony with the Mandarinesse;
for not being known, they dissemble, as if they saw them not, and make no
stay; to verify that Axiom, that where one is least known, there is more
pleasure and convenience to be enjoyed.

The cold, which this Country suffers, is much greater than could be
expected from the Latitude of 40. degrees. The rivers and lakes are so hard
frozen over, that they drive Carts over them without any danger; they make use
of stoves, that are more convenient than ours, and wast not so much fuel,
conveighing the heat by pipes laid under ground; and so within doors enjoy a
pleasant spring in the heart of winter. The same heat supplieth also the
absence of the sun, and by means thereof the trees are clothed with leaves and
flowers before their time.

In the Court we have a fair Church, built after the fashion of Europe, and a
house wherein reside 4 fathers by license from the King, and are in much
esteem with all the Magistrates.

Besides the Churches in all the places we have already spoken of, (the greater
part whereof are large Cities,) there are also many other habitations of
Christians, which have their Oratories, which are visited by us at set times,
Catechizing and Baptizing the new Christians, conferring and administering the
Holy Sacraments to the others.

The sixth and last Province is Leaotum the Northern bound of that Kingdom; it
is famous for a root which it produces of so high esteem, that at my
departure from thence it was sold for twice the weight in silver. It is so
excellent a medicine, that if those which are in health do take it, it
augments their strength and vigor, and if it be given to a sick person it does
marvellously comfort and warm him: it is called Ginsem. This Province being
the frontire next Tartarium, is much wasted, and is in part possessed by the
Tartors: here is seen that famous wall so much talked off, which runs nine
hundred miles in length, with more reputation than effect: for besides that its
own greatness and extant is enough to make it ruinous, the enemy has now
reduced it to a miserable condition.

CHAP. 4.
Of the persons of the Chinesses: of their nature, wit and inclination.
THe people of China are, white, like us in Europe; although in the Province of
Cantone, lying something within the Tropic they are of something a browner
color, and particularly in the Islands that lie near the maine land. And
because those which come hither are only such as are borderers upon Macao (the
Center of those Islands) some have been persuaded that there were not in all
that Kingdom any people very white: but it is certain, that excepting the
confines of Cantone, where they are something brown, the rest are all white;
not unlike to the whiteness of the people of Europe; and by how much the more
Northward one goes, by so much the more (as is usually seen) is the whiteness
the greater.

They suffer the hair of their heads to grow as long as it will, both men and
women. They are generally all black-haired; hence comes that name, by which
this Kingdom is called among other Nations the Kingdom of the black-hair'd
people: they have also black eyes, which are very little, little noses, and
neither large, nor high ones, as among us; which form they like not,
accounting it a deformity. They have but little beard for the most part, nor
do they care to have much, although some of them have so. They delight to have
it black, which is the most ordinary color; although some few have red beards;
which although it be not abhorred by all as among the Thebanes, yet it is not
esteemed or liked among them by any. They clippe not their beard, letting it
grow according to nature. They will be more troubled to loose one hair of
their head, then all the hair of their face: They do also, in neatness and
curiousness about their hair, exceed all other Nations. They have for this
purpose many Barbers, of whom it may properly be said, that they usurp that
name; it being derived from the beard, which they never touch; employing all
their diligence and art in kembing and cleansing the head.

The young children are better proportioned, and have a more pleasing Simmetry
of beauty than the rest: and this more particularly in the Southern Provinces.
But some places have the advantage in this above others; as in the Province of
Nankim, the City of Nancheu, where the women are esteemed to have the
pre-eminence of all others in beauty; as formerly in Portugal, those of the
Town of Guimaranes, from hence the rich men and the Magistrates provide
themselves with Concubines: and so this gift of nature comes to be of greater
esteem for their sakes, who are the great men of the world. As their age
begins to decline, from 25 to 30 years old, they loose not only much of the
liveliness of their color, but also of the Simmetry and proportion of their
shape: so that ordinarily they become ill-favored. The disposition of their
body is good; their strength vigorous; and they are great pains-takers: hence
it comes, that their land, which is very good, is by art brought to be much
more fruitful; and if there be any which is not good, although it be never so
little (there being not a foot of ground, which is unemployed) by force of
industry they bring it at length to be fruitful.

As I passed by Honum, I saw one ploughing with a plough of 3 Irons, or
plough-sheares, so that at one bout he made 3 furrows: and because the ground
was good for that seed, which we call here Feazols or Kidnybeanes; this seed
was put as it were, in a bushel, or square dish fastened upon the upper part of
the plough, in such manner, that with the motion thereof the Beans were gently
scattered upon the earth as corn falls upon the Millstone, at the mooving of
the Mil^hopper; so at the same time the land is plowed and sown with hopes of a
future crop. Wheat, Barley and Maiz they sow as we do; and it is very ordinary
for one that drives a beast laden, to carry a load himself, that none might
want employment.

They are watchful to make their advantage of every thing, not suffering any
thing to be lost, how unprofitable soever it seems: you may meet often upon a
river many vessels of considerable burden; laden only with weeks for lamps,
made of the pith of rushes, taken out with a great facility and dexterity;
others, which carry nothing else but paper (give me leave to relate it, because
it is a notable argument of the Providence and application, which they make in
the use of all things) for cleanliness in their houses of office. This is sold
in the streets as well as in shops, and may in no manner have any thing written
upon it; for if it have any letters upon it, it is among them accounted
sacrilege to employ it to that use. But as the number of the people is so
great, there are not wanting also among them idle persons and vagabonds, a
common and irremediable plague,

They are naturally inclined to be Merchants, and it is incredible, the
Traffic which they make, not only from one Province to another, with very
great profit (so that they which transport Porsellane within their own Kingdom,
although they sell it but from one Province to another, gain thirty per Cent.
twice a year) but even in the same City: For almost whatsoever is found in the
shopps, is sold in the streets in a lesser quantity; employing in this trade
even to little children, as far as they are able, as selling fruit, herbs,
wash-bals, and such like things.

The rich Merchants are of good credit, and very punctual, (as the
Portughesses have had experience for many years together;) but their way of
bargaining is fuller of craft, and subtilty, than is to be found any where else
in the world: for whereas strangers are not allowed to enter into the Kingdom,
they are all necessitated to treat with the Chinesses in this manner. First
they agree about the quality of the commodity, which each desires whether it
be gold, Silk, or Porcellane, or any thing else; when they are agreed of the
price, presently the Portughese consigneth to him a sum of money, as of 15. or
20. thousand, (or more) Crowns. Then the Chinesse goes with this money to
such parts of the Kingdom where the commodity may be had, which the other
desires, and returns with it to Cantone, where the Portughese stays
expecting him. This manner of merchandising was practiced for many years
without any fraud; but a little while since there has not been wanting some
who have used deceit therein. And at this day the credit thereof is diminished;
as I believe, through the fault of both Nations.

Nevertheless, the nature of the people and inclination of the whole nation,
as well in those who sell, as those who buy, is much inclined to guile and
deceit, which they put in execution with admirable subtletie. They will take
the flesh from off the breast of a partridge, and fill up the hollow place with
some other thing, and stitch up the cut, whence it was taken out, and all with
so much mastery and skill, that if the buyer be not an Argus, (and if he were,
he shall find no remedy) in stead of a partridge, he shall buy nothing but
feathers and bones. Amongst true Gammons of Bacon they will foist in others
made of wood, but so like, that they will easily deceive the sight for good
ones. It is an ordinary thing to fat up an old horse, and sell him for a young
one; and what is more, to paint him over with beautiful spots, so well done,
as if they were natural, choosing for the time of sale, the doubtful light of
the day toward the dusk of the evening, that the deceit may be the hardlier
discovered: This cheat was put upon one in Macao, who notwithstanding was an
experienced buyer, and of good judgment.

The bewitching art of extracting the elements and principles from barren
stones and hardest mineralls, which is spread through all parts of the
universe, has gain^d many practitioners in China; They are passionatly
addicted to the art of Alchimy, with this opinion, that he that has the art of
making silver, is in the way to find the receipt of prolonging life, unto
extreme old age. And how long will men give themselves over to this fond
persuasion, deceived with a vain hope of obtaining these two things, so much
desired, so uncertain? Many take great pains in this art, although they lose
much and gain little; contrary to that which succeeds in all other trades,
which is, to gain much out of a little. Finally, either these men deceive
themselves, or find themselves deceived by the professors of this science, who
are often uncertain and varying in their Maxims, which ought to be real and
constant; so that the event is always dangerous and uncertain. Many there
are, which are followers of it, hoping to make gain by their deceit, because
they dare not rely upon the certainty of their art.

There was one of these, which in Pekim offered himself to a Magistrate,
promising him great matters from his art. Covetous persons are ord^narily
credulous. He furnished him with materials to make his operation, amongst which
the other secretly conveyed a piece of silver, which he privily carried about
him to that intent, the ignorant Magistrate was well pleased with the product
of it, he seeming to him a true son of art. Then the workman faining to have
great occasion to go to another place, desired leave of him for some days,
which the Magistrate with much ado consented to, because his covetous desire,
being inflamed by that experiment, could not brook a long absence; But the
Alcyhmyst, (that used to fish in the silver seas of Hydropicall covetousness
with those deceitful nets, with which he long entertained their hopes, but
brought them in no profit) was absent three whole years: at the end of which
being returned to Pekim, he makes, as if he knew not the house of this his
friend, though he often passed by the door; but being discovered by the
Magistrate, he calls him in; who still persisteth in his dissimulation of not
knowing him. The Magistrate questions him concerning the art, whereof he had
made him an experiment: The other confessed, that he knew the art, but did not
remember to have practiced it in that place; alleging for his excuse, that as
he had done it in many places, so he could not remember them all. But without
much entreaty, promised to do it again, to that intent the Magistrate gives
him 500. crowns to furnish him with a sufficient store of materials: Then the
Alchymyst, without asking leave as before, conveyeth himself away, and never
appears more. But for all these experiences there are still enough, which do
hunt after this art.

But returning to our Chinesses; they are Affable, courteous, and of good
conversation: and therefore in this particular our men are not to be believed,
which dwell only in Macao and Cantone, because they are there, as it were, in a
continual war, by reason of the daily contracts and contentions, which are
betwixt the servants of the Portugesses and Chinesses; besides buying and
selling produces frequent disgusts; and if those of Macao do bear with them,
because they cannot help it, it is always with hope to be paid with interest
from those of Cantone, when they come thither by occasion of the faires: and so
there cannot be a friendly and just traffic betwixt them, but they do treat
one another almost like enemies.

But in the other Provinces and innermost parts of the Kingdom, as we have
said, they converse with us with so much respect and decorum, that in all
meetings with them they give us the first place, upon no other pretense, but
that we are strangers, and as they call us Guests of a remote Climate. In cases
of necessity, (which we have many times proved) they will not fail to lend us
what we ask, although it be more worth than the pawnes we give them; and that
without interest.

I am sure there cannot be a worser sort of people, than is found in their
prisons, for thither the dregs of the whole Commonwealth are drained,
nevertheless, we have found courtesy at the hands of those wretches, who in
such places use to be very inhumane. Upon occasion of the persecution which we
suffered in the year 1616. our fathers found in those prisons much respect and
correspondence, and when the Officers of the prison for fear of the Tyrant,
did bind them and use them harshly: it was always with a great resentment of
the prisoners; who not enduring to see them straightened with manacles upon
their wrists, did make them wider for them by burning them (their manacles
being made of wood) with hot irons.

After a long time, these fathers being to be released from one of these
prisons, the prisoners consulted among themselves how to show them some
courtesy: and collecting what they were able, they entertained them with a
banquet, which was more acceptable to the fathers, to see so much Humanity and
kindness toward strangers among Pagans, which were kept in that place, for
the chastisement of their crimes and ill manners, than for the good treatment
they received. Thus much will sufficiently demonstrate the natural courtesy
and civility of this Nation.

Among them, all acts of cruelty are much abhorred; wherefore among their
punishments there is not used that ordinary inhumanitie and severity, which is
among us, as Quartering; Tearing with pincers; dragging with horses; and
racking. He that deserves death, is either beheaded, or strangled.

In the year 1614. in the City of Nankim, an ordinary fellow with more than
ordinary insolence did aspire to the Empire. He had already listed much people,
and distributed offices among them, giving order, to cut off the heads of all
the Mandarines in one day appointed for their Rendezvous. When the conspiracy
was discovered by a malcontent, that was ^il satisfied with his allotment,
there was, upon this occasion, imprisoned almost an infinite company of people,
which were discovered by the Tyrants own book, wherein he kept a list of the
conspiratours: the king having notice of it, gave speedy order, that no more
should be imprisoned: by a second order he commands, that only thirty of the
most guilty should remain in prison for the space of 30. days with their
heads in the stocks, and that at the end of 30. days, whosoever of them
remained alive should not be put to death. (There escaped only two of them;)
which is strange, that for so enormous a wickedness, there was appointed no
greater punishment.

When many are condemned to die, they are kept in prison till the visitour of
the Province calls them before him; and perusing the list of them he
appoints 5, 6. or 7. of them to be executed: if he exceeds this number,
they give him the name of Cruel: The rest are sent back to prison.

They are inclined to virtue; I do not say they are exempt from vices, proper
to all Pagans, and indeed to all Mortals; But that they esteem those, which
make profession of virtue; and particularly of some virtues, which are despised
by other Gentiles; as, Humility, Virginity, Chastity; and this last is in such
esteem, that if a maiden, or young widow, lead a single life with that
Caution and other virtues requisite to it, they are wont to erect Trium-phall
Arches to them, and celebrate their memory with public and magnificent
praises and panegyricks.

Their manner of entertainment and complements are so Ceremonious, that there
seems to be no end of them; and are more proper for divine worship, than
humane conversation. This is to be understood of their visites, and their
meetings and incounters, where respect is to be shown: for amongst kindred and
friends they treat one another more familiarly. They are so composed in their
grab, and wary in their words, that nothing can cause an open difference
betwixt persons of quality one against the other, although both of them may
bear a secret spleen and grudging. Hence it is, that capital enemies may be
seen together at Banquets, or other public meetings without the least show of
enmity, dissembling it dexterously and courageously under the punctilioes of
civility and honor.

They magnify very freely and readily whatsoever is virtuous in the Actions of
their neighbors, courageously beating down that emulation, which in almost all
other nations suffers none to be pleased with any but themselves. When they
see any thing which comes from Europe, although there be in it little art or
ingenuity, it is by them commended with singular applause; and many times with
this expression, O, say they, These people are not like to us, dull and
un-ingenious. And sometimes of manufactures made in their own Kingdom, with
which by reason of the vastness thereof, they are unacquainted, they will say,
that they were not made there, but brought from Europe. A modesty indeed worthy
to be envyed; and so much the more because it is seen in a people that exceed
many others in their abilities, to the shame of those Nations, which have no
eyes to see, but such as are infected with the disparagement of what they
behold.

They are not less ingenious Mechanics, than the Manufactures, which come
from thence, show them to be, although all which come, are not made by the best
Masters.

They are very excellent in works of Ivory, Ebony and Amber, especially in
Eare-Jewels, pendants, and gallantries of Gold and Silver, for the ornament of
women. They make chains to admiration. There was one brought from thence to
Goa, which consisting of 300 links, weighed not 3 ounces of gold, and the work
was so fine and small, that the links were hardly to be discerned. They have
altogether relinquisht to Europe to be served in plate, there being scarce
found among them a vessel of Silver of a considerable bigness, no not in the
Emperors palace; being content to eat in Porcellane, which is the only vessel
in the world for neat and delightful cleanliness. There Gold-thread is of
less weight and worth than ours; they have a way of twisting of it about
paper, which makes it seem, as if it were right and massy and is an admirable
Artifice.

The workmanship of Europe, which they most admired, were our clocks; but now
they make of them such as are set upon tables, very good ones, and will be able
to do the like in small ones, if the price of them there did equal ours.
Although they make some things, whose price would be excessive if we should
cause them to be made here, Notwithstanding in the general we do much exceed
them in manufactures and mechanic Arts, except it be in that same Charam,
which is indeed a singular Artifice.

It cannot be denied, but that they are a people of an admirable Acuteness; so
that that may be worthily appropriated to them, that Aristotle so freely
bestows upon all the people of Asia; saying, that Asia exceeded Europe in
ingenuity; but was exceeded by Europe in valor; this being a thing so
approved to us by experience.

There are many, which even to this day do call the Chinesses, Barbarians as if
they spoke of the Negroes of Guynea, or the Tapuyi of Brasile. I have blushed to
hear some style them so, having been taught the contrary by many years travels
among them. Although the fame and manufactures of China are sufficient to teach
it us; it being now many years that we have heard the one; and seen the other.
It Is a great shame truly: but although in this relation there are many things,
which might satisfy us concerning the subtelty of their wit, yet I will give
you one example in this following case.

A certain Chaquen, (that is, a visitour of a Province, one of the most
important Employments of the Kingdom) receiving of his visits, after a few
days were over, shut up his gates, and refused to admit any further their
business or visits; pretending for his excuse, that he was sick; This accident
being divulged; a certain Mandarine, a friend of his, began to be much troubled
at it; and with much ado obtained leave to speak with him. When he was
admitted, he gave him notice of the discontent, that was in the City, by reason
that businesses were not dispatched: the other put him off with the same excuse
of his sickness: I see no signs of it, replied his friend; but if your
Lordship will be pleased to tell me the true cause, I will serve you in it, to
my utmost power, conformable to that affection I bear you in my heart: know
then, replied the Visitour, They have stolen the Kings seal out of the
Cabinet where it used to be kept, leaving it locked, as if it had not been
touched; so that if I would give audience, I have not where withal to seal
dispatches. If I should discover my negligence in the loss of the seal I
shall loose, you know, both my Government and my life; so that I know not what
to do, unless it be to stand in suspense, as I do, the which is but little
avail to me, being more sensible than the people themselves, of this delay of
justice. Well perceived the Mandarine how terrible the occasion of his
retirement was; but presently making use of the quickness of his wit, asked him
if he had never an enemy in that City: he answered him, yes; and that it was
the chief Officer of that City, that is the Chifu or governor, which of a long
time had borne a concealed malice against him. Away then, quoth the Mandarine,
in great have, let your Lordship command that all your goods be removed to the
innermost part of the palace, and let them set fire on the empty part, and call
out for help to quench the fire: to which the governor must of necessity
repair with the first, it being one of the principal duties of his office. As
soon as you see him among the people, call out to him aloud, and consigne to
him the Cabinet, thus shut as it is; that it may be secured in his possession
from the danger of the fire: for if it be he which has caused the seal to be
stolen, he will put it in his place again, when he restores you the cabinet;
if it be not he, your Lordship shall lay the fault upon him for having so ill
kept it; and your Lordship shall not only be freed from this danger, but also
revenged of your enemy. The visitour followed his council, and it succeeded so
well, that the next morning, after the night this fire was, the governor
brought him the seal in the cabinet; both of them concealing each others
fault, equally complying for the conservation of both. Now if after this
example the Chinesses must pass for Barbarians as those would have it, who
have forced me to relate this story, it must be upon the same account, on which
others have said as much of Moses.

CHAP. 5.
Of the manner of their habit.
THe materials, of which they make several sorts of stuffs and clothes for the
service of their persons, as clothing, Beds, and other furniture of their
houses, are wool, convase, (for they have no other sort of linen as I have
formerly hinted) silk and cotton: of all which they have great abundance. Two
hundred years before Christ they used garments with short sleeves, such as the
Giapponeses use at this day; who are descended of them, and still conserve this
ancient habit. This manner of garment continued here, until the reign of Hoan:
in the time of this King, who is much renowned amongst them, (about 400 years
after Christ,) that habit was altered, as well in the people, as the Officers,
to that fashion which is worn at this day: and is the very same throughout the
whole Kingdom, although it consist of so many and so large Provinces: nor can
it be altered (no more than any other notable custom among them) without the
Kings particular Order. For these people, which we call Barbarians, have very
well understood, that the changing of fashions and customs in a Nation for
those of strange Countries, is as it were, a presage that that Country will at
length be brought into subjection to that other, of whose fashions and manners
they are so enamoured: and we might for proof hereof, (if there were occasion)
name some particular Countries among us.

These fashioned garments have been conserved for so many years; and reach
from the neck to the feet, being all open before; These are for their under
garments, and are made for to sit closer to their bodies. Their upper garments
are large and wider in compass. And because they use no buttons, they lap them
before, one side over another, as our Clergy men do their Cassocks. Their
sleeves are very wide, and the whole garment without any trimming. A piece of
white Taffat^e of the length of ones hand serves them for a band; when it is
foul, they take it off, and put on another. This is only to be understood of
the Literati, or learned men, and the people of quality; for the common sort of
people are not suffered to wear it.

The young men wear indifferently all sorts of colors; but the Ancient men do
wear always the most modest. The common people for the most part are clothed
in black; as all sorts of servants, who are bound not to alter that color.

Those who are Governors, or have Governed, upon occasion of Feasts, do wear
garments of the finest red. The rich men change their garments at all the 4
seasons of the year; and the inferior sort, (although poor) twice a year, at
winter and summer: and upon this occasion many pawn that garment, which they
wear in one season to furnish themselves with a garment for the next.

Because their hair is their chief gallantrie, we will speak here a word or
two concerning it. Their youth, till seventeen years of age, leave the shortest
part of their hair hanging loose, the other they comb back to the top of
their head; where they tie it up in a knot. After that, age they wear a net of
horse-haire, which is like unto our Cawles, under which they gather up all
their hair, not suffering one hair to hang out: on the top of this they all
wear caps; the Literati square caps, the rest of the people, round: they are
all made of silk, or else of hors-haire, which by reason of the workmanship
come often to be more costly than the other. They are always to be black,
unless it be in the win^er, when they wear them of felt, and are always gray,
or else of the natural color of the wool. At the first time any one puts
on this Cawle, it is done with a particular solemnity, as we were wont
anciently, at the first putting on of the cloak or sword. For shoes, they know
no other materials, but silk of all sorts and colors, for the rich; and for
the poor, cotton: they are differing from ours in shape, and in the cost,
which is bestowed upon them, having many little works wrought on them with the
needle. Skins are used only for boots, which are rarely seen there. The richer
and better sort of the people wear hose of Damask or Satin, or any sort of
white silk; the rest of white Cotton. They wear breeches generally, both men
and women. This is the habit of this ample Kingdom, being as large almost as
all Europe, which hardly keeps constant to its own fashions, in any of its
smallest Provinces.

The women are decently habited with the same coa^es, (if I may so call them)
which the men use; wearing them close about their necks. Even the ordinary sort
of women are very curious in dressing their heads, adorning their hair with
flowers, as well natural as artificial; having in this art a competition with
nature; and with the variety of colors, the form and figure of them they do
as happily deceive the eyes of the beholders, as the grapes of Zeuxes, did the
sparrowes; or to express it better, as the curtain of Parrhasius deceived
Zeuxes.

The women of the better quality use gold and silver, the Courtesans, or
public women are not suffered to wear them; and it is a distinction to know
them by, what they are, that they are not allowed to wear any ornament on
their heads (contrary to the custom of other Countries) nor to have their
houses within the walls. The rest of their under-garments are the same both in
men, and women, only their shoes are so little, that one might reasonably
doubt, whether so small feet could belong to a humane body grown to a full
stature: The reason of this is, that from their very infancy they swathe their
childrens feet, so streightning them to hinder their growth; and not (as we say
in Europe) because they are not suffered to go: and although it be the common
opinion, that it is a great part of beauty to have little feet, yet the more
understanding Chinesses do hold this effeminacy to be a very great folly. It
took its original from one of their Queens, who having ill-shapen feet, to
mend that natural def^^t, did swathe them, to bring them to a better form: so
that, what was necessity in her (if it may be called a necessity, to mend
such feet, as might have served well enough without it) it came to be a
gallantrie in all women by imitation of her: so much ought Princes to avoid the
making of themselves Authors of ridiculous novelties.

The retirement of the women is very great. There is not a woman to be seen in
the streets, although in years; or never so blameless in her life; neither
are men suffered to visit them at their houses. That part of the house where
they inhabit is, as it were, a sacred place, for their sakes. It is enough to
tell any one who enters unwillingly, That there are women there, to make him
stop presently.

The menservants may enter thither only while they are little boys. Into the
very chamber where they are, not so much as their kindred, are allowed to come,
unless they be the younger brethren of the husband, of very small age; no not
the husbands father; with so much punctualitie, that if upon some particular
occasion he would chastise his son, (for although they are married, their
fathers do chastise them, if they see cause) he retireth presently to his wives
apartment, which is an inviolable Sanctuary; the father being not to enter
thither. If the women go out to visit their parents, they are carried in
Sedans close shut; and this is the custom of all their women, even to those of
the most ordinary quality. If they go on pilgrimage to any of their Idols,
and that it be necessary, that they go part of the way on foot, they cover
their faces with a veil. If they go by water in the Barks with their Parents
and kindred (as I saw once above 200. upon occasion of a Pilgrimage) they pass
one before another without speaking a word; believing that the least overture
that women give to the conversation of men is a large gate opened to the danger
of their honor. This, which may be counted a harsh Strictness, is turned into
a pleasant Sweetness by custom, (which makes all things easy) as well for
their repose, as for the peace and concord of the family.

Notwithstanding in so large a Country as China, this custom cannot equally be
observed every where; so that in some parts, as I have above mentioned, the
ordinary women go abroad as among us; but the women of quality always observe
that style of retiredness.

CHAP. 6.
Of their Language and Letters.
THe language which is used in China is of so great Antiquity, that many
believe it to be one of the 72. which were at the Tower of Babel. At least it
is manifest by their books, that it is more than 3700. years in use among them.
Is is various and different, because there are diverse Kingdoms, whereof this
Empire is composed at this day; and anciently they did not belong unto this
Crown, but were possessed by Barbarous Nations, as all the Southern Provinces
and some of the Northern: But at this day the Language of China is but one
only, which they call Quonhoa, or the language of the Mandarines; for they at
the same time, and with the same care and industry, that they introduced their
government into other Kingdoms, brought in likewise their language: and so at
this day it runs through the whole Country, as Latin does through all
Europe; but more universally each Province still retaining their natural
speech. It is a Language much limited; and as in the multitude of letters it
exceeds all others, so in scarceness of the nounes which it uses, it is the
least copious of any: for it has not in all above 326. and of words (which in
reality are the same, but only differing in accent and aspiration) 1228. Almost
all end in vowels, and those few, which do not terminate in vowels, end either
in M. or N. They are all Monosyllables, all undeclined, as well verbes as
nounes, and so accommodated to their use, that many times the verb serves for
a noun, and a noun for a verb, and an adverb too, if need be. For which reason
it is more easy to be learned than the Latin; the Grammar only whereof takes
up a child's whole time. The brevity of it makes it full of aequivocal words,
and for the same reason compendious. This which would be troublesome to some,
is very pleasing to the Chinesses; who are most particular lovers of brevity in
speech; being either imitatours, or imitated by the Lacedaemonians. It is rather
sweet than harsh, and if it be spoken perfectly, (as it is for the most part,
in Nankim) is very delightful to the ear.

To say a thing with respect, with humility, and in applause of another
merits, they use many excellent terms and phrases, (which are the proprieties
also of our Portugesses language.) And although it be a very narrow language,
it is so sweet, that it exceeds almost all others that I know. To say among
us: Take a thing, either with the whole hand, or with some particular fingers
thereof, we are forced still to repeat the verb take; but among them it is not
so; each word signifies the verb; and the manner too. As for example Nien to
take with two fingers; Tzo to take with all the fingers; Chua with the whole
hand turned downwards; Toie with the hand having the fingers turned upwards; so
likewise with the verb [is] as; he is in the house, he is eating, or is
sleeping: they have a word, wherewith at once they express both that he is,
and, how he is. We, to say, the foot of a man, the foot of a bird or the foot
of any beast, are forced always to specify with the same word foot but the
Chinesses do it with one word: as Kio the foot of a man, Chua the foot of a
bird; Thy the foot of any beast.

Their style in their writing is very different; from their discourse, although
the words are the same: so that when one takes the pen in hand for to write,
he had need to raise up his wits; and it would be counted a ridiculous thing,
to write as they speak ordinarily. This is the reason, that all their pointed
or accented reading, orating, disputing, and persuading, as wel^ in public as
in private, is always first practiced and exercised with the pen.

The letters which they use, seem to be as Ancient as the people themselves,
for according to their histories it is since the Invension of them 3700. years
to this present year 1640, in which I wrote this relation. I will be bold to say
that this is one of the most admirable things in that Kingdom: for the number
of their letters being excessive, almost all have some skill in them, at least
as much as is sufficient for the exercise of their trades; and though they are
proper only to China, yet they are used in all the neighboring Kingdoms,
every one reading them in their own language; as among us it is in the figures
of numbers and of the stars; which are the same over all Europe; and yet
every nation calls them by different names. They are very proper for
Embassies, Bills, and Books. These, although each Province have a different
language, are common and understood of all, as if they had been written in
their own language.

The Author of these is said to be Fohi, one of their first Kings. At the
beginning they were fewer, and more simple, resembling, in some respect, the
thing that was expressed by them; for that which is pronounced Ge, and
signifies the Sun, was written with a circle, and a Diametrall line through
it. Afterward the form was something varied, changing the circle almost into a
square, having the same line through it, and does still signify the Sun. This
variety in making of their letters has caused four kinds of them. First the
Ancient, which remains still in their Libraries, and is understood of all the
Litterati, although it be no longer in use, except in some titles and seals,
which they put in stead of Arms. The second is called Chincu, and is the most
current, as well in manuscript, as printed books. The third they call Taipie,
and answers to the running hand used among our public Notaries, not much in
use, unless it be in bills, contracts, pleadings, policies, and such like
things. The fourth is so different from the rest, as well for the
Abbreviations, (which are many,) as also for the different strokes and shape
of the letters, that it requires a particular study to understand them. This
word Sie, which signifies to give thanks, is written after three most
different manners.

Their letters are in all sixty thousand, enrolled in their vocabulary, which
they call, Haipien, and may be rendered a great sea. They have others more
brief; For to read, write, compose, and understand very well, about eight or
ten thousand letters will serve the turn: and when they meet with any letters,
which they call a cold letter, they have recourse to their vocabulary, as we
do, when we meet with a Latin word that we do not understand. From hence it is
evident, that he is most learned amongst them, that knows most letters; as
amongst us he is the best Latinist, that is most verst in his
Calipines-Dixionary. To form all these multitude of letters, they use only nine
strokes, or touches of the pen: but because these only would not be sufficient
for so great a fabrique, they do join figures, or perfect and significant
letters, one into another; by which means they make other new and different
ones, and of a different signification. So this line -- signifies one: crossed
with another line ^ ten, and having another stroke at the bottom ^ signifying
the earth, and with another stroke at the top of it ^ it stands for King;
adding a stroke on the left side of it between the two first strokes ^ it is
taken for a precious stone, and by adding certain other lines, it is meant for
a pearl: And this last figure is every letter to have, that must signify a
precious stone, or any other stone, that is of price and esteem, although not
counted precious. So every letter which signifies any tree must have joined
with it the letter, which signifies wood: and the letter that signifies
metal, must be annexed to the figure which it is put to signify, as Iron,
Copper, Steel; yet this is no infallible rule.

They have also, in the composition of their Letters, had respect to their
significations: and so that square figure, which we spoke of before, to
signify the Sun, joined with another very little different, standing for the
Moon, is called Min, and signifies Brightness. Another which has the
likeness of a Portall, called Muen, signifies a gate: there is another which
signifies a heart, to which it has some resemblance. Now if this letter be
placed between the two perpendicular lines, which form the letter that stands
for a Portall, it signifies Sadness and Affliction, that is, a heart
streightened and pressed in a narrow door: and every word of Sadness must have a
heart annexed to it.

They who write well, are held in great esteem; and they make more account of
a good writing, than of a good picture. And for a set of ancient letters well
shapen and formed, they do not care to spend a good sum of money: and letters
from being first esteemed, have come at length to be reverenced. They cannot
endure to see a written paper lying on the ground, but presently take it up;
and in the childrens schools there is a place appointed for the keeping of
them; and afterward they burn them at certain times, not out of religion, or
superstition, as the Turks do, but only out of the reverence they bear to
Letters.

Their way of writing is from the top of the paper downwards to the bottom,
and beginning at the right hand of the paper proceed to the left, as the
Hebrews and all Eastern nations do.

They formerly made use of the inner barks of some trees in stead of paper, as
other nations have done. For a style or pen they used certain Bodkins of Iron,
with which they dexterously formed their Letters. They wrote also many things
on Lamins or plates of metal, and also on vessels of molten metal; of which
there are yet some remaining, which are held in no small esteem by the owners,
and all that see them. But it is now 1800 years since they have had the
invention of paper, which is there of so many sorts and in so great plenty,
that I am persuaded, that, in this, China exceeds the whole world; and is
exceeded by none in the goodness thereof. That which abounds most, and is most
used for printing, is made of a certain Tree, which is called in India, Bombu,
and in China, Cio, the art in making of it is like ours; but the best and
whitest is made of Cotton-cloth.

In stead of pens they use pensills made of the hair of several creatures:
the best are of those of a Hare. They are more easy and convenient to write
with than pens: the ordinary ones cost three, four, or five farthings; the
best come to six pence a piece. Their standishes are made of stone of several
forms, and are commonly handsomely wrought, and of a small price: yet they
have some of thirty crowns a piece. In these they dissolve the ink, which is
made up in little molds and dried: The best is made of the smoke of oil,
which they gather by art: it is sold at a small price commonly, the dearest
being a crown, or seven and six pence the pound; but the best of all from ten
to twenty crowns. The Artezans which make it are not held for Mechanics, so
noble is this art esteemed by them. They use sometimes red ink, especially in
their Annotations upon books: and sometimes (but very seldom) write with it.
It is their greatest care and ambition to have all their instruments of writing
to be of rich materials, neat, proper, and in good order, with the same pride
and delight, as the most accurate Captain or Soldier among us takes in his
arms.

In printing, it seems that China ought to have the precedence of other
nations: for according to their books they have used it this 1600 years; but it
is not (as I said before) like unto ours in Europe. For their Letters are
engraven in Tables of wood. The Author of the book orders what kind of
letter he will have, either great, little, or middlesized; or rather he gives
his manuscript to the graver; who makes his Tables of the same bigness with
the sheets that are given him; and pasting the leaves upon the Tables with the
wrong side outward, he engraveth the letters as he finds them; with much
facility and exactness, and without making any Errata: their writing not being
on both sides the paper, as among us, but on one side only; and the reason,
that their books seem to be written on both sides is, because the white side is
hidden within the fold.

They print likewise with Tables of stone; with this difference, that then the
paper is made all black, and the letters remain white; because when they print
thus, they lay the ink upon the Superficies of the stone, but in the Tables of
wood, they put it only in the hollow of the engraving. This last manner of
printing serves only for Epitaphs, Pictures, Trees, Mountains, and such like
things, whereof they do desire to have the memories preserved; and they have
very many prints of this kind. The stones which serve for this use, are of a
proper and particular kind; their wooden Tables are made of the best
Peare-tree. So that any work which they print (as they do in great numbers)
remains always entire in the print of the Tables, to be reprinted as often
as they please, without any new expense or trouble in setting for the press,
as there is in our printing. Every one has the liberty to print what he
pleases, without the Supervising, Censure, or License, of any one; and with so
small charges, that for every hundred letters perfectly engraved in the manner
abovesaid, they pay no more than four pence halfpenny; and yet every letter
consists of many strokes.

CHAP. 7.
Of their manner of study, and admittance to examination.
THey are put to learn from their tender age. They have for beginners certain
little books, containing good rules and precepts of virtue, good manners,
obedience to their parents and superiors, or some such like matter. A few
months after, they give them Classical books; which they get all by heart,
both the Text and the Gloss, as perfect as we do our Pater Noster. After this,
comes the Masters explanation. They say their lesson likewise by heart, the
Scholars back being turned toward the master with the book lying open upon the
table, and they use no other phrase for saying their Lesson, but only Poixu,
which signifies, to turn their back upon the book, and this is done, that they
might not cast their eyes upon it to help themselves. They are kept to their
studies with so much rigor, (even the youngest of them) that they are allowed
no manner of recreation or divertisement.

Every day they write something, and their masters copy is laid under the
paper, like the black line among us: and the paper being thin and
transparent, the letters easily appear through, which the boy that learneth
does easily imitate, forming other letters like those, which he sees under
his paper; and by using this for some short time, he becomes accustomed to the
fashion of his Masters hand, which he imitateth after this manner. Therefore
after some time spent in this exercise, they write one line upon the Masters
copy, and another upon the blank paper by the side of it; for, as I have said,
the lines are made from the top of the paper to the bottom, till at length,
when they can well imitate the copy, they give over writing upon it. In fine,
they take very much pains to gain a good hand in writing; for, in their
examinations, where their compositions are copied, it is sufficient to have
their Grace denied, if there be but found one ill-shapen letter, before their
exercise be read; they presuming; that no man can be learned, if he read, or
write ill; although among us there be many examples to the contrary. For it is
well known, that the excellent Doctor Navarra wrought a very ill hand, and our
Bartolomeo Philippo, a singular Scholar, writ so perfect an ill hand, that to
the universal grief of all learned men, his most learned works were lost;
although they were many, and no doubt, full of most admirable knowledge,
because there was not found any one, that was able to read them; as may be
perceived by those works of his, that have escaped out of that pernicious
Chaos.

Next; when the Chinesses have learned a good quantity of their letters, and
have had some acquaintance with their books, they are instructed in the rules
of composition. First, they give them some disordered compositions, which they
are to reduce into order; then some abbreviations for them to enlarge upon, and
afterward in due time they give them only the point or Theme; in like manner
they do, at their examinations. And because every three years the most approved
compositions of those, who have taken degrees, are put in print, others take
great pains in them, and get as many of them by heart as they are able,

They have no Universities, where they study together; but all, that are able,
take a Master into the house for their sons, and sometimes two, if there be
much difference between their childrens ages. This Master is always with them
without any interruption, and teaches them not only letters and sciences, but
whatsoever concerns Civil government, good manners, morality, and the way
how to carry themselves in every thing. If they are persons of Quality, the
Scholar never goes abroad without his Master, who serves to instruct him in
all Civilities, and good behavior; particularly in visits; where, as there are
many Ceremonies used, there is something of difficulty; and they might easily
commit an error, if their Master did not help them. And without doubt, this
way is most decent for their reputation, and more profitable for their studies,
and less exposed to those venomous practices and company, which are apt to
teach them such customs, as infect their minds; and spoil the Decorum of a
Gentleman; and much more in China, where, if any one have this evil fame, he
cannot be admitted to examinations.

There are nevertheless many Schools for children of a meaner condition; where
the Masters have this good quality, that they receive no more than they are
well able to teach, that they might not go from them, as if they had never come
thither; as it falls out too often in Europe, where each Master endeavors
to have many Scholars, rather for his own gain than their advancement. For
indeed a man, let him be never so able, is but still one man; whence it comes
to pass, that some of their Scholars know the School, but are not known of
it. This inconvenience is avoided in China: each takes no greater charge upon
him, than he is well able to give an account of; and each Master admits no
more Scholars, than he can well teach. He is with them all the day long,
behaving himself with much gravitie; neither do they ever go out of the School,
unless it be at meals; and if any one of them does live far off, his dinner
is brought to the School. Their play-daies and time of vacation are only
fifteen days at the beginning of the new year, and some few days in the fifth
and seventh moon: and as there are there no Holy Days, they make all the rest
of the year an un-interrupted application to their studies. So sensible are
they of this truth: That it is necessary to take very great pains to be
learned; and, that seldom any one passes with the reputation of a knowing
man, without much labor and industry.

When they are grown up and past these rudiments, and their parents are not
able to provide a master for each in particular; some of the kindred and
neighbors join together, and take a master in common, who dyets with them day
by day in course, and receives his Salary from them all, which is not much;
but more or less according to the custom of the Countries, and many amount
each year to 40 or 50 Crowns; the common Salary being from ten to twenty
crowns: besides the presents which they make them at certain feasts,
consisting of stockings, shoes, and such like things. At meals (although it be
in the houses of persons of the greatest quality) they are to sit with the
father of the scholar, or at least with the scholar himself. Many times they
stu^y not in their fathers house, having others more proper for that occasion,
either within or without the City, but never far off: and as much as they can,
avoid their own houses, knowing well that the multitude of people, and the
respect which is paid to their quality at home, are capital enemies to study:
hence it comes to pass in other Kingdoms, that the sons of Lords and great
men do for the most part, prove great Ignorants: As if the greatest Nobility
did not consist in the greatest knowledge.

There are ordinary Masters without number, for there being so many that
pretend to the degree of a Literato, and so few that attain to it, the
greatest part are constrained to take upon them the employment of a
schoolmaster; so that to set up a school the year following, they go about to
get scholars for that time, from the beginning of the present year, but in
great houses they commonly receive none for Masters, but such as have taken the
degree of Batchelour, who continue the course of their studies with a design
to take their other degree.

When they have taken any degree, although it be but only of Batchel^ur, they
are then no longer under a Master, but form a kind of Academie, as it were,
among themselves; where they meet at certain times every month, one of them
opens a book, and gives a point or Theme, upon which all of them make their
Compositions, which they afterward compare among themselves.

Although they have no universities and particular schools, nevertheless they
have general schools, which are very capacious and magnificent, and most
richly adorned, for the examiners, and those that are to be examined; of which
there is a wonderful great number. These schools are in the Cities and
Towns, but the most stately ones are in the Metropolies of the Provinces,
where the examination of Licentiats is held. These fabriques are of a bigness
proportionable to the multitude of people which flock to them. The form is
almost the same in all. Those of Cantone are not big: because they admit not
of above foure-score, to take their degree; whereas in others, there are
admitted from an hundred to a hundred and fifteen, which is a great difference.
The whole structure is compassed about with a wall, having a fair and
sumptuous gate toward the South, opening into a large street, where a
numerous multitude are gathered together. This street or Piatza is 150.
Geometrical paces broad, each pace consisting of five foot: There are no
houses in it, but only porches and walks with seats for the captains and
soldiers, who are there assisting all the time of the examination, and keep a
strong guard. At the first entrance, there is a great Court, where do stand the
Mandarines of the first post, with a Court of guard within the gate; then
presently appears another wall with a gate, made like those of our Churches,
and opens and shuts in two leaves or pieces, when it is not convenient that
all should be opened: when you are past that gate, there appears a large
place, in which there is a pond of water, extending from one tide to another,
over which stands a stone bridge of perfect Architecture, which ends at
another entrance or gate, guarded by Captains, which suffer none to go in or
out, without express order from the officers. After this gate follows
another very spacious Court, having on each side rows of little houses or
chambers for the persons that are to be examined; placed on the East and West
side thereof. Every chamber is four palms and an half long, (every palm is
nine inches English) and three and a half broad, and is in height about the
stature of a man: they are covered with Tarrasse or Plaster in stead of Tyle;
within each of them are two boards, the one fastened to sit down on, the other
moveable for a Table: which after it has served them to write upon, they make
use of, when time is, to eat on. There is a narrow entry, which leads to
them, that admits but of one man a breast, and that hardly too; the doors
of one row open toward the backside of the other.

At the time of the examination; there is a soldier to assist in every one of
these little chambers, to guard and serve the person to be examined; sitting
under his little Table: They say, he has a gagge of wood in his mouth, that he
should not speak and trouble the student. But if it be in his power to remedy
it, it is not likely, that he does entirely complie with his obligation.

At the end of this narrow entry I spoke of, is raised a Tower upon four
Arches with Balusters without on all sides, within which there is a Salone or
great Hall, where do assist some officers and persons of respect, who stay
there to give account of what passes in all the little chambers, which they
have placed in their sight. At the four corners of this Court are four great
Towers, with their Bell or Drum, which is sounded, as soon as there happens
any noveltie or disorder, to give notice thereof to whom it does concern. Nigh
to these Towers are other Buildings with a large Hall, furnished with seats and
Tables, and other necessaries for the business that is to be performed there,
which is the first examination of the compositions; at which the more ordinary
officers do assist, sitting in those seats.

Going through the Hall by the gate which looks Northward, there is to be
seen another Court, and presently another Hall of the same form; but the
furniture thereof is more rich and costly, it serving for the President, and
more honorable officers. Then follow likewise other appartaments and lodgings
for the said persons, and for all the other officers and examiners; every
appartament has a Hall, seats and Table^ to negotiate and eat at; a chamber
with a bed, and Canopie of silk, and other household stuff proper to that end
they are designed for. There is also a walk with little gardens and low Trees.
There are also joined to these, other lesser chambers for Notaries,
Secretaries, Pages, and other officers of their families; besides these there
are other chambers for the Mandarines and inferior officers, and for their
ordinary servants, with Butteries, Larders, Kitchins, and whatsoever is
necessary for the accommodation of so great a multitude; every thing being
disposed and ordered even to admiration.

Anciently the nobility and kindred of the King were not admitted to any sort
of office or public charge; no, nor those of them that studied, were allowed
to come to the examinations, to take their degrees. About 20 years since,
after many earnest solicitations made by them, and oppositions by the contrary
part, they had the privilege granted them, to be admitted to all examinations;
and the examiners are obliged to confer degrees on some of them, but not to
many. The common people of all sorts and all vocations are admitted, except
those that are infamous, as the servants of the Mandarines (not their household
Servants, but those which serve them in their Tribunalls and Courts of
justice;) Sergeants, Bailiffs, Catchpoles, Rogues, Executioners, and guardians
of their public women, called Vampa. Likewise those are not admitted, against
whom lies any tax, or accusation of ill manners, until there be satisfaction
given of their amendment.

They have three sorts of degrees Sieueai, Kiugin, Cinfu; and that we might the
better understand them, I might say, that after their manner they are
answerable to our Batchelour Licentiate, and Doctor, each degree having their
several ensigns and badges of honor. Those that are only students, and have
taken no degree, have not any particular privilege belonging to them, but only
are respected as Gentlemen, and the people honor them, as the lights of their
Country, so much is knowledge esteemed among them, who know, how to honor
that, which does truly deserve esteem.

CHAP. 8.
Of the manner of their Examinations, and how their degrees are conferred.
THe order and manner, that the Chinesses observe in their examinations of
persons that take their degrees, is very curious. It is to be supposed, that in
these examinations, from the first of the simple student, to the last of the
Doctor, consists the business of the greatest importance of this Kingdom:
for on these depend the degrees and offices both of honor and profit, the only
mark, at which mortals aim with their chiefest attention. In a word, if
there be an employment, wherein these two are coupled (a conjunction which the
old proverb has sentenced to be very difficult) certainly it is this. We will
begin at the beginning, that is what is performed by the mere and simple
students.

Before the examination there is first spread abroad a report, that there will
be one, till at length it be published by Authority. Because the degrees which
are conferred, and those which pretend, are many, it is not convenient that so
great a multitude should be admitted to the examination of the Chancellor: and
to the end that both the fit and unfit should not enter at that examination,
there is an order in the Province, that those which are to enter, should be
proved first by two Antecedent examinations in their City or Town, after this
manner. Every Judge in his Territory does publish an examination, and
appoints a day for the meeting of all the students of his Precinct. And
because sometimes the place of the public universitie is not sufficient for
the reception of so great a multitude, they fill a large field with seats and
Tables; and there the examination is held. The Judge gives the point upon
which they are to compose. They begin in the morning and are allowed time till
night; They give in but one composition, and when they have finished it, they
consigne it to the proper officer; who, putting them together, examineth them
all along with great diligence; and choosing out the best, causes the name of
their composers to be written: this roll of their names is stuck up upon the
wall of his Palace; by which it comes to be known, who they are, that are
allowed to pass to the supreme examination; and this allowance they call,
Having a name in their Village.

The compositions thus allowed are carried by the Officer, in person to the
Governor of the City: and the same do all the judges of Towns, each within
his own jurisdiction; and each City in its Villages, each City being divided
into two Villages, with their particular judges, besides the Governor of the
City. And all the students of the Country, that have been already allowed of,
being assembled together, enter into the general place of the City; where the
Governor of the City examines them again, and gives them a new point, after
the same manner, as was given them in the Village with this difference; that
they use more care, rigor, and diligence, and admit less of the Intercession
of friends, who are ready in all places to pervert the truth. Of these the
governor chooses 200, and gives their names to the Chancellor, who puts
them the third time upon the same examination, almost in the same manner; and
chooses out amongst them about 20 or 25, upon whom he conferreth their degree;
so that being sifted three times most exactly, they come at length to be but
few in number. Then are given them their ensigns and privileges, with an
advertency of their subordination, not only to the Chancellor, but also to the
Prefects; who are two in each City; and are called Hioquon; that is, Mandarines
of the sciences. Their office is to observe and spy out the deportment of each;
and to chastise those, that behave themselves amiss; and (which is more) they
may examine them a new, if they please, and as often, as they think good.

The Chancellor is bound by his office to send through the Province, and to
assemble within the Cities all the Ancient Batchelours, and to examine them, to
find whether they study; or else addict themselves to other employments
different from their profession. He rewards the diligent, and castiseth those
that are idle, in this manner: when they are all gathered together in the
general Palace, he gives them a point for their compositions; the which being
ended, their papers are divided into five Decuries or Classes; to those of the
first he gives praise and rewards; the same or little less is done to those
of the second; Those of the third Class are passed by in silence; those of the
fourth he chastises; those of the last Class, he depriveth of their degrees,
privileges, and ensigns of honor, and turns them back to be ranked among
the common people: yet nevertheless with liberty to return again, for their
degrees, to their examinations. Of the first sor^ are chosen the ablest to the
number of 40. For each City, and 20 for each town; and although they have not
above eight Crowns pension a man, they stand the King, through the whole
Kingdom in 300000. Crowns. This employment is very great; for the Cities are
444; the Villages 1250. This is that which a Batchelour is obliged to do, to
obtain his degree: let us now see, what is required of a Licentiate.

The examination of these is held every three years, in the chief City of each
Province, upon the same day through out the whole Kingdom; which uses to be in
the eighth moon; and commonly falls out to be about the end of our
September, or beginning of October. The examination lasts about 25 or 30
days; although they, that are to be examined, are not held to it above three
days only; and those are the ninth, the twelfth and the fifteenth of the
aforesaid month. The chief examiners are the greatest Officers of the whole
Province, besides others of that precinct who are assistant to them: But above
all, the President; who comes, even from court, purposely to his Province.
These are the first, that do assemble in the general Palace; and with them
their Secretaries, notaries, and other people appointed both for their Guard
and service; and likewise Physicians, for fear they might have need of them;
because, whilst this action lasts, no person is permitted to come out, or
in, to them.

Without, there remains a vigilant Officer, to provide whatsoever is required
from within, only the Chancellor is here excused from this confinement, because
he is the common master of all the Batchelours. There are some, which are so
infallibly certain of their knowledge and abilities, that there was one in
Kiamsi, who, after the studenrs were locked up for their examinations, made a
list of those whom he conceived, should receive their degrees, and having set
it up in public, he erred only in six, of an hundred and fifteen, which were
elected.

When the Officers are assembled, the students (which in the larger Provinces
and Universities exceed the number of 7000) make their appearance, at nine of
the clock in the morning, keeping their order, and without any contrast; (as it
often happens at the examination of Batchelours, with such confusion, as is
often the occasion of undecent and unfortunate accidents, and sometimes
murders, as I once saw in the City of Sumkiam in the Province of Nankim, and in
that of Kiamsi.) At their entrance they are all searched, to find what they
carry about them; and if the least paper be but found about any one of them, he
is presently excluded. And for the less trouble in searching of them, they are
all obliged to wear their hair loose and hanging down, their legs naked, and
shoes made of cord, their garment without lining, or any fold whatsoever, with
their inke-horne and pensels about their necks; (for as we have said before,
they use no other pens, but those.) As soon as they are entered, they retire
into those little chambers, we spoke of before; each into one, with his
soldier to watch him, who sits at his feet under his little table. Then
they lock up the gates, setting their guards of Soldiers; who keep so strict
and rigorous a watch, that during the examination, they do not suffer any one
to pass through that street; much less do they permit any one to go out.

Then presently are the points exposed, which the President has already
written in large letters on white Tables of Charam; the which hang publicly at
the four corners of the cross way between the little houses; so that every one
may see them from his own chamber, the Points or Theames are seven; four out
of the four last books of their Philosopher which are common to all; and three
from every Kim, that is, out of every part of his books of sciences; each
student necessarily professing only one of them.

Upon each point the student is to write briefly, Elegantly, and sententiously;
so that every one is to make seven compositions, which are to be written in a
fair and well shaped letter, without any Abbreviation. If they afterward mend
or correct any thing, they are to write underneath, in what line that
Emendation is made. They make two copies of their compositions; the one
subscribed with the name and Surname of their Father and Grandfather, with the
years of their own age, together with an Inscription, as seems good to each
of them. These they seal up with the Inscription only on the outside:
presently they consign the open copies to the officers appointed to receive
them, and then go their ways. The sealed copies are kept according to their
number in a place appointed for them; the open copies are given to certain
Notaries, who copy them out in red letters, that the composers hand might not
be known; and after that, they are given to the Examiners, who distributing
them among themselves, do, the two following days, examine and review them,
with so much rigor, that the least error is sufficient to exclude the
student. I shall give you a pleasant example.

Among their letters, there is one called Ma, which signifies a horse: this is
composed of a perpendicular line crossed with three others, and underneath has
a stroke, which ends with a concavity like to our letter S. In this concavity
they put 4 pricks in a row, one after another. In stead of these four pricks
when they write with Abbreviation, they put only one line. Now there was a
student, who in his composition wrote it after this last manner; and although
his composition were excellent, yet because he had not writ this letter after
the first manner, the examiner sent him away with these words, without four
legs the horse cannot go.

When that is done; they let up, on the outward wall, a large catalogue of the
names of such, who have made any fault in their compositions, which serves for
advice to them, to return home to their houses, which they presently do partly
out of shame, and partly out of necessity, because they will not be suffered to
enter at the following examinations.

The second time they enter again, on the twelfth day of the month, where they
are proceeded with as before, excepting that they give them only three points,
concerning such doubts and difficulties, as may occur i^ matter of
government; to understand, how they would behave themselves in it, and how they
would advise the King. Then again upon the through examination of these second
compositions many are sent away and excluded from the third examination: to
which they enter on the fifteenth day of the month; and have only three points
given them concerning the laws and statutes of the Realm. When the
compositions of this last examination are received, they shut up the general
Palace for fifteen days, more or less; and during that time, by comparing and
choosing the best, they are reduced to a small number, who do really deserve the
degree. Then they consign them to the President, who makes the last scruting,
and ranketh them in their places and order, there being a great difference in
being of the first, or of the last; not only for their reputation, but also to
be the sooner provided of some good place or office.

After this last diligence is ended, which is used about the copies of the
compositions, presently they open the original compositions that were sealed
and laid by, that by the Inscriptions they might find out the names of the
Authors; which they write down in certain classes according to their merits.
This catalogue is exposed to the view of innumerable people, who are staying
without to expect it; some for their Son or Brothers sake, some for their
Father or Friend, some for their Master or Patron; and some only to satisfy
their curiosity.

At the time when these names stand exposed, being written in very large
letters, from the top to the bottom of a long paper, two palms and a half
broad, there stand ready without, just so many horses which are to carry those
that receive their degree of Licentiate; each horse being marked with his
number. of 1. 2. etc. And to every one of those servants, who are appointed to
lead the Horses, there is given a ticket, with the name of the Graduate, and
the number of that place, which belongs to him. Who presently runs to seek
him out (it being not easy to find him, because they do yet stand retired) to
give him notice of his election, and to beg some reward of him, and so stays
with him to wait upon him, till he departs to go to the Court.

The students having notice given them of their promotion, come all on
horseback to the Palace-general, every one in his order; where the Proveditor
and Minister of the Kings Exchequer-chamber, stands ready expecting them,
with the ensigns of their dignity, as the Cap, Gown, Tippit, and Boots, which
he solemnly puts upon them, and when they are thus adorned, they go
presently to give thanks to the President of the examinations: who receives
them on foot, and treats them, as his equals, though he be always to them in
the stead of a Master: and they do so depend on him; and bear him such
extraordinary respect, that it is a thing almost incredible to be related.
Among them is so much love and amity, as if they were really brethren; for they
are called brothers of the examination; and like such do they respect one
another. After follow diverse ceremonies, and several banquets presented by
the Officers altogether. They are three in all, as I remember, and are all very
sumptuous, but the third is of some profit also: for in this, there is set to
every one of them three tables; the first covered with diverse meats; the
second with hens, foul, venison, and other flesh, which is to be all raw; the
third with dried fruits: and all this is to be sent home to their houses, that
they might spend it there, at their own pleasure and discretion.

As Soon as these men have obtained their degree, they become presently great,
honored, nay adored; and, I know not how, suddenly rich. After this, they go
no longer on foot, but either on hors-back or in a Sedan. And not only the
graduate, but his whole family, change their condition, and he begins to
think of purchasing his neighbors houses, and to build himself a Palace. This
will yet seem more wonderful to him, that knows, that many of them come out
of their countries a very great way on foot, carrying at their backs, that
habit, which they are to wear in the City; having sometimes their hands daubed
with clay, wherewith they lately were mending up their poor cottages: of which
sort of blades I have seen some come to Nankim.

These solemnities being ended, the Graduates presently prepare to go to Court,
to be made Doctors; and if they will take any government upon them, they are
presently provided with some place or other: But if they accept of any
government, they lose their pretension of being examined afterward for Doctor.
Although there is none who at first does not attempt it; But if any one does
not succeed in it, and begin to be somewhat in years, having a mind to put
himself presently into the world, he accepts of a Government, having only
the title of a Licentiate, but such very seldom come to very high preferments;
although there have been found some of them, who have had the good fortune to
be advanced to the quality of Viceroy. For this journey to Court they have
every one of them given them 80. crowns, out of the Kings exchequer, to bear
their charges: and it is very certain (as I have been informed by some
Chinesses of credit,) that the whole expenses, which every Licentiate stands
the King in, from the time he takes his degree, till he comes to be placed in
the Court amounts to 1000. crowns; which throughout the whole Kingdom,
(according to my account,) makes a million and half of crowns. So much does
it cost the Prince in the forming of his wisemen, and making them capeable of
the Government of his crown: so great a reward does he propose to them, that
they might aspire to be sufficiently learned.

The Licentiates, who are made every three year, throughout all the Provinces,
are about fifteen hundred, more or less; and this is no great number in
respect of those, which procure, their degree in all the general Palaces. In
that of Cantone, which is one of the least, having not above 7500. little
chambers in it, the compositions of the first day are about 96148. from whence
may easily be inferred, how great the number of the pretenders is. And now we
will give a particular chapter, concerning the supreme degree.

CHAP. 9.
Of the degree of Doctor.
THe degree of Doctor is solemnly conferred at the Court, in the second Moon
of the year, which answers to our month of March. They proceed in it
according to the same form, which was observed in the degree of Licentiate;
excepting that the ensigns of honor are different, and the examiners of
greater quality; they being the chief of the royal College called Hanlin,
and their President is always the Colao, the greatest dignity, next the King,
of this Empire: although he differently exercises the charge of President;
for, in this Transaction, they of the royal College have a definitive vote;
and the compositions being distributed among them, after the first election,
they, who are elected and approved by them, cannot be refused or rejected by
the President.

All the Licentiates of the Kingdom are admitted to this examination, as well
the old ones, as the new. And anciently there was no precedent examination to
enable them for this admittance; because it was accounted sufficient to be a
Licentiate, to have entrance at the examination of Doctors: But because among
their compositions there were many so ill made, that it was time lost to read
them, and did render the composers incapeable, not only of the degree of
Doctor, but likewise of pretending to it; therefore about 15. years since,
there was introduced another examination for the receiving of them, which is in
practice to this day: from whence it happens, that many are not received, to
their great shame and sorrow: which is a wholesome instruction to others not to
spend their time in feasting and recreations.

In this examination are to be chosen 350. upon whom the degree of Doctor is
conferred. The ensigns of honor, excepting the Boots, which are the same in
all, are very different from those of the Licentiates, both in cost and
ornament. They have also a girdle given them, which they always wear in their
places of Government, which are bestowed upon them; but is more rich and
precious, according to the offices they are advanced to. When they have
received their degree, and put on their ensigns of honor, they all assemble,
within a Hall of the Kings Palace prepared for that purpose, where they are
examined the second time in one only composition, the point being about the
Government and employment which they are to be admitted to. At this
examination, in former times the King did use to assist in person; but now
there assisteth a Colao in his name.

The examination being ended, they pass into another Hall, where the new
Doctors do make their reverence to the King, and presently the Colai presents
to him three of them, which have obtained the first places; then the King with
his own hand bestows a reward on each of them. He to whom he gives the
first gift, being the chief of all the rest, has a particular name belonging
to him ever after; as also, to the second and the third: The first they c^ll
Chuam. Yuen, the next Pham, Yuen; the third Thoan, Hoa; and this name is of so
great esteem and reputation, that in a few days after the examination, there
is scarce any person through out the whole Kingdom, that does not know them by
these names; and not by the names of their fathers and Country; which is a
wonderful thing in so vast a Kingdom as that is. The honor is as great, as
that of our Dukes and Marquesses. As well for the respect, which is paid them
throughout the whole realm; as for the places of authority and trust, where
they are put to govern; being the very same, which were anciently conferred
upon those great Lords, whose authority was in another way, correspondent to
that, which now these Doctors have.

These ceremonies being accomplished, there is yet another examination, which
although it be voluntary, there are few that absent themselves from it. A new
point is given; they make their compositions; and according to them there is an
Election made of those, who are to be admitted to the royal college. They
select only 30 of the most deserving, and of them they admit five every year;
who only for being entered in so small a number, are always providing with
profitable places of government. The other twenty five have particular Palaces
assigned them; where they assemble, and become as Scholars under the discipline
of a Colao; who almost every day, causes them to compose somewhat, and
exercise themselves in all that belongs to their learning, and speculative
government. This continues til the next examinations, at which new persons
enter, and the other go forth, and according to their degrees and antiquity,
are provided with the places of greatest importance at the court; from whence
(unless it be to be Presidents of the examinations, or some other particular
employment, that lasts but a short time, and by the Kings order) they never
go out; no not to be vice-royes; which employment is accounted below them,
because only those of the royal college are capable of the dignity of a Colao.

All the new Doctors are that year put into some employment, unless there be
any, that is not of competent years. That which helps this multitude to
employments, is that the same year there is held a general visitation
throughout the whole Kingdom; by which there are so many of the old Mandarines
turned out, that there are many places made void for the new ones; and, as this
degree is of high account, the visits, congratulatious, Feasts, and Presents,
which are made upon this occasion, are almost incredible. The reward for
bringing the first news, is many times worth 200 Crowns to the Messenger, but
commonly 50, as soon as the friends and kindred of those who are named among the
three first abovementioned, hear of their promotion, presently they erect unto
them triumphall arches in their Cities or Villages, not of wood coverd with
Canvasse or past-bord; but of pure Marble sumptuously wrought; in the front
whereof is engraved the name of the Person, for whom they were erected; the
place he has obtained, and the year of his Doctour-ship; in a word, the world
is the same throughout. It is a vain thing to believe, that he which has not
power, should be admired, heard or received with applause; whether it be done
out of zeal to the truth, or out of flattery and interest.

CHAP. 10.
Of the Books and Sciences of the Chinesses.
OF the Sciences of the Chinesses, we cannot speak so very distinctly and
clearly; because really, their Authors have not been so fortunate, as
Aristotle, Plato, and other Philosophers and wise men, who have methodically
handled them under their several Classes, divisions, and titles: whereas the
Chinesses have written little or no thing of many of the sciences and liberal
arts, and of the rest, but superficially, except those which concern good
government and policy.

From the very beginning it has been their chiefest aim, to find out the best
way of government; the first that began this, were the Kings Fohi, Xinon and
Hoamsi. These three at the beginning gave themselves to their moral and
speculative Sciences, by way of mystical, even and odd numbers, and other
ciphers and notes; by which they gave law to their subjects: and from hand to
hand, these were always communicated to the Kings; who were the wisemen of that
time, and by this means did govern the Kingdom; until the Monarchy of Cheu;
which began 1123. years before the coming of our Savior: at which time Venuam,
and Checuam his youngest Son, published these numbers and ancient notes, and
made a book of them, entitled Yechim; giving likewise many moral precepts,
documents and orders to the whole Kingdom; and following the steps of other
Philosophers, which lived according to the Stoic rule: they had always great
care of the Government and public good; until the time of Confusio; who
composed five books in order, (called by them Vehim) which are at this day
held as sacred. He made also other books; and of his sentences and sayings
there have been (since) also many more books composed.

This Philosopher flourished about 150. years before the coming of Christ; he
was a man of a good nature, well inclined to virtue, prudent, sentencious, and
a lover of the public good. He had many disciples, which followed him; he had
a great desire to reform the world (which, even at that time, began to lose its
sincerity and veracity, changing the ancient manner of living, and introducing
modern customs.) And so he governed in several Kingdoms: for when he saw,
that they did not live conformable to his precepts and counsels in one
Kingdom, he went to another; yet not uncensured by many other Philosophers of
that time, who seeing the evil course, which men took, retired themselves to
their villages, and becoming husbandmen, in their own persons tilled their
grounds. Now it happened that one day Confusio, passing along, and being to go
through a river, whose ford he was not acquainted withal, sent one to enquire
of a man that was laboring thereabouts, who was a Philosopher, He asked the
messenger, who he was; and being answered, that he was a disciple of
Confusio's, who sat in his Coach expecting his answer; The Philosopher
replied, let him go in a good hour: he knows the way, and has no need of a
guide; signifying thereby, that he went from Kingdom to Kingdom, endeavoring
to Govern, in a time that was not proper for Philosophers to reign in.

Nevertheless in after times, this man was in so great favor with the
Chinesses; and the books which he composed were held in so much credit, as
also the sayings and sentences which he left behind him; that they do not only
hold him for a Saint, and a Master and Doctor of the whole Kingdom, and
whatsoever is cited of him is esteemed as an Oracle or sacred thing; but also,
in all the Cities of the Kingdom, he has public Temples built to his
memory, where at set times he is worshipped with very great ceremony: and in
the year of the examinations, one of the principal ceremonies is, that all the
graduates go together to do him reverence, and acknowledge him for their Master.

Of those that are descended from him, he that is the nearest of kin has a
competent revenue, and enjoys the title of Chuheu, which is as much as
Marquis or Duke. The Governor of the City where he was borne, out of respect
and favor to him, is always one of his family: and finally, all those of his
lineage, as soon as they are borne, have a particular privilege from the
Emperor, and are respected by all, in regard of their predecessor Confusio.
This custom continues to this day, although it be 1800. years since he died.

But returning to the Books which he published, they are these following; The
first is called Yekim, and treats of his natural Philosophy, and of the
generation and corruption of things; of Fate, or Judiciary Prognostication from
these and other things, and from natural principles; Philosophizing by way of
numbers, figures, and symboles, applying all to morality and good government.
The second is called Xukim, containing a Chronicle of the ancient Kings, and
their good government. The third Xikim, and is of ancient poesy, all under
metaphors and poetical figures, concerning the natural inclinations of
mankind, and also of diverse customs. The fourth, named Likim, treats of
rites and civil ceremonies of the Ancients; and also of those that belong to
Religion and divine worship. The fifth is called Chuncieu, the which treats
also of the History of their Country, and contains a collection of examples
of several ancient Kings, good and bad, to be imitated or avoided.

There are also four other books, which were made by Confusio and another
Philosopher called Mensiu; In these nine books is contained all the natural
and moral Philosophy, which the whole Kingdom studieth; and out of these is
taken the point, which is proposed to read, or compose on, in their
examinations for degrees. Upon these books they have several commentaries and
glosses: But there is one of them, which by the law of the Kingdom they are
commanded to follow; nor are they allowed to contradict it in their public
Acts; and has almost the same authority with the text.

These nine books are held, as it were, sacred, and in them, and their Glosses
and commentaries consists the great endeavor of their studies; getting them
by heart, and endeavoring to understand the difficult places of them; forming
diverse senses upon them, whereby, to govern themselves in the practice of
virtue; and to prescribe rules for the government of the Kingdom, according to
those wise dictates and Maxims they find there. And because their
examinations are very strickt and rigorous, they not being suffered to bring
along with them to those examinations, not only any book, but also not so much
as a fingers breadth of paper, it being no easy thing to be very ready in all
these books, the order is; That the first examination of Batchelours be upon
the last four, and that of Licentiates to be upon the same four; as also upon
one of the other five: for this reason none is obliged to be very perfect in
more than one of those sciences, which he does profess: and upon that the
point is to be given him.

But to speak more distinctly to their learning (although in their books it is
not delivered so clearly and orderly) I say, they consider in the universe
three things; that is, the heavens, earth, and man; and so accordingly they
divide their learning into three members, that is, into the science of the
heavens; the science of the earth, and the science of man; including in the two
first, all natural knowledge, and in the third, all moral.

In the science of the heavens, they treat of the beginning of all natural
things, of the Creation of the Universe, and of the Formation of man himself:
of universal causes, of generation and corruption; of elements and elementary
qualities, answerable to the planets; of celestial motions and relvolutions;
of the four seasons of the year; of the stars and planets, of Judicial
Astrology, of spirits good and bad what they are; and other like matters.

In the science of the earth, they treat of the variety that is seen in her,
by reason of the 4. seasons of the year, of the productions of things, and
their differences: of fields and possessions, and their divisions in order to
Husbandry and Agriculture: of the situation of the 4 parts of the world: of
their position; and other particulars concerning them; of the choice and
building of Coemeteries, and burying places for their dead; in which they are
very superstitious.

In the science, which treats of man, they teach all their morality; and
that which belongs to man in a sociable and politic capacity; who imitating
the order, manner and propriety of heaven and earth, as the universal
Parents, lives in community with the observing their five moral virtues,
which are Piety, Justice, Prudence, Policy and Fidelity. They treat also of
moral matters, and of the respect which they have to the five orders of
persons, into which their Commonwealth is divided; that is, Father and Son:
Husband and Wife: King and Subjects: Elder Brother and Younger Brother: and
Friends among themselves.

All their morality is divided into two members: The first they call Divine
Morality, which treats only of ceremonies, rites and sacrifices, which they
make to heaven; earth; the planets; parts of the world; good and bad spirits of
the heaven, and earth, mountains, rivers, tutelary spirits, souls of the
dead, Heroes and famous men, etc. The second is their Politic and civil
Morality; This is divided into Ethiques, which orders the manners and
actions of mankind as they are considered in relation to their own persons:
and into Oeconomie, in order to the government of their families: and into
Politiques, in relation to the Government of the Commonwealth, the public
good, and conservation of the Kingdom. The Government of a single person does
put him in a way to the good Government of his family; and the good Government
of a family to that of the Kingdom; as for example, A father, which does not
well Govern his house, how should he govern a City or Province? and he that
knows not how to govern and correct himself, according to the duty of his
single person, how should he be able to regulate his family? So that they lay
the first foundation of mortality, in the good manners and behavior of each
particular person; from whence proceed well governed families, and public
Governments well administered.

Under the same member of the science of man, they comprehend the Liberal and
all other Arts; which belong to their persons, families and Monarchy; which
shall be the subject of the following chapter.

CHAP. 11.
Of their Sciences and liberal Arts in particular.
GRammar, the gate of the other Sciences, if we reduce it only to the
terminations of a language, as Cornelius Nepos, and other grave Authors have
done, is but in little use among the Chinesses: for all their words being
Monosyllables and undeclinable, there is not much pains required to put them
together in syntax: yet notwithstanding all this, there is a great deal of
difficulty in composing; the which consists in placing of adverbs and certain
terms, which are not significant: but if we should enlarge the Grammar, as far
as Angelus Politianus, and some other have stretched it, it is certain, that
there is great use of Grammar among them; for their humane learning is very
large and vast; and although they have but few fables or mysteries, yet they
have many Histories, Sayings, Sentences, and Apophthegmes, which they must make
use of for the ornament of their compositions.

For Logic, they have no other rules, but what are dictated to them by the
light of nature.

Rhetoric is much in use among them, although they have no rules belonging to
that art; but rather take it up by way of Imitation; observing and practicing
what they find to be good in the compositions of other.

Arithmetic they have in perfection, for as much as concerns the four
Species and kinds thereof: they have also their demonstrations, and figures, as
I have seen in their books. Of Algebra they know nothing at all, nor do they
much practice the ordinary Arithmetic. The way of account through the whole
Kingdom, and also in the neighboring Countries, is with an instrument, called
by the Portughesses, Gina, and of the Chinesses, Suonpuon, that is, a Table of
account: it is made like a small square, divided into ten parts, with certain
little rodds or wyres of brass, upon each of which are threaded seven little
balls or beads, about the bigness of those we use in our Chaplets or Rosaries:
five beneath (for the wire is divided into two parts) which stand for unites;
two above, which signify tens: and with this instrument, moving up and down the
little balls, they make their accounts with great facility and expedition.

In Geometry they have a sufficient knowledge; for although, not being
acquainted with remote Countries and Kingdoms, they have not been able to
distinguish their bounds; nor to assign them their proper confines: yet they
have very exactly divided their own country, of which they have very perfect
maps. Add to this; that anciently all their land was divided by very exact
measures: because the King had not his revenue then, in that manner, as he has
it now, that is, that every land should pay so much; but every one divided his
land into ten equal parts, and one of those parts, which lay nighest to the
middle, they tilled and sowed, and the profit was the Kings: and even now a
days, in buying and selling of land, they measure it, if there be occasion.

The measure which they use upon this occasion, as likewise to measure any
other continued quantity, is in this manner. The least of all, they call
H^fuen, and is three grains of wheat. Ten of these make the second measure,
called Huzum; ten Huzums make a Che; and ten Che's make their greatest measure
called Hucham, bigger than an Italian yard. These measures, the which they have
perfectly divided in the manner abovesaid, are used by all Officers, as also
by taylours, to make their garments, taking measure by them, as we do in Europe
with a piece of thread, or Parchment: so likewise, the Carpenders frame a house,
though never so big, with all its pillars, beams, joyces. etc. Without so much
as trying a piece of timber, where it is to stand, only by means of these
measures; and having framed a house thus in several pieces; they will on a
sudden ioyn them together and set it up, without missing in the least.

Their ways they measure by paces, but still according to the same measure,
making a Geometrical pace to consist of 6 Che, and one Li of 300 paces; and of
100 Li one Stadium, or days journey. So that from North to South it appears
that 250 Li make a degree; for we allow to every league 15 Li; and 16 leagues
to every degree.

To measure corn, rice, pulse, and such like, the greatest measure is, that
which the Portughesses call Pico, and the Chinesses Tan. This is composed of
smaller measures: the least is as much as a man can hold in the hollow of his
hand; ten of these measures make one Xim; (and this of rice is the ordinary
allowance of a man for a day) ten Xim make one Ten, and ten Ten make one Tan;
which comes to weight about 100 Cattes, which make 125 pound of
Portugall-weight, 16 ounces to the pound.

The third manner of measuring, which is by weight, is divided after the same
manner. We will begin with an Hao, and it is the tenth part of a piece of their
money, which the Portughesses call Caxa, or Li, as the Chinesses call it: and
answers to our half Iulio or threepence: ten Li make one Condrin; ten
Condrin one Mas; ten Mas one Tael; and 16 Tael one Catte, which is their pound,
but bigger than ours; for 16 Tael make 20 of our pounds: 100 Catte make one
Pico; or, as they call it, one Tan.

In weighing they use not the Balance, but the Stillyard, or statera, as well
for little, as great weights. For great weights, they do not use an Iron-beam,
but of wood, divided into its parts by points or marks of Brass, or else of
silver. In weighing of gold, silver, medicines, and the like, they make use of
certain little weights, with a beam of white bone, divided by strokes of black.
They make these Stillyards very perfectly, and of several fashions; The middle
sized have three rows of pricks, and three threads near the Center in stead
of a cord; the first row of pricks gives any weight from 3 ounces to five; the
second goes further, and weighs to ten ounces; the last row to 20. The
larger sort of Stillyards weigh more or less; the least sort are divided into
so small parts, that although those ten parts, into which a Li of silver is
divided, do not use to be divided in brasse-mony, (for they coin no money but
of brass) nevertheless in the weighing of silver they distinguish and divide
them very exactly.

For the better understanding whereof, it is to be supposed, that throughout
all the Kingdom of China, excepting the Province of Yunan, they use no other
money but of brass; and all the silver goes by weight, so that if I would
give a crown, I give as much silver, as a crown weighs, and so of a
sixpence or threepence, etc. And for this cause there are an infinity of
founders, as also mint-houses for silver: and to buy some things, especially
such as are of small value, silver of base alloy will serve the turn; and so
base, that in some Provinces, of one sixpence they make eight or ten; and
reap much benefit by it. Other things cannot be bought but with fine silver,
and so the poor silver goes often to the fire, to be otherwise qualified.

They are great lovers of the Mathematiques, but to speak generally, they know
very little of them; none being allowed to study them professedly, except
those, who apply themselves to this study, by the Kings special order; and
these are only two throughout the whole Kingdom; The one in the Court of
Pekim, and the other in that of Nankim; with a train and attendance of
Mandarines, and the Title of the Kings Mathematicians: These teach their art
but only to their sons, who always succeed them; and are but moderately
knowing in their profession. Nevertheless, they have many ancient books of
this science; not only of the course and motion of the stars, planets, and
several other things, but also of Judicial Astrology and Horoscopes, to which
they are much addicted. By these books they find out, when the Ecclipses of the
sun and moon are to be; and have maps of the stars, though not in great
perfection, yet tolerably good. They reckon a greater number of stars than we.
They make the elements to be five; that is, water, metal, fire, wood, and
earth. Over these they assign five predominant planets: as Mercury over the
water, Venus over metal, Mars over fire, Jupiter over wood, and Saturn over
the earth. They are great observers of the motions of the heavens; They
distinguish the seasons of the year by the Aquinoxes and Solstices. They
divide the Zodiac into 24. signs, doubling our number. They make the year to
consist of twelve moons; and 354. days, having six months of thirty days, and
six of 29. and when it is leap-yeare, which falls out every three years, it
consists of 13 moons and 383. days.

Their year begins with the new moon, which is nearest to our month of
February. From the observation of the heavens and their motion, they proceed to
the Judicial part, referring several events to the conjunctions of the
planets, and celestial appearances of Phenomena, which they diligently
observe: and if there fall out any new or strange appearance, they presently
give the King notice of it by a petition; and to this end in both Courts there
is a very high place or Tower, furnished with several mathematical
instruments, which they call Quon Siam Thai, that is, a place to observe the
stars in.

Of that in Nankim I have already said something, when I spoke of that City. In
Pekim the chiefest instruments are a sphere, like that at Nankim with all his
Circles, Aquator, Zodiac, Tropicks, etc. of cast metal, and excellent
workmanship. Another instrument of the same bigness, (that is, of 24. foot in
circumference,) divided into several circles, some fixed, others moveable, a
style or Gnomon in the middle, and little holes at each end to take the hight
of the stars, the degrees and elevation of the Pole, etc. There is moreover a
celestial Globe of brass of the same bigness, divided into its degrees, with
its constellations, whereof they make only 28. They have also a Style of brass
very large, divided proportionably, with which they measure the shadows of the
four seasons of the year; that is, of the Aquinoxes and Solstices. There are
besides, many other moveable instruments of brass, for several uses, which do
sufficiently demonstrate the curiosity of their Ancestors, and how much more
diligent and intelligent they were than the Modernes.

Music was anciently much esteemed in China, in so much that their Philosopher
Confusio, in the Country where he governed, one of the chief things he took
pains in, was to cause them to be taught Music. Now adays the Chinesses
lament and say, that the true rule thereof is lost, and almost all the ancient
books that treated of Music: So that that Music, which they have at present,
is not esteemed off by the Nobility: The greatest use they make of it, is in
their comedies. There are also particular Musicians, who are sent for to their
feasts, marriages, and the birth of their children; and of these there are some
that may be endured. There are not wanting also blind men, who go singing about
the streets, and at the doors of their houses: and as all the Chinesses do
make a feast on their birth-dayes, these blind men do keep in their memory the
punctual time of all the birth days of persons of quality, and know their
houses well; and at those times do never fail to go thither to sing. The Bonzi
do use Music in their offices and mortuaries, the Tone whereof is not much
unlike our Cantus firmus, or plainsong; though they have not formally either
plain-song or Organ-note; for they do not raise, nor fall their voice
immediately from a note to the next note or half-note; but mediately raise and
fall it to a third, a fifth, or an eight: in which the Chinesses do much delight.

They have twelve Tones, six to rise, which they call Live, and six to fall,
which they call Liu. They have also their notes in singing like ours of, ut,
re, mi; they are five, and among them is our ut: in learning of Music they
make no use of signs, nor of the joints of the fingers; nor in composing do
they use lines, as we do: it is therefore to be supposed, that in their
consorts, they have not a Music formed of diverse parts: for although many do
sing together, all is but unison, as is in use almost throughout all Asia.
Therefore their Music is pleasing only to those of their own Country, but
their best way of singing is, one voice only with an Instrument. Neither are
they delighted with our full Music, but very much with a single voice.

They use keeping of time, but cannot tell how many diversities it has, and so
in singing ancient songs, and modern ones, upon the same air with the old,
they hence know the time, when they are to sing, and when they are to stop.
Concerning their instruments, they say they have seven several kinds of tones,
besides a man's voice; and according to these they have made their Musical
Instruments. The first is of metal, and contains bells of all sorts,
Cimballs, Sistra, etc. The second of stone. They make an Instrument of Jasper,
like unto the Italian squadra, excepting that the lowermost end is very large,
and they strike or play upon it, as it hangs up.

The third is of skins: here come in our ordinary drums, and those of the
Moresco fashion, or kettle drums; which they make of several fashions: and
some so big, that they cannot be played upon, unless they be hung up in frames
of wood. The fourth is of silk, of which they make strings for instruments as
here we make lute-strings of gutts. For stringed instruments, they have the
vyoll almost like ours: but it has only 3 strings, and is the usual
instrument of the blind man. They use also the violin with 3 strings and its
bow; they have also another with one only string, which they play on, like to
our Bow vyollin. The chiefest stringed instrument which they have, is of seven
strings, and is in more esteem than the rest; and if the Musician be skil-full,
it makes tolerable Music. The fifth is of wood. Of this kind they make certain
thin pieces of board, and laying them together, they play upon them all at
once, like snappers or castagnets: the Bonzi also have a particular way by
themselves, of striking and playing upon a piece of wood; and that with much
keeping of time.

The sixth is of those instruments which are sounded with the mouth, as flutes,
of which they have 2 or 3 sorts, and so sound them very excellently. They have
also another instrument made of several pipes, like the fashion of our Organ,
but it is but small, and to be carried in ones hand. They sound it with their
mouths; and the Harmony is excellent. Now sometimes all these instruments are
played on together, and make a pleasing music.

Poesy has ever been much esteemed in China; and in the time, when there were
many Kings, Feudatory to one Emperor; when they came to do him homage (as they
did every three years) they were obliged each of them to bring with him out of
his Kingdom, the Rythmes and Poesies, which were there most current and in use,
that by them he might judge of their manners and customs, which truly are much
discovered in such compositions. In this particular, the Chinesses have a great
advantage over all others, because they are very modest, in whatsoever they
write; and it is very rare to find a loose word in their verses: and (what is
more,) they have no letters whereby to express the privy parts; not are they
to be found written in any part of all their books.

They have great variety of verses, and do use a consonancie of meeter, like to
that in the Songs, Ballads, Sonets, and Madregals of Europe: and they put also
the correspondency of the Rythmes, at the end of each; and so many verses, as
we do in our sonets and octaves; in which they use great variety.

They compose likewise verses by the number of syllables, the which they call
words: for as in their language, all words are Monosyllables, there comes to
be no difference betwixt a syllable and a word, which consists of one only
letter, which is likewise pronounced a Monosyllable. So that all letters being
thus after the same manner, the quantity of the verse consists in the number
of them; so that as we compose verses here of five, seven, or eleven
syllables, so also the Chinesses make theirs of five, seven, or more letters:
whereas among us two words, and sometimes one may take up the whole verse: it
can never fall out so in theirs; because all their words are of one syllable
and one letter. They have not verses that answer to our latin verses, with
feet, as Dactils or Spondees, etc. But are all made like our Sonets and Dities,
and other verses in Rythme; in which they use many various forms and manners of
compositions. The chief are eight: it will be sufficient to relate one to you,
to give you some knowledge of the rest.

In this kind of Poesy the verses are to be eight in number, consisting each
of them of five letters, and the consonancy of rythme to be every other verse,
in this manner: The first may have it, or no, as they please; but the second
must rhyme to the fourth; The fifth with the sixth; the seventh with the eighth:
The third, fifth and seventh have no consonancy of rhyme, but the letters are to
be correspondent to one another: as also the verses, that do observe a
consonancy, are likewise to have their letters to correspond to one another;
the first with the first, the second with the second, etc. And this
correspondency consists not in riming, but in the signification; wherefore if
the first letter of the second verse signify a mountain, water, fire, or
whatsoever else, the first letter of the fourth verse must likewise signify
the same thing; which is likewise observed in the second, and in the rest of
the letters, of the whole verse. This is a very Artificial way, but difficult.

In the conceits of their verses, and in the figures with which they express
themselves, they use almost the same manner with us in Europe. They have
another kind of verse, of less esteem, like ordinary rimes, which are every
where in request: but the Nobilitia, and particularly those of the Kings
kindred and blood-royall, are much addicted unto the eighth manner of verses
above mentioned, in which they make many several Poesies, chiefly in
commendation of their friends, of famous men, of the dead, and of several
virtues.

In Painting they have more curiosity, than perfection. They know not how to
make use either of Oils, or Shadowing in this Art; and do therefore paint the
figures of men without any grace at all: but trees, flowers, birds, and such
like things, they paint very much to the life. But at present there are some of
them, who have been taught by us, that use Oils, and are come to make perfect
pictures.

Medicine, or Physic, is in a very good condition in China, because they have
abundance of good ancient books of that art, being all their own authors,
for ours are not yet arrived thither. They do not let blood, nor set on
Cupping-Glasses; They use no sirrops, no potions, no pills; much less have
they the use of Cauteries, or issues, a medicine of great advantage; They are
only Herbalists, using nothing but herbs, roots, fruits, seeds, etc. and all
dry: and for a greater supply, that which they have not in some Provinces is
brought them from others: so that there are whole Faires only of medicines; and
in the Cities and Towns the Apothecaries shops are very well provided, from
whence they furnish themselves. But neither in bottles nor glasses; but of all
others the Physicians are well provided; because they never write any receipt,
but give the medicine themselves to the patient whom they visit, And all is
done at the same visit, therefore the Physician has always following him a
boy, carrying a Cabinet with five drawers, each of them being divided into more
than forty little squares; and all of them furnished with medicines ready
ground and prepared.

They are very famous in judging of the Pulse: never asking the patient,
whether the pain be in his head, shoulders, or belly; only they feel the
pulse with both their hands, leaned upon a pillow, or some other such thing,
observing the motion of the pulse for a good while; and afterward do tell,
what the patient ayleth, I do not say that they hit right, on every thing, in
all patients: nor that all Physicians are able to do it; there being many which
do not study, and know but little; but the good and learned Physicians do
seldom fail. We had a Father that was sick of a violent stitch, in the
Province of Kiamsi. The Physician by feeling of his pulse could tell, whether
his pain did increase or diminish, and all the changes and alterations of his
disease; and I have heard several Portughesses, which have confirmed the same
by other cases. Having felt the pulse, presently they compose the Medicine. If
it be for the King or Prince they make four compositions, two for them to
take, and two to be kept, all of the same medicines, and equal in number and
quantity: The two are kept, till the patient recover. For all other persons,
they make two only, one for the morning, and the other for the evening. They
write upon them in what quantity of water they are to be decocted: and how and
when they are to be taken; and many times there does follow a wonderful
success.

I will relate what happened to a Father, who lay sick in prison in the City of
Nankim. At the beginning of his sickness they sent presently for a Physician,
and finding no effect of his medicines, they sent for another; and because the
physic of the second had no better success, and the malady still increased,
the Christians sought out for a Physician of more fame and reputation; who
although he was very unwilling to make a visit into such a place,
notwithstanding, at length by much entreaty he was persuaded to visit the sick
man: He felt his pulse, and performed his ordinary ceremonies; among the which
one was to lay his breast bare, which was full of spots; for indeed he had the
Meazills. Presently he compounded three medicines, the first the patient took
in the morning: the second an hour after noone; (These were a kind of pills,
which made him go four times to the stool) at night he took the third. The
disease still increasing, the Father was brought that night to such a
condition, that he became speechless, and all thought he would have died;
nevertheless he held out till the morning, when suddenly he mended so fast,
that when the Physician came and felt his pulse, he found him to be without any
fevour; telling him, that he was cured, and that he should only have a care to
eat moderately, till he had recovered strength; which accoordingly fell out:
for in a short time the Father was perfectly well.

They forbid not their patients to drink water, so it be boiled, or else Cha;
but they will not allow them to eat, but if the patient be hungry he may eat
lightly and with great caution: if he be not hungry, they do not much trouble
themselves to persuade him to eat: for they say, when the body is sick, the
stomach does not well perform his office, and so the concoction which is then
made, is malignant and contrary to health. His visit is presently rewarded with
a moderate fee; nor does he return, unless he be sent for, leaving, by this
manner, a liberty to the sick person to change his Physician, if he think fit,
and to send for others; as many times they do, till the third or fourth day of
their sickness, if they see no effect of the medicines they have taken.

CHAP. 12.
Of the Courtesies and Civilities of the Chinesses.
AMong the Chinesses to uncover the head, or to Scrape a leg is not esteemed
any courtesy, but rather contrary to good manners; especially to uncover the
head: But to bow the body, or at least the head, when one can do no more, are
accounted terms of Courtesy and good manners, And to speak first in
general; Their Courtesies are very low bowings of themselves even to the very
ground; as is the ordinary mode in their visits and meetings: They call this Ye
or Coye: Secondly they use the same reverence, and then suddenly to fall upon
their knees, and in that posture to bow again with their head even unto the
ground: and in some cases they rise up again upon their legs, and repeat
the same Ceremony three times; which is the least; four the most ordinary;
nine the most that can be; and that is performed only to the King. Sometimes
they shorten it, making their first reverence standing on their legs; and
presently kneeling down, they make the three following on their knees.

The courtesy of the women is the same which is used among us; excepting, that
in some cases, they also kneel; and in that posture make an obeisance with
their head to the ground three or four times, as civility shall require.

They have for this purpose particular garments, which the common people do not
use; it is also true, that among friends they do not use them; but never fail
to do it with others: neither dare any one visit a Person of quality without
such a Vest, or garment: But if they meet by chance, (not in the street, for
such meetings they carefully avoid) and both of them have not that garment
above mentioned, which they call Tai, both the one and the other are excused
from that Ceremony of the Vest: But if one of them has it on, the other must
presently put on his; which for this purpose is commonly carried after him by a
servant; and if by accident he has not brought it with him, although he should
be never so much importuned by the other, (who has his Vest on,) to accept of
the accustomed Ceremony and Courtesy from him, he may not consent to it, but
avoiding the Courtesy, is to sit down and converse with him.

If one go to visit another at his house, he must stay in the Hall, till the
other has put on his Vest; But if he be a friend, he is to come presently,
(although he be not ready with his Vest) and receive his guest, and to make
much of him, and after that, he is to retire and put on his Vest.

This garment of Courtesy, for such as have taken degrees, is the same with
the ensign of honor, which they wear, in their government and the ensign of
their office. They that are noble by blood and descent, do wear the ensign and
habit of Doctors, although they have never studied. For Gentlemen and
Letterati, who have not taken any degree, there is allowed for them to wear a
wide large Vest, but much differing from that which is ordinarily worn. The
Ministers and officers of the chief Magistrates, as also, in all the courts of
justice, those who are under the President use this Ceremony; which is, to
take off the badge, which they wear upon their breast, and to put on a girdle
of a small price; which they use only some few days in the year, when they go
about, to make their obeisance. The young people, if they have not taken a
degree, use only their ordinary habit.

The courtesy, which the common people use, is to clap their hands one upon
the other, and lift them up as high as their head. The same is used by friends
and kindred, when they treat one another freely, and without Ceremony; and if
they be equals, they both together do the same reverence once; only he is
esteemed to have the advantage, that stands on the right hand; as among us,
that takes off the hat last, though both do uncover. Among grave people the
ordinary Ceremony used in their visits, invitations and meetings, is; that,
standing on their feet they make on obeisance even to the ground once, without
any more ado: children to their Fathers on certain days, as New years day,
the Fathers birthday, and other feastivals, use the second courtesy of four
bowings, standing on their feet, and four kneelings on their knees, and they to
whom it is done, receive it sitting. The same Ceremony do the Scholars pay
their Masters; who receive it standing. The same do the inferior Mandarines
use to the Magistrate; and Idolaters to the Idols, and the Mandarines to the
King; excepting that these last hold an Ivory Tablet a palm and a half long,
and four fingers broad, before their faces: finally, the King himself does the
same in the temples, and to his mother; and when he does it, he holds the
said Tablet of Ivory before his face.

The first time they see one another, and are Persons of an equal condition,
and he that visits, or is visited, will show an extraordinary affection and
respect, he causes a Carpet to be brought and spread before them, and after
the first ordinary courtesy, they perform the second kneeling down four
times, and this they do both together. They avoid, as I have said, all meeting
abroad, as much as possibly they can; but if they cannot decline it, they
salute one another by turns out of their Sedans, lifting up their arms to
their head, bowed in form of a bow, beginning at least 20 paces off before they
meet, still doing the same very leisurely, whilst the encounter lasts; If the
one be inferior to the other, and be carried in a Sedan, he causes it to be
set down on the ground; if he be on horseback, he alighteth and stands on his
feet; and as the other passes by, he makes him a profound reverence, even
unto the ground: if they be not Mandarines, they perform the ordinary Courtesy
to one another: if they be common people, they hold up their hands, and pass
along.

The servants in great houses are not to do any reverence unless it be at
certain times and occasions: as, when himself or his Lord or Master comes home
from abroad, or at the beginning of the new year, etc. They fall down on their
knees, bowing their head to the ground, once, or thrice.

The ordinary reverence, which they make before their Lords and Masters, is to
stand upright with their arms hanging down. Those that belong to the
Tribunals, and also the servants and sergeants of the Mandarines, in public,
always speak to their Masters upon their knees; as also the Plaintiff and
Defendant, with their caps off.

To give or receive a thing with one hand only, is accounted little manners,
among persons of the same condition, and if an inferior does it to his
superior, it is an incivilitie. In a word, they are excessive in their
civilities and good manners; which seems rather more proper for divine worship,
than civil respect. To be courteous, and outwardly well composed, to do things
with maturity, circumspection, gravity and eavennesse, they account among their
chiefest virtues: all which are expressed in this word Li: in which they
comprehend also the circumstances of time, and habit; and the Thie, with which
they are performed.

The Thie is a bill or book, with folds within and without, being about the
breadth of ones hand, and a palm long, and it is of three several fashions.
The largest has six leaves: the midling three, and the least one: and all use
them according to the custom of the Province and the quality of the Person,
that does visit, or is visited. The Colai seldom use other, than the small
ones.

That which is used in the ordinary visits is white with a red streak on the
outside. If the visit be for to present their respects, or an invitation to a
feast, it is all of red paper: if it be to condole, or for the death of any
one, it is accommodated to the color of mourning: if it come from one that is
in mourning, the letters are Azure, as also the streak on the outside; the
paper is white, but much differing from the ordinary paper, being only used
upon this occasion.

This Thie contains no more than one line of writing, which is that in the
Margin; if it be a friend, or one that would show himself such, he writes the
line quite out: if he be not such, he leaves out the two first letters, and
begins at the third place: if he would seem grave or stately, beside the two
first he leaves out also the fourth, and begins with the the third, going
on with the rest, which are never left out. The writing imports thus much in
English Your Lordships most intimate friend, and the perpetual scholar of
your learning.N. comes to kiss your hands, and to do reverence to your
Lordship.

This Thie is given to the porter, who presents it to his Master, and gives
him notice of the stranger, and who he is. Sometimes the visit is received, but
not the Thie; and then he that receives the visit, is not obliged to return
it. But it is otherwise, when the Thie is left; for although it be only given
to the porter, because the lord is not at home, or because he will not admit of
a visit, yet he is obliged to return a visit to the other. Inferiors, as
Soldiers to their Captains, the lesser Mandarines to the greater, cannot make
use of a Thie, but they make another kind of thing of the same form, but much
different in paper and style; neither may it have a stroke on the outside, or
say, that they come to visit; but only, who they are, what office they bear,
and what their business is; and it is almost like a petition, which they call
Pimthie, that is, a bill of advice. Those of the greater Quality, such as are
the Colai, Vice-royes and the like, many times visit not, nor render a visit,
in their own persons; but only send a Thie from their house, or leave it at the
gate as they pass by.

They are as free of their visits, even to strangers, as we are to our familiar
friends: but with the same facility and liberty, that they go to visit they
will often excuse themselves, if they be visited; and it is enough to say, they
are not at home, unless it be to a person of some great quality and respect;
or that he has often come to visit him; then they will hardly deny him
admittance. By how much the person is of a greater and graver quality, with so
much the more difficulty does he admit of visits: and some to free themselves,
and to avoid the trouble of these Ceremonies, write upon a piece of paper in
white letters, and clap it over their gate, That they are retired to their
garden house; by which means they are excused from the molestation of these
Civilities.

The visit must be, (like that of the Physician,) in the morning; for toward
the evening it is not esteemed to be of so much courtesy; nor must it be a
visit by the way, going upon other business; and if at any time they make such
a visit, they excuse themselves, saying, They will take another time to
satisfy the intention of their obligation and devoir.

For ordinary visits they have no set time; there are times nevertheless,
wherein acquaintance, friends and kindred are obliged to pay this Ceremony. The
chief and principal time is the first day of the new year; wishing one
another an happy new year: at which time there is a great multitude of sedans,
horses, and people up and down the streets: for then visits are most frequent.
Many times they go not into the house, but leave a Thie, and go their way; and
if they enter, they are obliged to eat and drink, although it be but a little.
The second time is on the fifteenth of the same month; But the visits are not
so frequent, and the feasting more, because it is at the ending of the fifteen
days, which they call the feastivall of Lanthornes; because during that time
they set many of them up and down the streets on gates, and in windows; and
some of them are very fair and costly.

The third is the Third day of the Third moon which is in March, and is called
Cimnim. They go all then to the sepulchers, to perform there their sacrifices
and other Ceremonies; and although they bewail their dead, certain it is,
that the living make good cheer among themselves.

The fourth is the fifth day of the fifth moon, which they call Tuonu. The
people keep a festival at that time in the streets and highways, and upon the
rivers; although sometimes this is forbidden, by reason of the disasters, which
often fall out upon the rivers.

The fifth is upon the Seventh day of the Seventh moon, at what time they
beg ability and power of the moon; as also they do the like upon the Ninth
day of the Ninth moon. They visit one another and send Presents; and every
feastivall has its Presents that are proper to it.

Beside these feastivalls, they visit upon occasion of death, of changing their
houses, of marriage, at the birth of a son, at the promotion to a degree or
office, or higher dignity, at the taking of a journey, upon the birthday, and
especially when they enter upon any seventh year of their age, and in these
cases they must not make an empty visit, but are always to send some Present.

When one undertaketh a long journey, all his friends visit him, and send him
presents. But when he returns, he is to visit and present them; who performed
those kind offices to him.

They visit likewise the sick, but only at the gate, who seldom admit of a
visit within, unless it be from an intimate friend.

In these visits, they are very punctual; sons toward their father; scholars
toward their Masters; inferiors toward their superiors, and the whole
Kingdom toward the King: so that on his birthday, at the four quarters of
the year, and at the chief feastivals, the viceroy together with all the
Magistrates of the Province dispatch away an Ambassador to court to visit the
King in the name of all that Province. They which reside at the court, as well
Letterati, as Captains; on the same days go in person to court, to do their
devoirs.

They have several Hals well accommodated for the receiving of visits; the
first is common to all: The visitant may enter thither and sit down, without
giving any notice of his being there; And although he find not the porter to
usher him in, they have another farther in, which they call the private Hall:
Hitherto may their kindred and intimate friends come; but no further; least
they should go into that part of the house, which is called Hui, and is the
place where the women are; whither the servingmen of the house are not suffered
to come, unless they be very young. In the outward Hall they come to receive
their visitants: and after the ordinary courtesies are performed, the master of
the house with his own hands brings a chair, and fitteth it with a cushion,
and if they are many, he brings a chaires, and accommodateth them for them
all. And afterward, they al of them accommodate a chair for him. He leaves
every one to take the place that is due to him; and if it be not, that some one
of them has a particular respect, due to his dignity or office, the sons,
cousins, scholars, etc. take place according to their age; and if they do not
know one another age, they ask it. The Master of the house takes always the
lowest place. After they are seated, presently the drink called Cia is brought
in, which they also take according to the same order of precedence.

In some Provinces, the often presenting of this drink is esteemed the greater
honor: But in the Province of Hamcheu, if it be brought the third time, it
intimates to the visitant, that it is time for him to take his leave. If the
visitant be a friend, and makes any stay, presently there is a table set with
sweetmeats and fruits: nor do they ever make dry visits; which is the custom
almost of all Asia, contrary to the use of Europe.

In exercising their courtesies, (whether it be a son before his father, or a
scholar before his master,) for the most part they are more hearers, than
speakers; the young people being never forward in speaking. The terms which
they use in speaking are very honorable, and full of respect toward others,
and humble toward themselves: and as it is not good manners to call any one
You, in Spain or Italy, so neither is it among them to say I. Wherefore they
never use this word, but other terms in stead of it as the Foster-child, the
Scholar, etc. And the son, when he speaks to his father, names himself
His youngest Son; although he be the eldest, and is already married: servants
to their masters style themselves Siaove: and the youngest of them Siaoti: he
that pleads at a Tribunal, styles himself the delinquent; a Christian at
his confession the sinner; the women in the palace (excepting the Queens) and
the Eunuchs speaking to the King, use your majesty's slave, Nupor, every one
else speaking to the King names himself vassal, Chin. If one does not speak
of his own person, but of such as belong to him, he is to use modest terms and
expressions, The father says of his son, My young son. The Master, My
young scholar, and the son speaking of his father, calls him, The father of
the house; The servant of the Master, The Lord of the house.

In speaking one with another they use always honorable Titles, as amongst us
Your worship, Your honor, etc. but they have this quality besides, that even
to mean and inferior people they give an honorable name, as to an Host, Chiu,
Gin, Kia, the man, Lord of the house. To a barge man, The chief man of the
vessel. To a mulitier, The great wand. But if they would anger him, they call
him by his ordinary name, Can Kio, that is, persecutour of the feet. To
servants, if they be grave men, The great master of the house. To the ministers
of the courts of justice, and to them which wait on the Mandarines, Man on
horseback or Cavalier, and yet they always go on foot. If they speak to a
woman, although she be not of kin to them, they call her Tasao, that is,
sister-in-law; but sometimes it happens, that he which cannot speak the
language well, in stead of sister in law, calls her Broom, by an
equivocation of the word.

In speaking also of such things, as belong to him they speak to, it is to be
done in certain particular phrases: So that if he speak of his son, or
servant he is not to say, Your Lordships son, but the noble son, Limlam; if
he mention the daughter, he says, The precious love, Limg^i; and so of others,
even of sickness and infirmity he is not to say simply, how does he with his
malady? but with his noble indisposition, Quei ^am? Among the common people,
(who do not use these Punctilios) if they do not know one another, they call
Brothers, Hiu^. But if they are acquainted I and you, as they list, without any
ceremony.

As they are so punctual and excessive in the manner of their treating and
naming one another; so also are they in the diverse names which they have, and
which they take up according to their age. These are of five sorts.

The first is the Surname, which they take infallibly from their Father, and
never that of the Mother, or the Mothers Father; but the Mother takes the name
of the Husband.

The second is a name which they call, The little or young name, which the
Father imposes; when they are little ones; and it is commonly the name of some
living creature, or flower, or of some day, etc. and by this name only the
Father and Mother may call them; but the servants only by the first, second,
and third, etc. as has been said.

The third is when he goes to school; for the Master gives him another name,
which, joined with the Surname, composeth a name, by which both his Master and
Schoole-fellows call him.

The fourth, when they put on the Nett or Ca^le upon their head, of which we
spoke before: this is done when they are seaventeen or eighteen years of age:
for at that time particularly, if one marry a wife, he takes a new name, which
they call a letter; and by this all may call him, except the servants.

The fifth is at the going out of his youth, when h^ assumeth an other name,
which they call The great Name or Hao; by this all may call him, excepting
himself and his parents.

Now to return to the Hall, where we left the guests conversing; at their
departure, the Guests joining all together make an ordinary reverence to the
Master of the house, giving him thanks for their good entertainment; and he
accompanies them out to the street; where if they came on foot, both parties
make ordinary reverence to each other and depart; if on horseback, or in a
sedan or coach, then they make three reverences; and the third Congie is made
at the gate; where presently the Master of the House goes in, and the Guest
takes horse; for to ride or take coach in his presence is not counted good
manners. When they are on horseback, or in the sedan, the Master of the House
comes out again, and they take leave of one another, and when they are gone a
few paces off, they interchangeably send a servant with an embassy or message
(To Pai Xam) and recommendations.

When the visit is the first time made, and the Person be of quality, commonly
it is with a present, as soon as they are come in: and for the most part in China,
the ordinary and constant presents are some stuffs, ornaments for women, things
of use; as Shoes, Stockings, Handkerchieffes, Porcellane, Ink, Pensils, and
things to eat; and they do commonly choose those of the best sort to present,

The Present, if it be of things to eat among friends, it is to be of 4. 6. 8.
or more things. With the present is sent also a Thie, or bill of visit, wherein
is written what they have sent. If he do not accept of it, it is no
discourtesie; neither if he take part only, and send back the rest: but he must
answer him with a Thie, giving him thanks, and excusing himself, that he did
not receive it; or if he do take part, he is to write, what he took, and what
he sent back. Among men of greater quality, and that will show respect to a
Person without doing much harm to their purses, they write first, the things
which they will send, and send the Thie, before they send the present; of
which, because it ordinarily consists of many things, they do not receive
all; and he who is presented makes a prick at those things written in the
Thie, which he will receive: then he, which presents, buyeth only the things
which the other has pricked, and lets alone the rest: if he accepts of
them all, he buyeth them all and sends them.

There are some Imaginary presents, of which, he that presents them, is
secure, that little or nothing of them will be received; and yet they consist
of many things in number, as sometimes of thirty or forty: and are costly in
their quality; and pieces of Damask, and other silk stuff, silk stockings; and
many things to be eaten, as Hens, Ducks, etc. These things are many times
hired, and that which is received, is paid for, the rest are sent back to the
owner, with some consideration for the loan of them.

The custom is, that he, who receives a Present, is to return another
^equivalent to it. Excepting always edible things among friends; and that which
any brings, when he comes from abroad, and from Countries where those things
are particularly to be had. Neither do they remunerate those, which they call
Presents of dependencie; as from the inferior to the superior; from the
Master to the Scholar; nor of pretenders and suitours.

It is also the custom to give the Page or Servant, which brings the
Present, some money, more or less, according to the quality of the present,
showing great respect to him that sends it.

They of Kiamsi, as more expert in their expenses, and more cunning in the
Lesina, or art of thrift, are very subtle and skillful in this particular; and
for a Present which is worth a Crown, they say, they are to give the servant
six pence, and proportionably in the rest.

CHAP. 13.
Of their Banquets.
Much time and money is consumed by the Chinesses in their Banquets, by reason
they are almost continually at them. There is no meeting* departure, or
arrival, or any prosperous success of a friend or kinsman, which is not
celebrated with a Banquet; nor any accident of disgustor grief, for which they
do not likewise make a Banquet of consolation; nor any business of importance,
but it is to be treated of at a Banquet, neither without one do they begin any
work, or finish any building. They make many others upon no other motive but
this, Comedamus, and bibamus, cras enim moriemur; let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die.

It is very ordinary among the common people, and particularly among officers
of the same office, to have Co-fraternities which they call a Brotherhood of
the month. The Brotherhood consists of thirty, according to the number of
days therein; and in a circle they go every day to eat at one another houses
by turns, making a Banquet, like that of the sons of Job. If they have not
convenience to receive them in their own house, they provide it at another
man's, there being at this day many public houses very well furnished for this
purpose. If he will have it at home, but without any trouble to his Family, he
appoints, how many messes he will have, how many dishes, and what meat; and
they are brought home to him very well dressed.

Those of the North are very much different from them of the South: for they of
the South are very exact, even to the least matters in these courtesies of
Banquets, and they do esteem themselves more friendly and courteous, than the
others; as in truth they are.

In their Banquets they are more careful to have variety, and to have it well
dressed, than for the quantity of the meat: and feast more for conversation and
to treat with one another, than to eat and drink; although they do both the
one and the other pretty well. They drink at the beginning of the feast, and so
continue it with wine and meat, without bread or rice, till the guests say,
they have had wine enough: Then presently the rice is brought, and the glasses
are set by, and there is no more drinking.

In the Northern Countries their custom is contrary to this: The ceremonies
are but few, the Messes well furnished, the dishes large and full: and when the
ordinary ceremonies are performed, which are usual through the whole Kingdom,
they begin with the meat; and every one takes that which pleases him best,
and as much as he can eat; meanwhile without quenching thirst, either with wine
or water: for then they drink neither. They conclude with rice. When the dishes
are taken away, they discourse about an hour; and then they serve in others,
only of salt meats, as Gammons of Bacon, tongues, and such like things, which
they call Guides, that is, of wine; and then they begin to drink.

To speak in general of the whole Kingdom; they do not usually drink wine,
neither at dinner, which is in the morning five hours before noone, nor at
supper, which is about four a cloak in the afternoon; but at night before
they go to bed, then using salt meats, as is abovesaid* and for this reason
their Banquets are most commonly at night; making use of the daylight for their
studyes and business; supplying this light at night with candles, of which
they have great quantity, made of a certain oil, which they harden up with a
little wax; which serves them in the winter; reserving for the summer those
which are made of wax; of which they have three sorts: The one is Bees wax;
the other is taken out of the holes of a certain sort of Snakes, much better
than the other, and much whiter, without any art used to it. The third is taken
from a tree, whose fruit is like our filberts, and the meat very white. And
though this last, be not so good as our wax; yet it is better than suet: it
melts very well, and makes very good candles.

The people of the better quality make Banquets of more state; for they have
houses of recreation, either in the City, or very near it for this purpose;
adorned with many costly pictures and other curiosities. And if the person
invited be an Officer, or man of great quality, although the use of
Tapestrie-hanging in China is very rare, yet for the entertainment of these,
they hang their houses with them very curiously, even the ^eeling and all. The
number of their Tables shows the greatness of the Banquet. One Table for
four, or one for two, is ordinary. But for persons of greater account they set
one Table for each; and sometimes two; one to eat at, and the other to set the
dishes on. The Tables at these Banquets have all Frontalls, or a piece of
linen hanging down from the edges, but neither Table-cloath nor Napkins,
using only their Charan, a neat and polished varnish, with which their Tables
are covered. They lay no knives, the meat being all carved out before it come
from the kitchen; nor forke, using two little sticks, with which they eat very
dexterously. They set neither salt, pepper, nor vinegar, but yet musterd, and
other sauces, of which they have many and very good. They serve in at the same
Banquet flesh and fish; boyld and roast; fried meat; and meat in pottage and
white-broth; and several other viands dressed after their manner; and very good.
They use broths much; but they never serve up any without flesh or fish in it,
or a kind of Paste, like that which the Italians call Vermicelli.

Anciently they used neither Tables nor seats, but according to the custom of
the greatest part of Asia and Africa, they sat and eat upon the pavement,
covered with mats; and to this day, their writings and books speaking of
Tables, use for the significative letter of Table, that which signifies a mat.
The Giapponesses, with most of the neighboring Kingdoms, even to this day,
keep their ancient custom, of sitting and eating upon the ground: but the
Chinesses, from the reign of Han, have used seats and Tables; of which they
have many beautiful ones, and of several fashions.

In the disposition of their invitations, courtesies, and entertainments they
have much superfluity; as well before the coming of the guests, as at the
beginning, prosecution, and conclusion of their Banquets. Before they begin to
eat, the master of the house inviteth them to fall to. About the middle of the
feast they change their little cups for greater: they force none to drink, but
modestly invite them. The times, when they most commonly and infallibly make
their banquets; are the feastivall days, both of the year, and of each man in
particular, as marriages, etc. Besides other infinity occasions above
mentioned.

The better sort of people, when one takes a journey, or returns from another
Country, do make a Feast; and it falls out many times, that on the same day
they are feign to go to seven or eight invitations, to comply with their
friends. Some days before the Banquet (that is when they have time enough)
they send a Thie, by which they make their invitation, and pray them to accept
of it. If they refuse, they excuse themselves with another Thie. But if they
accept of it, they send them another Thie; which they call the Thie of
solicitation. The time of the Banquet being come, they commonly stay, till all
are met; entertaining themselves in the outward Hall. When all are come, they
enter into the Hall of the Banquet; and the master of the house performs the
usual ceremonies to them all, as well insitting, as in placing the cups and
eating-sticks. The ceremonies being ended, they all seat themselves in their
order; and the master of the house takes care to go up and down, and invite
them to eat and drink. Their Banquets are very long, and they spend much time
in discoursing; but the ordinary custom is to have Music and Comedies: and
the Comedians are obliged to act whatsoever the Guests command them. At length
the Banquet ends, by the importunate entreatie of the Guests; to which he
that inviteth them, still seems to make resistance. The day after the feast,
all the Guests send their Thie to the person that invited them; which
contains partly the praise and commendations of the Banquet, and all that
they had there, and partly their thanks to him that gave it them.

CHAP. 14.
Of the Games which the Chinesses use.
PLaying at Cards, (which are like to ours in form and figures, which are all
black and without colors) has penetrated, even to this remotest part of the
world, and is the common recreation of the meaner sort of people, but is not
used by the Nobility. But the game of the Nobility, and graver sort of
people, as well to pass the time, as to win money, is that of Chesse, not
altogether unlike ours. Their King can never remove, but into the four nearest
places to his own Station; which is also the law for the two Bishops. They have
no Queen, but two other men, which they call Vasi di Polvere, or vessels of
dust, very ingenious: These stand before the two Knights; and before them two
Pawnes; the which are placed in the next row before the other Pawnes. These men
have a motion like to our Rookes, but cannot Check the contrary King, but only,
when between one of them and the King, there is another man immediately
interposed, whether it be his own man, or an enemy. So that the King may avoid
that Check three manner of ways: either by removing into the next place, or by
interposing another man; or else by taking away that man, that stood betwixt
him and his enemy, and so, by laying himself open, he is defended.

They have another grave game among them, which is as follows. On a
Chess-board of 300. places: they play wi^h 200. men, a hundred white, and a
hundred black: with these, each endeavors to drive the others men into the
middle of the Chess board, that he might be master of the other places: in
conclusion he that has gained himself most places, wins the game. In this
game the officers do pass their time with a great deal of delight, and often
spend a great part of the day at it; for between those that are skillful, one
game will take up an hours time. Those that are expert at this game, are well
esteemed, though it be only upon this account; and are therefore often called
and received, as masters of this Game, with all ceremony.

The Chinesses also use the game of Dice, which have the same shape and points,
as ours, without any difference.

The common people do much use a game called by the Italians Giuoc^ Della
Morra, casting out their hands, and fingers, as they do at that game in Europe.
They play most at it in their Banquets, between two, who shall drink; and he
that loses, gaine^h the drink.

The Nobility, for this purpose, have a drum placed without the Hall, where
they eat; and there stands a man, who beats on it at adventure as many
strokes, as he thinks fit; and when he beats on the drum, they begin to count
from the first man of the Banquet; and he at whom the drum stops, is obliged
to drink. In the City of Nankim there is another game much practiced among the
common people. They buy a couple of Capons, the best they can find, or else
fish or Porcellane, or what other thing they please; but it must be excellent
in its kind to excite an appetite in others to win it. Then one holds in his
hand, ten pieces of their money, the which have letters on the one side, and on
the other nothing. This man offers them to him that will throw, and he
throws them ten times; and if in any of these times all the pieces light with
the same side upward, either written or not written, he gains the reward that
is proposed, if not, he loses an halfe-penny.

There is not wanting in China the game of Cock-fighting, which is used also
throughout all India: they have Cocks bred up for this purpose. Before they
fight they fasten to each leg near to their spurs a small razour: then he
that keeps the field, having made the other fly or fall, is Conqueror, and
wins the other cock, and whatsoever was abetted on his head. But because
many times they wound one another so just at the same time, that they both fall
together, that Cock, which after he is fallen, pecks at the other, or croweth,
is accounted victour.

They combat after the same manner with Quails; and to his purpose they
commonly breed up the Cock-Quails with great care. This Game is particularly in
request among the Kings kindred, and the Eunuchs of the Palace; in which they
spend a great deal of money. These birds do fight very furiously and
desperately.

They fight likewise with Grillo's, or Cricquets; and this sport is much used
in the Spring time. They have little houses made of clay very artificially to
keep them in: when they fight them, each man pulls out his Cricquet, and
puts him into a Basin, or other clean vessel, and, with a little slice, or
spattle, they put them to one another, and when they are near enough to lance
at one another, they do it with such fury, that many times one will fetch off
the others leg at the first blow. He that conquereth, presently sings, and
wins teh game. This game is much used in Pekim, and particularly by the
Eunuchs, who spend a great deal of money at it.

They do not permit young children, that study; to play at any game; the bigger
sort have games proper to their age, which are very like those our youth have
in Europe.

They are forbidden to play at cards or dice; and if they be taken, or accused
for it, they are chastifed and condemned to a pecuniary mulct; and some are
imprisoned only for spending too much time at play. For among them Tu Po, that
is, glutton of play, sounds as ill, as any other vice, which we abhor here.

CHAP. 15.
Of their Marriage.
IN the Kingdom of China, (as does plainly appear by their books, and
Chronicles,) formal Marriages and indissoluble after contract, have been in use
above 2400 years; and in ancient time they used certain particular Ceremonies
at the celebration thereof; one of which was, giving the hand. But these have
been changed by time, some being taken away, and many others added.

Always from that time to this, there has been among them two kinds of
Marriage; one a true one, with a matrimonial contract for their whole life
between the two parties; and then the woman is called a wife; and treated as
such, and received with extraordinary Ceremonies.

The second is rather a Concubinage permitted by their laws, in case they have
no children by their wife; especially sons, but now it is grown so common,
that although some do forbear having them upon the account of vert^e; yet it is
very ordinary among rich men, to take Concubines, although they have children.
The manner is very different from the true and legitimate Marriage; for
although they contract after some sort with the Father of the maiden: and that
they treat one another as kindred; yet in truth she is bought and sold; and
many times by a Person that has no relation to her, but only that he b^ed her
up for that purpose; for there are many in China, which breed up young maidens,
and teach them Music, and dancing, and other perquisites of women's breeding,
only to sell them afterward for Concubines, at a great price. Yet however it
is not accounted a Matrimony; nor has it the solemnity of Marriage belonging
to it; nor any obligation of perpetuity; but the man may put her away; and she
may marry with another; there being no law which prohibits it, in case she be
wholly withdrawn from the company of the first.

The manner of treating them is very different They eat apart by themselves in
their own chambers: and are in subjection to the true wife, and serve her in
some things, as her Servants. The children which they bear, do not do them
reverence as to a mother, but they pay it to the true wife, whom also they call
mother. Hence it is, that if the Concubine die that bore them, they are not
obliged to three years mourning, nor to deprive themselves of entrance into the
examinations, nor (if they govern,) to quit their charge; which, (as you shall
hear hereafter,) is to be done at the death of their parents. Therefore,
although he be an only son, he is not obliged to these duties: but only when
his Fathers lawful wife dies, although she be not his true mother. When the
Husband dies, the government of the estate and family falls to the lawful
wife, and to the children, whether they be, by her, or by the Concubine. But
when the lawful wife dies, it falls to the Concubine and her children, if
she have any.

Sometimes it falls out, that they take a Concubine, and keep her only, till
she bring them a son: for, if the lawful wife will not suffer her to stay,
as soon as the child is born, they send her away, or marry her to another; and
the child which staieth behind, never knows her who bore him, acknowledging
only for his Mother his Fathers lawful wife. It happens also many times,
that a man takes an excessive affection to his Concubine, and then all goes
amiss, but only in what belongs to the outward observance, which must not be
changed. Widows may marry, if they will; but they that are women of quality
seldom or never do it; no although they be young and have no children. They
are to live in their Father in laws house, and are for this reason much
esteemed.

In the legitimate Marriage for the most part, they observe an equality of
estate and condition; but in their Concubines, they have regard only to their
natural endowments. They may not marry with any of their kindred on their
Fathers side, in no degree whatsoever, nor with any of the same Surname; but
they may marry with their kindred on the Mothers side, if they be in a remote
degree; but that is not so exactly observed. A young maid will hardly marry
with a widdower, which they call patching up the house, and the bed.

They never marry, although they be never so great friends, without a Mediator,
or one that goes between both parties; wherefore they choose whom they please,
there being as well men as women, who perform this office. The Bridegroom
never sees the Bride, before he enters the door to take her for his wife:
there Fathers marry their sons ordinarily very young, and promise them in
Marriage even from little children, and sometimes before they are borne, which
promise these punctually perform, although their Fathers die before the time,
or one of the parties fall from his honor, or estate, etc. excepting both
parties voluntarily agree to break off the contract: and if by chance the son
for some respects will not stand to the contract made by his father, they
compel him by law to perform it.

In China, before the Father die, there is no formal portion given, either to
son or daughter; among the meaner sort of people the ordinary custom is,
not absolutely to buy their wives, as some say, but the husband gives a
certain quantity of money to the Father of the maid, with which to buy her
clothes, and ornaments for her head, suitable to her quality. This sum is
always of the largest for that purpose; but the Fathers save as much out of
it, as they can; what remains, being to accrue to them. Hence it is, that
some have said, that the Chinesses buy their wives; there being not wanting
some ground for this belief: for to this day they agree with the Father of the
maid for so much money; which if it be not given them, they will not part with
their daughter.

Among the Nobility there is no talk of giving any money, but the Father of the
Bride is obliged to comply with what the style and custom of that Kingdom
requires, each according to their ability: and commonly that which he gives
is all necessary Furniture for her apartment, excepting the bed; which,
although all things are very cheap in that Country, will sometimes cost fifty
Crowns. He gives her four or two maid servants, to wait upon her, and some
money; and of all this more or less, according to his ability. But land or
possession they almost never give, unless the Brides Father be very rich, or
that he would match her to some principal Person; and that only in case he
have no sons.

After the contract is performed between their Fathers, then there follow many
courtesies and compliments; as first, the Bridegroom sends the Bride a
present of things to eat, as flesh, wine, and fruit; Secondly, a day is chosen
for their Marriage: which, when it is resolved on by advice of Astrologers, is
celebrated with great Ceremony. The third is, to send to know the Brides name;
and last of all, the Bridegroom sends the jewels to the Bride, that is, a
ring and eare-pendants, etc.

The day before the Bride is to be received; they send from the Brides house
the Houshould-stuffe and Furniture that is given with her; making a procession
with them; which is to be done about noone, that all may see it; The men that
carry it, go two and two, each of them bearing a piece of household stuff of the
same kind, that the other does, whether it be Tables, Chaires, Chests,
Curtains, Bed, or what other thing soever.

The day following, in some Provinces, the Bridegroom goes in person on
Horseback, with his Father and nearest kindred, to receive the Bride: who is
carried in a sedan with great pomp and state. In other Provinces, especially
toward the South, the Bridegroom sends the sedan toward the evening (they
have some very curious ones, made only for this purpose, richly adorned with
silk, and the door to be locked on the outside) and a great deal of company
to wait upon her with lights set in wooden frams like lanthornes. The mother
after the Bride has finished the usual compliment, at parting, puts her
into the sedan and locketh the door, and sends the key before to her
sonne-in-laws mother; and so she departs along with the company, who go all
before her, excepting the maidservants, which her Father gives her, who go by
her side.

When she is come to the Bride-groomes house, the mother-in-law unlocketh the
sedan and taking out the Bride, delivers her to the Bridegroom; Then they
go both together to the Chapel, or Oratorie of their Idols, where are
likewise kept the Images or names of their Predecessors. There they make the
ordinary reverence of bowing themselves four times upon their knees, and
presently they go forward into the inward Hall, where their parents are sitting
in Chaires, to whom they make the same reverences; then the Bride retireth with
her Mother-in-law, her waiting maids, and the woman that did negotiate the
marriage, to the women's apartment; where she has a particular chamber for her
self and her husband; into which, as is abovesaid, no other man may enter, no
not their Father or elder brother, so that if the Father would chastise the son
for any fault, (which is ordinary there for their Fathers to do, although
their sons be married) if he can get into his wives chamber he is safe, for
the Father may not enter there, nor speak with his daughter-in-law, except on
some occasions, which are dispensed with: So careful a watch do they keep on
that precious Gemme of Honor. The Bridegroom, when he does not retire,
stays with his Father, kindred, and friends, etc. Who spend many days
together in continual feasts and banqueting: when the first month is over,
the Bride returns home to her Fathers house, which they call Queinim, that is
retiring to rest.

The sons do all equally inherit; although they be but halfe-Brothers, and
not begotten on the lawful wife, having regard in this only to the Father. The
sisters have no more than what is given with them at their marriage. If the
Father die before he has married his daughters, the brothers are obliged to
bestow them in marriage; and the sons that are already married, (if the
Father in his life time divide his estate among them,) are bound to maintain
their sisters, till they are married.

Nevertheless in China there are some families, especially of the Nobility,
where the eldest sons do inherit the Majorasgo, or the most considerable part
of the land, if they have any that is so entaild; although they have other
brothers. And these children are called Que Cum, Chu, Hui, Heupe, Chei, Hei.

CHAP. 16.
Of the Funerals and Sepultures of the Chinesses.
ALthough the Chinesses, in many things, especially those which concern the
government of their life, have been of the same opinion with the Europaean
Philosophers, yet they are very different from them in that which belongs to
Death. For the others have taken little or no care about the Sepulture of the
body, whereas these esteem nothing more; using in their life time all possible
diligence to leave every thing ready and in order for it; and their sons do
in nothing more show their piety and obedience, than by putting it in
execution after their Fathers death.

It is a general custom of the whole Kingdom, not to bury any one barely in
the earth, although it be a child of two days old. Every one is to have his
Chest, or Coffin according to his quality, and ability. Wherefore the rich
men, (although the Chinesses are very thrifty, and parcimonious) do in this
exceed all extremes, seeking out wood for that purpose, of the greatest price
and esteem, that they possibly can.

The Eunuchs are the most excessive this way, because they have no children to
inherit their wealth, giving many times 500 or 1000 Crowns for Bords to make a
Coffin, though in realitie, these are not so much worth. For it happens many
times, that going to a Merchant, that sells this commodity, the Merchant
sets them a price, asking them five or six hundred Crowns, but tells them
withal, that if they will have Bords of a thousand Crowns, he has not any at
present, but that he has expected some a great while, and looks every day,
when they should arrive: and if his Lordship has not extraordinary have,
prays him to send some few days hence, and he shall be accommodated. Here,
the Merchant has no more to do, but to change the paper, which is pasted upon
those Bords, and with it the price; and when the Eunuch returns he finds
bords of such price as he desires. When the Chest is made with all sort of
exquisite ornament on the outside, as of gold, Charan, and other gallantries,
they keep it in their house, and many times in the same chamber where they lie,
with much satisfaction and contentment. As contrariwise, if, being in years,
they have not already made it, they are always ill satisfied and discontented:
and truly it is a great trouble and charge to the Sons, if they have ancient
Fathers, and their Funeral Chest be not yet prepared.

This is the usual manner of the whole Kingdom; but, because they have taken
their religion from the Pagods of India, they have also entertained some of
their Ceremonies and superstitions, who are buried after three several
manners, and that, before they die by the course of nature, in the earth, in
the water, and in the fire, (as they do to this day in Giappon) some throwing
themselves off from high places, others drowning themselves in rivers, with
stones tied about their necks, and others, other ways, which we will not here
treat of. The Chinesses are not so valiant to do this, while they are living,
but being dead, if they are so poor, that they cannot make them a Coffin, they
burn them, and bury their ashes. In the Province of Sucheu they burn the
body, and put the ashes in earthern Iarres, close stopped; and then cast them
into the rivers.

After the Chest, follows the place of Sepulture, which every one provideth
for himself and his posterity, without the walls: for within, it is not
permitted. Of these places they make great account. Some have in them very
convenient houses: they are kept locked on the outside, and within are full of
Cypresses, (which they usually plant there,) and other trees, proper for that
place. They are many times little worth, in respect of the quantity of ground
they contain; but do cost them a great deal of money, if their Astrologer do
judge them lucky places, and fortunate for the Family; for none do make choice
of them, without his opinion.

In Burying, they observe this order, to lay the chief of the Family in the
uppermost place, and the rest by his side according to their degrees. On the
topp of the Sepulcher, they place many ornaments wrought in stone; and before
them they set Stone-statues of several Animals; and (above all) Epitaphs; and
stones graved with elegant compositions, in praise of the deceased. The great
men, especially the Eunuchs use another way of more vast expense. For they
build in such places, Sumptuous Palaces, with Halls underneath them like
Coemeteries; where there are Niches fitted to receive the Coffins of the
deceased. These Palaces serve them when they go thither; and on The day of the
dead; at which time the whole Family is assembled to make their Sacrifices and
Ceremonies. For the poorer sort of people, that cannot have a peculiar place of
Sepulture, there is ordinarily, in every City, a common place of Burial.

They never fail to bury every one in the place of his Sepulture, although it
be never so remote from that where he dies; which happens often to the
officers, who by reason they are sent to govern in several parts of the
kingdom, do many times come to die out of their own Country, and upon that
occasion cause them to be brought home and buried there: neither does it seem a
custom void of reason, Jacob and Joseph having used the same diligence upon
that account.

At their death the first Ceremony is: that before the dying Person breathe his
last, they bring him on a mattresse, or quilt, into the outward Hall, where he
is to expire. I do not know, what is the reason of this custom; neither is it
generally used of all; for if he be a person of quality, they let him alone in
his bed, and as soon as he is dead, his eldest Son plucketh off the Coife and
Cap from his head, and pulling down the bed without any order overturneth the
Beds-Tester and curtains; and partly by tearing, and partly by breaking,
pulls every thing down, and with it covers the Corpse. If it be a woman, the
women stay, and if it be a man, the men; presently washing the dead Body
according to their custom. When they have washed it; they wind it in a fine
linen cloth, if he have any; or else in a piece of silk. After that, they
cloathe him in the best garment that he has, and upon him they lay the
ensigns of his office and degree: and when he is, thus adorned: they lay him
into the Coffin, which is made of very thick boards, and strongly joynted. On
the inside of the Coffin they bestow two weights, which they call Manos of
Bitumen; and after that one of Charan; and then there is no danger, that any
ill smell can come through it.

The Coffin is then brought out, and placed in the outward hall, which is all
hung with mourning. On the top of the Coffin they lay his statue made by the
life, with his ensigns of honor, just as he lies in the Coffin. Before it,
they set a Table and a Carpet; behind the Coffin, they hang up certain
curtains; behind which, the women stand. On each side of the Coffin are his
sons and grand-sonnes sitting on straw in very deep mourning. In the first
open Gallerie set about with Balansters, which is before the hall, there stand
Trumpeters on each side thereof; and at the great gate of the Palace, on the
inside, in the Court, are two drummers: without the gate next the street there
is hung out a great flagge, made of pieces of paper reaching almost to the
ground, and it is a signal, that their mourning is provided, and that now they
admit of visitants. After that, they advise all their friends and kindred
thereof, sending them a Thie of Mourning, wherein, with words of much
affliction and humility, they give them notice of their sorrow.

Then presently begin their Visits of Condoling, which are done in this manner:
When the Visitant is come into the first Court, presently he puts on his
Mourning-garment, which he brings with him for that purpose. The drummer
beats his drum to give notice of his arrival, and while he passes through
the Court, the Trumpets sound; as soon as he comes into the Hall, the women
behind the Curtains begin to weep and lament. When he comes up to the Table he
lays thereon a purse of paper; with money in it to the value of twelve pence,
or eighteen pence; (which serves for an Aid of the cost,) and some little
perfumes: Then upon the Carpet he makes four reverences, part kneeling, and
part standing on his feet: When they are ended, presently the Sons rise up
from the place where they are, and go and place themselves on the left hand of
the Visitant, and make him as many reverences, partly kneeling, and partly on
their feet, at which time they are to weep, or at least to make as if they
wept: When this is done, without speaking a word, they return to their places
again: In the mean time the Visitant goes forward, and presently one of the
remotest of the kindred, in slighter mourning, comes to receive him, and
leads him into another room; where as soon as they are sat, presently there
is brought in some of their drink, called Chia, and dried fruits, or else dried
sweet meats; of which for the most part they do not eat, but taking a little,
put it into their sleeve, and so take their leave.

This courtesy is esteemed so due, that those friends, who are at hand, may by
no means omit it; and they who are farther off, if they dwell in neighboring
Cities, come in their own person: But if they live very far off, they send
one from home to do it in their name. This ceremony commonly lasts eight or
ten days. But they who live far off, may come, or send to do it, at what
time they please.

When the Visits are over, the eldest Son is obliged to go to all those of
the same City, that came to condole with him at his house; but he has no more
to do, but to come to the gate; where (without) a Carpet is spread, whereon he
makes his reverence, leaves a Thie, and goes his way.

After this, they begin to think of the burial, which (if they are able) is
performed with a great deal of expense; if not, they leave the Chest standing
at home, till they are better able; which is some times whole years first. They
give notice of the funeral to their friends, by sending a Thie to each, as at
the first: Who being assembled, come presently to the place above mentioned.
First of all, are carried the Pageants, which are several great statues of
men, Horses, Elephants, Lions, Tigers, etc. They are all made of painted paper,
and adorned with gilding. Besides these, are carried several other machines,
as Triumphant Chariots, Pyramids, and such like things; every thing being set
out with various works, in silk, and flowers, and roses of the same
materials; all which is to be burnt, if the Person be of great quality: For
otherwise all these are but hired, and none of them is burnt.

After these Pageants, follows the multitude of people which come to look
on; then come all their friends clothed in mourning; after these, the Bonzi,
singing out their prayers, and sounding their Cymballs; after them, come
another sort of Bonzi, who wear beards, and long hair, and leading a single
life, live in community: These go playing upon several musical Instruments.
After these, follow another race of Bonzi, of a different sect; These are
shaved, and go along also saying their prayers. After these, come the more
intimate friends; after them, follow all the kinsmen; after these, come the
sons and grand-sonnes of the deceased Person, clothed in a very austere
mourning, bare footed, with certain staves in their hand, fashioned like those
which pilgrims carry; so short, that they are little above two palms long;
and so they go along hanging their heads down.

Immediately after these comes the Coffin; which if it be made of precious
wood, is uncovered, that it might be seen; else it is varnished over, and
richly adorned with gold and Charan. It is placed on a very large Machine,
carried sometimes by 30, 40. or 50. men, which is still the greater state, the
more they are. Above it, is fastened a Baldacchin^ or cloth of state, which
covers it all over head, having his rich Tassels and strings hanging down by
the sides. Near to this on both hands, are carried many lights in great
wooden frames, made like lanthorns; behind the Coffin, are carried the women,
crying and lamenting in sedans fast locked, and covered all over with mourning,
accompanied in the same manner by their female-friends and kindred. When they
are come to the place of Sepulture, they perform several ceremonies both
before and after the Coffin is buried: And a sumptuous banquet, (which they
make for all those that accompanied the hearse) is none of the worst ceremonies
among them. And this is one of the occasions, wherein they make use of those
fair houses they build in those places.

When they are returned home, then follows the time of mourning, and the
ceremonies that are then observed; which are these that follow. The first and
most universal, is to cloth themselves in the coursest and heaviest mourning;
the color thereof is white, not only in these Kingdoms, but also in Giappon,
Corea, and many other neighboring Kingdoms: and as it seems to me, this
white color was not chosen at the beginning for its one sake, but came in, as
it were, by consequence: for they themselves cannot give any reason, why their
prede cessours chose it; and on the other side they know, that it is a
cheereful color, and as such they wear it at certain times: the reason
therefore of it seems to me to be, because in China they make no cloth but
of Cotton, Silk, and Hemp. Of Silk and Cotton there is no course cloth to be
made, but of Hemp indeed there is, such as would make one afraid to see it.
And because in its natural color it is more unsightly and horrid, than when
it is died and colored, they on purpose choose to have it so: whence it being
naturally white, by consequence, white came to be the proper color for
mourning.

This Mourning lasts three whole years; during which time, the sons do never
sit on a chair, but on a little fourm, or stool, covered with Mourning: they
eat not at a Table, nor lie on a Bed-stead, but the bed is laid on the floor:
they drink no wine, eat no flesh, nor use any Baths, (which are very common
among them.) They go not to Banquets, nor do they go out of their doors, but
in a Sedan close shut, and covered with mourning. They abstain from their own
wives (as they say at least:) if there be any examinations in that time, they
go not to them: they may not hold any public office; and if, at the time, they
do actually exercise any, their Father or Mother chance to die, although he be
viceroy, or Colao, he must leave his office, and attend to bury them, and to
make their obsequies; and when the Mourning is ended, they return to their
charges and offices again, and sometimes to greater.

This time is accounted so sacred among them, that it admits of no
dispensation, except it be in their captains and officers of war. And
because one of the Province of Cantone seemed more desirous of his government,
than to observe his Mourning, and computing his time, resolved to spend the
rest in his journey, which he wanted to makeup his three years, when he came to
the court, and petitioned for his office, it was promised him upon this
condition, that he should return home to his house, and fully accomplish his
time of Mourning, and then he should come again to court, and make his demand.

The number of three years, they say, is to give thanks to their Parents for
the three years of their infancy, during which time they were carried more in
their arms, than on their own legs. And therefore in those three years, in
token of reverence, they may not innovate or alter any thing in the house from
that order, which the Father kept in it.

For a wife they mourn but one year. There is a Slighter Mourning of five
months and three days, according to the neernesse of their kindred and
relation: Friends for their friends observe only Three days of Mourning. They
have all Mourning garments lie ready by them; there being so many occasions to
wear them.

This is the manner of their Mourning and Burial of the Persons of the
greatest quality, which is increased and diminished, according to the condition
and quality of the Person. At the Funerals of the Kings, and those of the
royal Family, the Ceremonies are much greater: and that they might the better
be conceived, I will set down what passed in the year 1614. at the Funeral of
the Queen Mother, where I my self was present.

CHAP. 17.
Of the Funeral of the Queen Mother.
THe Queen Mother died on the ninth day of the second Moon, which is the last
of our March, in the year 1614. presently all the Court put on Mourning, not
only the Nobility, but even the common people too; and especially the Kings
officers and Ministers, who laying aside the ensigns of their dignity, (which
are both of Authority and Ornament to them) do change them for others of
Mourning and Sorrow: as their Girdle (which commonly they wear very rich) into
a rope of course Hemp; and their Cap (which is of black Silk) into one made of
the course cloth for Mourning. In this manner they went four months, till the
time of the obsequies. The common people wore only a Mourning Cap for four and
twenty days, with so much exactness, that he that neglected it, was punished.

The second day, the King leaving the Palaces where he dwelt, passed over to
those of his deceased Mother; which, although they are within the same wall,
yet stand at some distance. They clothed the dead body in white very richly;
and every day till it was put into the Coffin, the King went in Person, with
all the people of his palace to visit her, and to perform those ordinary
Reverences and Compliments, used by children to their parents, putting rich
odours and spices into a perfuming pan, which stood before her; all his women,
Sons and Nephews, as also some of the Principal Eunuchs of the Palace did the
like with all Solemnity. Then presently, by the Kings command, the garments,
bed and other things which the Queen used, were burned: judging it an unworthie
thing that ever they should be made use of by any Person inferior to her in
dignity and authority.

On the third day the body was put into the Coffin. The excellency of the
matter thereof may be easily imagined by what has been already said, that even
for private persons the price of one amounts many times to a thousand
crowns. The boards are very thick, and the Coffin very capacious. There the
King himself placed her upon a Quilt and a Pillow, which were there laid,
strewing upon her, pearl, and precious stones to the value of 70000. crowns,
and placing by her side fifty pieces of cloth of gold, and fifty of cloth of
silver, which truly would have been enough to have maintained a gallant man all
his life time. The Coffin was shut, and the King with the rest made their
accustomed reverences, and departed.

On the fourth day the ceremonies were continued, clothing themselves in a
more austere and horrid Mourning, for to celebrate the Sacrifices, which in
realitie are not sacrifices, but offerings, and pure ceremonies. The Coffin was
placed in a spacious Court, as it were, upon a high Throne, and about it stood
fifteen Tables: The first, that was in the front, was for the King; the rest
for his women, Sons and principal Eunuchs, who, after the King, according
to their order, made their offerings with perfumes and reverences.

On the fifth day, which was appointed for those who dwell without the Palace,
there was assembled all the Nobility and Titulados, which they call Que, Cum,
Chu, Cheu, Heupe, who do all succeed by inheritance. After these, followed all
those that were of Affinity and Alliance with the King, that is, such as were
married to his Daughters or Nieces. After these, the Magistrates of the six
Tribunals: And after these, came the wives of the great Officers, who have
jurisdiction over the whole Kingdom, such as are those of the six Tribunals,
each in that which appertains to him; whether it be concerning the Revenue,
or the Militia, or any other thing. All these in their order performed the
ceremonies abovesaid: and so there was a period put to the first part of the
ceremonies, which are used in the Palace before the Funeral; for abroad there
were many things commanded, and several edicts published; in which were
intimated:

First, that all Mandarines, both of the Gown and Sword, should make their
appearance at the Palace the day following, to bewail the deceased Queen:
which done, without returning to their houses, they should go directly to their
Tribunalls, there to remain and keep a fast for three days, without eating
flesh, fish, or eggs, or drinking any wine. That done, for the space of other
three days, they should come all to the gates of the Palace, and there in
their order, one by one, should make four accustomed reverences, with some
other external signs of grief, and then return home to their houses.

The second: that all the wives of the Mandarines, from the first to the fourth
degree, clothed from head to foot in close mourning, should assemble at the
same place, and for the space of three days lament in the like manner: and that
afterward, at their own houses, for the space of twenty seven days, they
should not put on their Jewels, ornaments, etc.

The third; that those of the Royal Council, called Han Lin should all make
Poems, verses, and compositions in praise of the deceased Queen.

The fourth: that they of the Quan Lo Su, that is, the Officers of the Kings
exchequer and revenue, should, with all diligence and liberality, provide what
ever was necessary, for the sacrifices and other expenses of the funeral.

The fifth: that all the Bonzi, and ministers of the Idols, should ring their
bells for a long time, as a sign of sorrow and grief.

The sixth: that for thirteen days there should be no flesh killed, or sold in
the shambles: but that all should fast, as the King did; who, for the first
three days, did eat only a little rice boiled in fair water, and the rest of
the time, pu^se only.

The seventh; there was order given to the President of the Council of rites
and ceremonies, and to those of the chamber, that they should present mourning
garments to all the Ambassadors, who did then actually reside in the Court;
and that they should be brought to the Palace and perform one day the
ceremonies and compliments in like manner, as the people of the Country did.

The eighth: that all Mandarines, that had finished their government, and all
new pretenders should come for three days to the Palace, to do the same
reverences and ceremonies.

The ninth: that the common people, for a week together, should do the same,
morning and evening, at the Palace of the Governor of the City.

Besides this, all the Mandarines, dispersed through the Provinces and Cities
of the Kingdom, were written to; that at the arrival of the news of the
Queen-Mothers decease, they should give notice thereof to all the blood royal
of the Male line, and to their wives and children; and order, that they should
make the three accustomed reverences, and other ceremonies on their knees; and
immediately to cloth themselves in Mourning for seven and twenty days. This
order was given to all the Mandarines of the Kingdom, as well to those that
had governd, as to those that did actually govern, as also to all Litterati,
of what degree soever, as likewise to those that had not received any degree.

To the common people there was order given, that they should wear Mourning
caps for thirteen days.

Moreover it was ordered, that as well in the Palaces of the Mandarines, as in
the public Innes on the high ways, and in small villages, where travelers
are lodged at the Kings expense, no music, either of voice or instrument,
should be suffered. And this order was divulged by Mandarines appointed only
for this occasion. And when this order came to the Court of Nankim, all the
officers, both of the Gown and Sword, went out to meet it as far as the
river, all in deep Mourning, even to their Umbrellas, wherewith they keep off
the sun; and accompanied it through the City, in an orderly procession, as
far as the Tribunal of rites and ceremonies; where the President received the
order in writing; and set it up in an eminent conspicuous place, and all of
them did their reverence to it; after that, he took the letter and opened it,
and made proclamation of the order, although there wanted nothing to the
execution thereof, but that the common people had not yet their Mourning caps.

These were the ceremonies, which preceded the Funeral; the which being ended,
order was given to the Mathematician Major, or chief Astrologer of the Court
of Pekim, that he should make choice of a day or days, whereon the Obsequies
should be solemnized. He, after he had consulted his art, appointed the ninth
day of the sixth moon (four months complete after the Queens death) to be the
day, whereon the corpse should be brought out of the Palace, and the fifteenth
of the same moon, for the day of the Funeral. The time being come, order was
given for the solemnizing thereof in form following.

First; that all the Mandarines of the Court, and Magistrates of the six
Tribunals, six days before, should leave their own houses, and make their abode
at their Tribunals, and should fast for three days in manner abovesaid.

Secondly, that the Officers of the Kings Patrimony and Revenue should prepare
whatsoever was necessary, for that occasion; that is, great quantity of
Candles, Perfumes, Spices, great store of Phantasticke figures, and Images of
men, Horses, Lions, Elephants, Vmbrellas of Silk, all richly set out, that they
might be burnt at the place of Sepulture. It is reported, that there were spent
in this above 30000 Crowns. I make no doubt, but so much was spent; but that it
was afterward all burnt, is hard to be proved; It may be, fame was something
extravagant in that particular.

Thirdly, that they of the College of Han Lin should anew, make other verses
proper for the Funeral.

Fourthly, because the King was to accompany the Body to the Sepulture, which
is twelve miles distant from the Court, he named another Person, who in his
stead should perform all the compliments and necessary Ceremonies.

Fifthly, order was given to all the Officers, Captains, and Soldiers, that
they should keep a Guard in the City, and at the Sepulcher, and that they
should accompany the Body, by the way, in this manner, That at every gate of
the City, (which are nine in all) there should stand a thousand men. That from
the gate, through which the Body was to pass, to the place of Sepulture, there
should stand two rancks of Soldiers: that there should be 3000 to carry the
Coffin by turns; and 10000 horsemen to accompany it: and for the Guard of the
Royal Sepulchers, while the Obsequies lasted, 40000.

Sixthly, order was given to level the way from the Palace to the place of
Sepulture, and to rail it in on both sides, that the people might not stop up
the way. At every twenty paces, there was set a basket of yellow earth, for to
strew in the way, as the Hearse passed; as also, that Tents, and Pavillions
should be set up in certain places: for the refreshment of those that
accompanied the Body.

Seaventhly, command was given to all the officers of the revenue, that they
should provide, with all punctualitie and liberality, whatsoever was necessary
for the sustenance and diet of the Mandarines, Eunuchs, Captains, Soldiers,
and all others, that by duty of their place, attended upon the Funeral
Solemnity.

Eighthly, that three days before the Funeral, the Mourning, Lamentation,
Reverences and Sacrifices should be renewed in like manner, as at the beginning.

Ninthly, and lastly it was commanded; that from the seventh (that is, two
days before the Funeral Solemnity began) to the twentieth of that Moon, no
Shambles should be opened, neither flesh nor fish sold, in any manner, nor that
any noise of mirth, or Musical instrument should be heard any where throughout
the City.

All things being set in order for the Funeral; on the seventh of the sixth
moon the King and Prince with all the officers, went to the Temple of his
Ancestors, which stands within the Royal Palaces: where, clothed in deep
Mourning, and coming before the Image of the first founder of his Family, he
made a low Reverence, and after offered to his deceased Mother, whose Image was
yet standing there, many Garments of silk, wine, and other things. Then he
commanded that one of the compositions made in her praise, should be read;
after which using several other Reverences and Ceremonies, they all returned;
and the King left particular order, that all those Garments, Poems, and other
things should be burned.

On the eighth day, were made Sacrifices to Heaven, Earth, the Planets,
Mountains, and Rivers, with great Solemnity; when these were ended, the King
commanded, that the same Sacrifices should be made to the nine Gates of the
Palace, through which the Corpse of the deceased Que^n was to pass; and to the
Tutelar Angels of them; as also the six Bridges of the River, which runs
through the Palace, offering in all these places living creatures, Aromaticks,
wine made with several Spices and ingredients, and diverse other perfumes.

The Chest or Coffin, in which the deceased Queen lay, was of the most precious
and dearest wood, that could be found in that Kingdom, and was shut and closed
up with all possible art and diligence, and clasped on the outside with hasps
of Silver, made in the form of Dragons: neither was there any Gold, or Charan,
used for the Ornament thereof, that that precious wood might be left more bare
and open to the sight. It was placed in a Triumphant Chariot very richly
wrought, with its Curtains of silk embroidered with Gold. Moreover the Chariot
was adorned all over with plates of Silver, cast in the figures of Lions and
Dragons, and other works; all performed with exquisite art and diligence. About
the Hearse stood many Candles and perfuming pans.

The fifth day being come, which was appointed by the Kings Mathematician for
the carrying of the Corpse forth of the Palace, the King with his Women, Sons,
and the Eunuchs of the Palace, came to the place, where the Chariot, that
carried the Hearse, stood; where, after they had renewed their lamentations for
their departed Queen, they Sacrificed to the Chariot it self, or to the God
and Genius thereof; that the voyage might be prosperous; and that the Body
might enjoy quiet and security; then Sprinkling sweet waters upon the Hearse,
they made their last Compliments and Reverences.

Presently the Eunuchs (for no others enter there,) put themselves in order to
draw the Chariot, the King accompanying it with all his Family to the last,
that is, the eighth Gate of the Palace, where, with new laments, Ceremonies and
complements, he took his leave.

Then within the first gate stood ready, they that were to receive the Corpse,
and in the Kings name and stead, were to accompany it, and to make the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies, that were to be performed at certain places. Then
presently began the Procession, with such solemnity, order, and silence, that
it caused admiration in all that beheld it. It went no further that day, than
to a Town without the walls; near to which there was a Tent set up very richly
adorned, where the Chariot was put; and the Tables likewise being, set, they
did Sacrifice, and burned Incense and Perfumes, and performed other Ceremonies
and Reverences; and last of all they renewed their Lamentations. From this
place was dispatched an Eunuch to give the King full account, whither, and how
the Body was arrived, and of all that passed there.

The day following was begun with the Ceremonies and other Funeral
solemnities, with which the day before was concluded; and their journey
continued with such a Multitude of people, as well of those of the Guard near
hand, as of other people afar off, that were curious to see, that they were not
to be numbered. By reason of the Sacrifices, Ceremonies, and stops which they
made in the way, they were three days ere they arrived at the Mountain, where
the Kings Sepulchers were.

As Soon as they were come thither, the Hearse was removed with many Ceremonies
from the Chariot, where it was, to another triumphant Chariot, which they had
in readiness for that purpose, of no less cost than the former. After that,
they Sacrificed to the earth, a Bull, with Spiced wines, rich perfumes, and
garments, Suplicating to the tutelary Spirit thereof, that he would receive
that Body with pity, keep, and defend it, etc.

At the same time, nine Mandarines, appointed by the King himself, performed
the same Ceremonies and Sacrifices to all the Kings predecessors, which were
buried there: when the day was come, on which the Body should be buried, which
was the fifteenth of the sixth Moon, they made many Sacrifices, and so put an
end to the Funeral: when presently the Mandarines posted away, to give the
King account of all that had passed; which account was always given him in
part from time to time by the way. And he showed his liberality to all those
that had taken pains in that work: and to show his care and piety, in all
that which he ought, to his Mothers memory, presently after her death, he
commanded that all prisoners should be released, that were not committed for
any enormous crimes. He gave order also, that in the Provinces, where there was
a Scarcity of victuals, the ordinary Tribute should be taken off; and that
alms should be given to those that were most necessitous among them.

He ordered also, that the Rights and Gabels, to be paid at the Gates and
Custome-houses, which upon some occasions were lately imposed, should cease:
and he himself, with his own hands, made many thousand small pieces of Silver
which he lapped up in paper, according to the custom of China, to give them in
Alms for the Soul of his dead Mother.

Truly there is nothing in China, so worthy to be imitated by Christians, as
their piety toward their Parents, and God having given to this Nation such
knowledge and inclination to virtue, it is great pity, that they should only
want the foundation of faith. Hence we may see, with how great fruit and profit
the Gospel might be preached in this Kingdom, or rather by the goodness of
the Lord, it is already preached, as we shall declare in its proper place.

It will not be besides the purpose of this discourse, to add briefly
something, concerning the death of King Vanli, Son to this Queen abovesaid,
the which fell out toward the end of August in the year 1620. in their
seventh moon; forbearing to mention the Ceremonies, which were like to those,
we even now related.

He fell sick about the end of June (in the same year,) of a looseness and
pain in his stomach, swelling of his feet, and other Maladies; This infirmity
lasted two months with many various changes and alterations: after which,
finding himself come to the end of his life, he called his Son, the heir of
the Kingdom, with his three other brothers; to whom he made a discourse full
of good advise and wholesome precepts, accusing himself of too much
negligence, and want of care, and then gave them the last salute.

Then he made his last Will and Testament, the manner whereof is this. When the
Physicians do despair of the Kings recovery, the Colai, if they be many, as
they use to be, together with the chief of the Eunuchs, and the first
President of the Palace, whom they call Suli Kien, go to the King, and
endeavor to draw from his own mouth, what his last Will is, and the sum of
his Testament. After that; they go secretly to the Prince, the heir of the
Kingdom, and give him an account of all, to the end nothing might be done
contrary to the will of him, who is presently to take possession of the
Kingdom.

When they have understood, what both their pleasures are, they put it into the
form of a Will, and carry it to the King, to have his approbation of it. Then
they present it to a Senator of the royal College, called Hanli Yven, to
whom it belongs to put such writings, as concern the King, into good form
and style.

That done, it is closed up and sealed with the Kings seal, and is kept in the
Archives of the royal College, whilst the King is living. As Soon as he is
dead, it is carried to the Tribunal of Rites and Ceremonies, to whom it
belongs to publish it through the whole Kingdom, and to put it punctually in
execution.

The form of this Will is here faithfully copied and translated out of the
Chinesses language into ours.

The last Will and Testament of our Emperor Vanli, who in obedience to Heaven,
has resigned his Empire into the hands of Posterity.
I From a child received the government of this Monarchy from the hands of my
Progenitors, and have held it forty eight years, a very long time: wherefore
I have no reason to lament, that I am now to leave it. As Soon as I was created
Emperor, I had strong inclinations to govern well, and to imitate my
Predecessors; as in truth I endeavored to do, with all exactness. But
afterward, being hindered by several infirmities for many years, I left off the
care of having the wonted sacrifices celebrated to Heaven and earth: neither
did I cause the offices and ceremonies to be performed, which are due to the
memory of my Ancestors. I seldom times sat upon the throne to consult of the
affairs of the Kingdom; I detained the petitions which were presented me,
without dispatching them. I took no care of nominating Magistrates, as the
Kingdoms need required; and I know, that at this present there are some
wanting. I have opened nine mines of gold, and silver: I have increased and
multiplied the Gabells and Excise: I have disturbed the public peace with
tumults of war; whence has followed discord with the neighboring princes,
and great oppression and injury to their people: wherefore thinking continually
both night and day upon these things, I am hardly able to suffer the grief,
which my soul endures, and which does now detest her former faults: finally,
I began to take up better resolutions; but I am fallen into this infirmity, the
which does still so increase, that it makes me believe, I shall very shortly
lose my life.

In the mean time I have this only hope left me, that my Sons and Nephews
will amend my faults by leading a better life.

You therefore the Heir of my Kingdom, seeing that you neither want
ingenuity, nor good disposition; and because you have hitherto never forborne
the exercise of piety, obedience, and other virtues; be of good courage. The
inheritance of the Empire of China is yours. Let your principal care be well
to compose your life and manners. Apply your self with all study and industry
to the well governing of the Kingdom. Love those that are good; refuse not
counsel; take not advise in evil part: that you might be able to bear the
great weight of this Empire: do your endeavor that your Son my Grandchild,
follow his studies with all diligence. Be kind and loving to your three
Brothers: assign them convenient habitations; and provide for each of them a
good revenue and honorable Titles. Use your utmost diligence, that all your
subjects, as well noble as ignoble, may live in peace, and love concord. Take
care speedily to make the Colai, and other the supreme Magistrates, for I do
remember, to have left two places void: and above all, forget not to elect the
Kings Administratours. These things I recommend to you that you should
endeavor speedily to put them in execution.

By all means take off the new Gabells at Bridges, the Excise of silk, stuffs,
eartherne ware, and other things, which I have lately introduced. Take care
that all causes, which are depending in the Tribunals, be dispatched with
diligence by some select Judges; and free the innocent. The soldiers on the
confines of Tartary do want their pay and provisions: let them be speedily
supplied out of the royal exchequer (this last clause is said to have been
added by the Prince to his fathers Testament,) I do recommend to you the
soldiers and Captains, which were slain in the last war. Honor their
Mortuaries, and their souls with new Titles; assist their families by paying
their arreares.

All this I briefly ordain, that you should put it in execution, as soon as
possibly you may.

As for my Funeral, cause the ceremonies of the Kingdom to be observed.
Though I had rather for my particular satisfaction, that in stead of twenty
seven months, as is the usual custom, they should only last for so many
days. All the Magistrates, Viceroys, Visitours and Captains of war, have
more need to assist at their governments and charges: Suffer not, that they be
called hither, upon the occasion of my funeral. It will be sufficient, that
when each has news of my death, he cause to be done, for three days in the
place where he is, that which uses to be performed at the Funeral of the
Kings body. The Pastilios, and other perfumes, wont to be presented on the like
occasions, may be brought by the inferior officers, in the name of the great
ones. But for the Magistrates appointed for the government of the forts, and
the Presidents of Cities and Towns, my Will is, that in no case they should be
suffered to come, as also that the strangers, who are Tributary to this
Kingdom, should be excused, I do ordain that this my last Will should be
published through the whole Kingdom, that it may come to the ears of every
one of my subjects.

This was his will and Testament; which accordingly was every where published.
The other ceremonies I forbear to write, because they are the same with those,
we have already related.

CHAP. 18.
Of the several Sects of religion in China.
THe Chinesses are generally little inclined to Sects; neither are there any
thing near so many among them, as among the people of Giappon. Nevertheless
they have three, which, although they be different, yet, that they might not
err in any, or to speak more correctly, that they might err the more, they
join them altogether. Two of them are proper to China, and first sprung up
there: The third, which is of the Idols, is adventitious, and came from India.

The first is that of the Litterati; and is more ancient among them, than some
do think, who make Confusio to be the author of it. They worship no Pagod, or
Idol, but acknowledge a Superiority, or Deity, who is able to chastise and to
reward. Notwithstanding they have no Churches, wherein they worship him; nor
any divine Offices which they celebrate, nor any prayers that they rehearse;
nor any Priests or Ministers, which officiate at his service. Yet they speak
and write in their books of this Lord very Honorably, as of a divine person;
neither do they apply or attribute any undecent thing to him, as our Ancestors
did to their Gods. But as they did not perfectly and distinctly know the true
God, they fell to worship three things, which are the most renowned, powerful
and profitable in the world, the which they call San, Cai, that is, heaven,
earth, and man. There are, in the courts of Nankim and Pekim only, very
sumptuous Temples for heaven and earth; but which do properly belong to the
King alone; wherein he only in his own person does sacrifice; he being the
Minister also of the sacrifice, and in his absence, or by his order, the chief
Magistrate of the Tribunal of Rites.

In the Cities, there are Temples for the Tutelar spirits, to which the
Mandarines do sacrifice, as also to the spirits of the rivers, mountains, and
of the four parts of the world, etc.

There are also Temples to the honor of some men, who have been famous
Benefactours to the public; and therein, are palced their Images. They do the
same honor to their Ancestors, until the fourth degree upwards.

For their soul in the next life, they neither expect, nor pray for any thing:
Nevertheless, they ask for temporal assistance in this life, good fortune,
and to be able to imitate their good works and atchivements.

They pretend by this to stir up devotion in the people, that they seeing how
heaven and earth are honored, as universal Parents, they might also honor
their particular Parents: and seeing how famous men of former ages are
honored, they might thereby endeavor to imitate them; and seeing how their
deceased Progreitours are served, they might learn how to serve them, while
living. In a word, they order every thing, as it may conduce most to good
government, to concord, peace, and quietness in Familes, and to the exercise
of virtue.

The Second Sect is that of the Tausi, proper also to China. The Author
thereof was a Philosopher named Tausu, of whom they feign, that he was eight
years in his Mothers belly. He lived about the time of Confusio. He has many
followers to this day, who live together in community: they do not marry: they
suffer the hair of their head and their beard to grwo very long: in their
habit they do not differ from others, except in some things at the time when
they officiate. In stead of a Cap, they wear a little Crown, into which the
knot only of their hai^e enters. They place their ultimate Happiness in the
Body, in order to obtain a quiet and easy life; without labor and trouble.

This Sect acknowledges one Great God, and other lesser one, all corporeal.
They acknowledge Glory and Hell: the Glory to be conjoined to the body, not
only in the other life, but also in this; feighning, that by means of certain
exercises and meditations, one may come to make himself a child, and young,
and others to become Xin Sien, that is, the fortunate ones of the earth;
obtaining by this means whatsoever they desire, and to be able to transfer
themselves from one place to another, although never so distant, speedily and
easily; and other such like fooleries.

They are skillful in Music, and have good Instruments. They are always
called to the Sacrifices and Funerals, and at those of the King and
Mandarines, they are ever assistant. They Pretend to be South-Sayers, and
promise to procure rain, and to drive away devils from places that are
haunted: But are able to do nothing; and sometimes at such undertakings they
are foully routed by the devils: in great droughts they promise rain, and often
prolong so much time in praying for it, that at length the time of rain
comes.

In Pekim, in the year 1622, there fell out a pleasant Accident, although
troublesome. There happened a great drought, prayers were made, pennances and
fasts were kept: but all to no end. At length certain Tausi offered themselves
to procure rain without fail, and appointed a set day and hour, the offer
was accepted with great applause, joy, and good hope of the event: then they in
a great Piazza, or marketplace made a theater composed of little Tables, which,
as they have many there of an equal height and breadth, they did set one upon
another, beginning at bottom with a great many, and raising it up by degrees
higher, still with fewer Tables, till at length, the Machine came to end in one
only, observing an handsome propoition and reasonable height. On this last and
highest stood the chief of them, praying and supplicating; and the rest went
round about him, doing the same, like Baals Priests, (although they did not
wound themselves; for in that they had great regard, as those who sought not
blood, but water.)

The people stood all round about, expecting the event: and the Ministers
observing so great an Auditory, which was almost infinite, redoubled their
prayers, their whistlings, and ceremonies. When the day and hour appointed was
come, presently the Sky began to be overcast with very dark clouds, to the
great joy of all, and credit of their Ministers, who did already promise
themselves the happy accomplishment of their undertaking; expecting every
moment, when the rain should fall, When behold, of a sudden there fell a
furious storm of Hail, the Stones whereof were as big as Eggs, and some
bigger, which did ruin, not only their fields, but their Gardens, and killed
diverse Persons, that could not in time recover some Shelter.

The Fathers have writ me from thence, that they thought the end of the world
was come, so great was the confusion and noise of the Hail that fell. The
Prophets, for having procured stones in stead of water, were all rewarded with
store of Bastinadoes.

The third Sect is of the Pagods, from India, from the part of Indostan; which
Sect they call Xaca, from the Author of it: concerning whom, they fable; that
he was conceived by his Mother Maia, only upon the sight of a white Elephant,
which she saw in her sleep; and for the more purity she brought him forth at
one of her flancks, and then presently died, being but nineteen years of age.
And that, iconsidering the death of his Mother, the cause whereof he was by his
Birth, he resolved to leave the world, and to do penance; the which he did in
a Mountain called the Snowy Mountain, where he had four Masters, with whom he
studied twelve years; so that by that time he was thirty years of age, he was
accomplished in the Science of the first principle. He took the name of Xekia,
or Xaca: he taught his doctrine for the space of 49 years; he had many
Scholars, who, after his death collected his papers, and spread his doctrine
through the greater part of Asia.

This Sect entered into China in the year of our Redemption 63. The Emperor
Hanmim being commanded in a dream, (as their books report) to send for it in.
The Bonzi, who were the preachers of that Sect, were well received of him, and
at the beginning, were very powerful, much esteemed, and in so great number,
that they say, they were three millions. But at this day they are very few in
respect of that number: whether it were that they trusting in their multitude,
or in the Kings favor, committed some notable disorder; or (what is more
likely) by reason of the misfortune that befell many Kings, since their coming
in: and by this means they are so declined, that unless it be in the offices
and Acts of their divine worship, there is but little account made of them
among the Chinesses.

Their Priests wear their head and beards shaved: their Cap is different, but
the rest of their Habit is the same with that of others. They worship idols:
They hold a Reward and Punishment in the next Life: They marry not: They live
in Convents, four or five hundred together, or more: They have a moderate
Maintenance allowed them by the King, notwithstanding, every one is allowed to
get what he can: They beg, mutter Prayers: They sing: They have several
offices, and prayers against fire, tempests, misfortunes, and especially for
the dead: in which Functions they use sacerdotall, or priestly garments: Their
Caps are like ours, and their sprinkling brushes without any difference at all:
They eat neither flesh, fish, nor eggs, neither do they drink wine.

They live enclosed; but within a very great circuit of wall, with long
streets in it in manner of a Town; where, in every house there dwellet^ three
or four, that is, one Master and the rest Scholars: In it they have all manner
of convenience. That which the King gives them, is divided equally to every
house. They have also a superior, who is over them all, and governs them,
but at large, for he only takes notice of such cases, as are proposed to him
for the rest, every one governs his own house. He distributeth the offices
among them, and appoints such as are to receive strangers. When any officer
arriveth at their Convent, or Temple, presently a drum is beaten, which they
keep at the gate; and then there are about thirty obliged to come and meet him,
when they have put on their garment of Courtesy. When the Magistrate is come
to the gate, they make him a low reverence, and presently turning about they go
before him, waiting on him to the place, whether he goes; and there they
attend him, standing on their seet in the same manner, till he go away. They
are properly subject to the council of rites, who governs them; but in
chastising of them, when there is occasion, they are more favorable to them,
than to secular persons.

There are others of them, that live in caves, rocks, and grotts, and some that
make their particular penances in private; others that make little narrow
lodges, knocked full of nails with their points turned inwards, where they
stand in sight of all the world, for the space of a month without leaning: Some
of them profess to eat nothing, whilst they are there, but only to drink Cha.
But those that are expert, say; that they make up great balls of beef, which
has been first well boiled, dried in the sun, and then ground to powder; and
that when they give them their Cha to drink very hot, they cast one of their
balls into it, which presently dissolveth: which although it be no very
nourishing diet, yet it is sufficient to sustain them, and to color their
deceit of living without eating.

There be some who belong to no Convent, or Temple, neither are they Sons of
any Monastrie; neither are they admitted into them, as Guests, but for one day
only: They call them vagabonds; and among these, there are many times found
some, who are very wicked men, and do much mischief, especially by robberies.

Notwithstanding the greater part of these abovenamed Sectaries, is not
scandalous; but very patient, meek and humble; whether it be from the habit,
which humbles them; or from the little esteem that is made of them, which
keeps them under.

There go abroad no ill reports of them, although they be frequently spoken
off: And to mention those which appear in public, in two and twenty years,
that I was there, I heard only two stories of them; and of one of them, the
cause was not certainly known. In the City of Hancheu, there was found one
morning one of them bound to a Tree, and stabbed to death with daggers:
concerning which there was an ill judgment raised. In the village of Xhanhay in
the Province of Nankim, during the time that I lived here, a Bonzo was desired
by a widow woman, to come to her house and to recite some prayers for the soul
of her deceased husband: But it seems he chose rather to make a commeration
of the living, than the dead: The fact was known; and for a month together he
was exposed to public shame (for they do chastise them very well) with a great
square board about his neck, whereon was written in great letters the occasion
of his penance. It is very much in 22 years to have heard no more against them.
Not but that I could say something upon this occasion: but it is better to be
silent, than to speak of it.

There are also Nuns in China, who live after the same manner: They shave
their heads; but they are not many; neither do they observe Clausure.

The end of all these Sects of the Bonzi is to do penance in this life, to be
better provided in the next. They believe the Transmigration of Pythagoras, and
that the souls departed go to hell; which, they hold, does contain nine
several places; and after they have passed through them all, those of the best
sort, are borne men again, others of a middle fort, are turned into living
creatures, like unto men. But they are in the worst condition, that go into
birds, who may not so much as hope in the next Transmigration to become men;
but at soonest in another after, having first gone into some other living
creature. This is the general belief, not only of the common people (in whom,
these errors are radicated beyond imagination) but also in people of better
account.

But their wisest men, or to speak more truly, they that are most given to
Atheism, forsaking this way, which they call the Exterior, do follow another,
more interior or secret; the knowledge whereof they preserve, with great care
among themselves; placing their whole intent on the understanding of the first
principle, (which is properly the doctrine of Xaca) whom they believe to be the
same, in all things; and all things to be the same with him; without any
essential difference; operating according to the extrinsick Qualities of the
subject; as wax is formed into several figures, the which being dissolved by
liquefaction, remain in substance the self same wax.

After this their way; they divide mankind into ten Classes. The four first
whereof are good* that is, Principiantes, or Beginners; Proficientes, or
Proficients; Provecti, or those that have Advanced; Consummati, or they that
are accomplished. The three first do walk well, although they are but yet in
the way; but the fourth is arrived at perfection, by means of contemplating the
first principle; and by mortification of their passions; which did disquiet
them with perturbations and scruples; and do already enjoy such an internal
quiet and Peace of mind, that nothing does give them any remorse or trouble,
for whatever they think, say, or do; assuring their consciences, that after
death they are to expect neither reward nor punishment; but that every thing
shall return to its principle, as it was at first.

For the other six Classes of men, they make six Hels. The first and gentlest
is of Infants, who have not yet had any experience of their passions, nor been
troubled by them; especially by covetousness, anger, etc. The second is of
them, who being placed in the government of the world, give themselves wholly
to the vanity thereof: The third is of them, who like brute beasts, follow
their passions and disordinate appetites. The fourth is of them, that rob,
wound, assault, and slay. The fifth of them, who suffer hunger, thirst,
misery, labors, troubles externally in the body, and internally in the soul.
The sixth is of them, that take upon them voluntary labors and sufferings, as
the Bonzi, who do penance, fast, etc. This external life serving them only as
a disposit on to the internal; the which being obtained, the other serves
them for naught, no more than the wooden engine, (which workmen use to shape a
vault withal) after the vault is finished.

Now these men do esteem Hell to be no more than thus: And when they speak of
Transmigration into beasts, they say, It is to be understood of this life: As
if a man be civil, courteous, and well bred; they say he is turned into a man;
if choleric and furious, into a Lion; If cruel, into a Tiger; if gluttonous,
into a swine: If a thief, into a Bird of prey. Hence was the original of that
handsome saying among them, Ti Yo Thien Than Ti Yen Sin Vai. (That is,) Heaven
and Hell are seated in the heart.

These are the Three principal Sects of China, from whence have sprung many
others that are there to be found.

They hold, that they may be made all to agree without any prejudice to their
observance. They have a text, which says, San Chiao Ye Tao; that is, The
doctrines are three, but the reason of them is but one. For although the
worship, adoration, and exercise be different, notwithstanding the end at which
they all arrive, is the same, Cum Hiu, (that is) nothing.

The Litterati of the first Sect, imitating Heaven and Earth, apply all to the
government of the Kingdom; of their families; and of their persons, only in
this life; and after that pretend to nothing. The Tausi of the second Sect,
without any regard to their families or the government, treat only of the
body. The disciples of Xaca of the third Sect, without any regard to the body,
treat only of the spirit, internal peace, and quiet of conscience: Hence
arose that sentence which they use, Iu Chi Que, Tau Chi Xin, Xe Chi Sin, that
is, the Litterati govern the Kingdom, the Tausi the body, and the Bonzi the
heart.

Besides these three which are all admitted, and publicly professed in the
Kingdom; there is another which is not public, nor permitted; but is under a
prohibition, notwithstanding it has many followers: it is called Pe Lien Kieo,
and is exceedingly hated of the Chinesses, especially of the governors;
because the disciples thereof do conceal themselves, doing every thing by
night with much secrecy. It is commonly believed, that their intent is, to
exalt some of themselves to the Crown; and it is verily thought, that some
perverse men of this profession, have already designed it.

A Chinesse of good credit did affirm to me, that there were throughout China
many thousands of them; and that they had a Captain or King, with all his
officers belonging to him: whom, such of their Sect, as live far off, do
reverence in their letters, with all respect due to such a Person; and those
that are at hand, when they have a convenience to assemble themselves, do
honor him with services, courtesies and splendor, suitable to that of royal
Majesty: and that all of them knew one another.

In the year 1622. in the Province of Xantum, which lies between that of
Nankim and Pekim, there was discovered and taken one of these that was their
Captains. And because the Mandarines were resolved, not only to punish him,
but all those that followed his Sect likewise; they questioned him concerning
his companions; and not being able to draw a confession from him, they gave him
several times the rack. Which being understood by those, of the same Sect,
whether it were for love they bare him, or for fear, that he might be
constrained to confess and discover them, they all resolved to arm
themselves, and fall upon the Mandarines, and by force of arms to deliver
their companion: which accordingly they put in execution, with so much
suddenness, that it was impossible for the others to resist or escape them.
They slew many of the Mandarines, and the rest were so affrighted, that they
delivered their companion,

Then having formed themselves into a Body, they began to conquer the Province.
At the beginning their number was not considerable, but in a short time there
were so many, who joined themselves to them, part of their own faction, and
part of other vagabonds, that already they came to be many thousands; and so
going on, without finding any resistance, they made themselves Masters of the
small villages, and at lengh took two walled Towns, where they fortified
themselves, issuing out from thence, to assault their enemies.

This news gave no little trouble to the Court, the rebels being very near
them. But at length by the diligence they used, all was remedied; by reason,
that numerous forces were sent out against them from Pekim: and although at the
beginning, there fell out many battles with various success, both on the one
and other side, yet at the length they of Pekim were Conquerours, and the
rebels army defeated, and their Captain taken, who called himself King; and
kept this Title with so much obstinacy, that being lodged at the house of a
Person of quality, before he came to the Court, he did him no Reverence at all;
and being bid to bow and do him Reverence, he answered with much disdain, the
King does Reverence to no man. Being come to Court, he was condemned to die,
and was accordingly beheaded; and this was the Crown which he deserved. After
that, the King quieted the rest by pardoning the greatest part of the rebels.

CHAP. 19.
Of their Superstitions and Sacrifices in China.
SUperstition is an Individual companion of Paganism; but in China, Giappon,
and Corea, and the neighboring Kingdoms, it is in great excess. The Kings
Mathematician gives no small occasion to these superstitions; for from the
impressions of the air, the colors of the Sky, tempests, unseasonable
thunders, aspects of the Sun, whereof they have two and twenty differences,
and several appearances of the Moon, whereof they have sixteen, he always
makes his Prognostications, especially whether there will be peace in the
Kingdom, or dearth, mortality, mutations, perturbations, and the like.

To this end he makes an Almanac for the whole year, which he divides into
its Moons; and the Moons into days, which according to his calculation, he
declares fortunate or unfortunate, to do or leave undone any thing; as to take
a voyage; to go out of doors; to make marriage; to bury the dead; to build,
and other such like affairs: whence the Chinesses in all their business, do
so observe these Rubriques, that merely, not to go against these rules, they
hasten, defer, or let alone whatsoever they have to do. So that if the Almanac
say, on such a day, such a business is to be done, although all the Elements
conspire against them, they will by no means defer it.

Besides this Almanac, whereof there are so many copies given out, that there
is not an house, which has not one of them, the marketplaces and streets are
full of Astrologers and Soothsayers, who keep open Shop with their Tables for
Calculation, in order only to tell such their fortunes, as come to them to
require it: and although for the most part, they that come to them, are
deceived and coozened, yet there are so many that flock to them, that although
the number of these Diviners, is almost infinite, they live and sustain their
Families by this Art.

Some profess to Divine by way of numbers, even or odd; and with black and
white figures; making 64 mutations, or changes of them; which they explain and
interpret as they please.

Others consider the time of the Nativitie, which the Chinesses are very
diligent in keeping account of, that they may know the hour, the minure, and
conjunction in which their children were born.

Others, whom they call Tili, pretend to Divine by means of the Situation of
the earth, and from the correspondence it has with heaven, and with the parts
thereof; pronouncing what places are prosperous, and what unfortunate; and
where, if they build their houses, all will succeed prosperously, and with good
fortune to the Family; or contrariwise, with sickness, misfortunes, disgraces
and other evils: and in this faculty they have many skillful professors, on
whom they spend a great deal of money without any profit at all.

Others Divine by the Physiognomie of the face; others by considering the lines
and strokes of the hand; others interpret dreams.

Whilst I dwelt in Nankim, there was a man, who went to consult one of these
about a dream he had, which was concerning an Umbrella, or skreen to keep off
the Sun: the professor asked him, if there were any plea or enditement
against him, in any Court of Justice: he answered, There was: Well said the
professor, then San signifies an Umbrella, and San also signifies to vanish;
and the interpretation of your dream is, that all that is against you will
vanish and come to nothing. The poor man was very well pleased, but being
afterward araigned, he received thirty Bastinad'os well set on. The wretch
being angry at his punishment, whereof he thought himself secure, went to
quarrel with the professor, who answered him, Alas, I had forgot to ask thee,
Whether the Umbrella, which thou saw, were a new one, or an old one: it was
a new one, answered the fool. Then said the professor, Make account, that thy
sorrows do but now begin.

Others divine only by the Touch, and these are blind men. In the year 1630.
there came to the Metropolis of Kiamsi, a blind man, well in years: he opened
shop, and was frequented by many of the Nobility: he foretold many things, with
much confidence; and a certain Gentleman of the same City, that was of one of
the four principal families of that place, came to me to tell me what had
passed; he knew me, and understood well enough, what my opinion was in that
matter. He told me many particular cases of things already happened; by which
he was confirmed of the event, of what the other said, should yet come to
pass; and prayed me, that I would go in person, and make trial of him. I went
only to undeceive him: and coming to him, he touched my hand, and bid me speak:
when I had spoke, he began to tell, that I was married, and that I had two
sons, that one of them was towardly, the other wild and disobedient; that my
wife was froward and discontented; in fine, that my whole family was in
disorder: but that when I had taken my degree, all would be well. He is already
a Graduate, answered my friend. Where, replied the blind man? In another
Province, answered the other. At which the blind man withdrew, seeing, although
without eyes, that he had erred in that particular of my degree.

Besides these, whom they consult, they have in their Temples, several kinds
of lots; and a book that explaineth them: They do very frequently draw these
lots, and they as frequently deceive them.

The observe likewise, and make Auguryes from the singing of Birds, and from
the Howling of Beasts: and if at their going out in the morning, they presently
meet with a man clothed in Mourning, a Bonzi, or such like thing, they take it
for an ill Augurie: They say also, that they have familiar spirits, which they
frequently consult: But of this I have not had any knowledge.

Anciently, in time of the Tartars, there were many very skillful in this Art;
and if we may believe, what Marcus Venetus relates, they did many wonders: But
at this day there is nothing certainly known of this matter. Yet there is still
a family, that have a particular pension from the King, which is continued, by
succession to their posterity; and the name of, Magitian or Wizard Major, and
is the chief of that Sect, and is sometimes sent for to the King. I for my
part believe, the devil has more power over them, than they have over the
devil.

As for sacrifices they are very frequent in China, as well great as small
ones: and every one provideth for them what he will, or rather what he can,
according to his estate and ability. They sacrifice four times a year, to
Heaven, the Sun, Moon, and greater part of the Planets and Stars; to the
Earth, Mountains, and the four parts of the World; to the Sea, Rivers, Lakes,
and other things. But it seems that in realitie they sacrifice to the Spirits
of those things, when in common speech, they say they sacrifice to the Earth,
Mountains, etc. Which may be seen in many sacrifices they make; as in the
sacrifice of the house, kitchen, ships, standards and ensigns, when they go to
war, and such like things; in which sacrifices they speak only to the Tutelar
Spirits of those things.

They sacrifice much more to the Idols, and to famous men deceased; to whom,
when they know them to be such, they cause Temples to be built, and place in
them their Images, for services they have done, or other benefits the Kingdom
has received by them.

If seems, that at the beginning it was, and still is meant, only for a kind
of grateful commemoration of them; and that properly they do not sacrifice to
them, but only bring offerings to them, and perform other Ceremonies. But the
ignorant people in time, are come to worship them as Saints, and make prayers
to them, and other such like honors.

They make likewise these kind of offerings to their Ancestors; whose
pictures and Images, (or at least their names written) they have always
present at these offerings and Ceremonies. They only make mention of six, that
is, the first founder of their family; their third and fourth Grandfather,
their great Grandfather, Grandfather and Father: And when he that is the
chief of the family dies, they take him in, and leave out the fourth
Grandfather: So that there always remain six and no more. These offerings
and ceremonies are not properly sacrifices made to their Fathers, for they do
not believe that their Fathers and Ancestors are all, either Gods or Saints;
but only it is a demonstration of Gratitude and Reverence which they think is
due to them, from whom they have received their being.

The which they sacrifice is, some kinds of Beasts, as Goats, Hogs, and
Oxen: These are the most usual. Of Fowls the most ordinary are Cocks and
Hens. Of Fishes what they please. They also sacrifice pieces of flesh, and most
commonly the Head: They sacrifice also Rice, Pulse, and Wine. And if the King
sacrifice any of these things, the Mandarines take themselves large shares of
them; and if the better sort of people sacrifice, such as are the heads of
families, it is divided among the kindred. The ordinary sort of people, after
they have made their offering, which is commonly boiled before hand, take up
every thing again, then having dressed it anew according to their fancy, they
make a feast with it, where it is all eaten.

They sacrifice many other things; as Banners and Umbrellas, all of silk;
several figures molded in gold or silver, or else made of Orpine, or base
gold; great sums of money made of cut paper. All these things are to be sold,
ready made, in the market places, at the shops of several Artificers; and
after they are sacrificed, they burn them all.

Every man offers sacrifice without any difference, they having no
determinate ministers appointed for this act: neither indeed have they for
other things; as for offices (or Divine service) Burialls, to sing and
officiate at them with any exactness.

It belongs only to the king to sacrifice to Heaven, the Earth, Sun, Moon,
Planets and Stars, and if any others should do it in public, he were guilty
of a great crime. For this end they have two most famous Temples at the two
Courts: where the King sacrifices at the four seasons of the year, Spring,
Summer, Antumne and Winter, going thither himself in person; and if he cannot
go, he sends some other to officiate in his stead.

The great Lords and those who are Titelados, sacrifice to the Mountains,
Lakes, etc. The Gentlemen and Officers to the four seasons of the year, and
particular parts of the earth, Hills, and the like.

For the rest, as to their Idols, their houshold-gods, Genij, or Tutelar
Angels, any one sacrifices that will, there being set times and places
appointed for it: except at sometimes they do accomodate themselves, both to
the occasions and places; as when any one is to take a voyage by water, he
offers sacrifice on the day, whereon he departs; and that either in the
Bark, or on the next shore.

CHAP. 20.
Of the Militia and Arms of the Chinesses.
THe knowledge and skill of War and Military affairs is very ancient among
the Chinesses, as appears by their books and Histories; and it is very
certain, that they have conquered many famous Kingdoms: it is also commonly
believed, that they did formerly conquer Ceilan; and near to that place, in
the City of Nagapatam there is to be seen, at this day, an edifice, or
building, which they call The Pagod of the Chinesses: and it is a Tradition
among the people of that Country, that it was built by them. Neither truly is
it a work unfit to be compared to any of that Kingdom. Nevertheless their
books make no mention at all of it; but that is not a sufficient reason
altogether to refute this Tradition; for no more have they any memory left in
their books of the ancient Christianity, which notwithstanding it is most
certain, was there; and was also very much dilated and spread abroad. However
it is manifest, that they had 114. Kingdoms Tributary to them; but at this day
they have only the neighboring Countries, which are nothing near so many; and
even of these, some of them do deny them their tribute; and others have been
abandoned by the Chinesses themselves, holding it better to retire themselves
to their own, in peace and quietness, than to go on still with war and
troubles, to conquer or maintain other Kingdoms.

Beside the Conquests and wars made with stranger Kingdoms, they have had
war also for many years in their own Country; so that beside many
particular books that treat thereof, they have one body of history consisting
of ten Tomes, which only treats of the wars of those times, of their
Captains, their manner of warfare, battles, victories, and other things:
wherein are many notable things to be read, which do clearly demonstrate, that
they have formerly been a valiant and warlike nation, although there are but
few such at this time. The occasions how they came thus to grow less, were
very great, as I shall show hereafter.

At this day, that which they have of warlike in the Kingdom, is only the
multitude, which is very great; for besides the Soldiery, which they have in
the frontiers of Tartarie, and in the Armados and fleets, which are at the
mouths of the great rivers, which run into the Sea, every Province, and in
that every City and Village of the Kingdom, has a proper militia of their
own, which is paid by them, and commanded by their own Captains: and in case
that any Province has need of men, they make use of the Souldierie of their
own Cities and Towns; which by order of the viceroy is easily brought to one
Rendevous. And if there be occasion for them on the frontiers, or any other
place of the Kingdom, presently by order from the King, or his council of
war, they raise the Soldiers of one or more Provinces, according to the
Present necessity, and the possibility of the Province; all of them not being
able to maintain the same number of Soldiers.

These Soldiers are always in readiness, and if one of them be wanting or
die, there are presently enough in the same Town, though it be never so little,
who make suite for the employment; and so the place is presently supplied.

In the City of Nankim they say, there are 40000 Soldiers, and in that of
Pekim 80000. and throughout the whole Kingdom (as Father Matthoeus Riccius
affirms, who lived in China many years, and had very good Knowledge thereof)
above a million: and Father John Rodriguez, who went very much up and down
China, and had opportunity to see the principal places thereof, and was very
curious, says; that he found by diligent search in their books, that in the
body of the Kingdom, with all the Cities and Villages thereof, there are
594000 Soldiers; and on the great walls, which confine on Tartarie 682888. and
yet he did not put into this number the Soldiers of the Armado that guardeth
the coast. Nor will this number seem so excessive, if we consider, that China
alone, beside that it is much more populous, is as big as Spain, France,
Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, great Britain, and all the Islands
belonging to it.

In all this multitude; if we speak of them, who guard the Frontiers* there is
no doubt but there is found some valor and courage; and they have sometimes
gallantly repulsed the Tartars, and in the year 1596, when the Giapponesses,
after they had passed through all the Kingdom of Corea, without finding any
resistance, would have entered China, which they came on purpose to conquer, the
Chinesses repulsed them in such manner, that after the loss of many men, they
were feign to put up their pipes, and return home without doing any thing: so
likewise the Soldiers of the Armado have made some assaults, wherein they have
been victorious. But if we speak of them, who live in the Cities and Villages
throughout the Kingdom, they are but of small courage and valor: but you must
not conceive, that they are only Soldiers, and have no other profession, for
they are Inhabitants and natives of the same places; and are Tailors,
Shoemakers etc. They are always ready to march at the Kings command, and
leaving their houses, go to the war, whenever there is occasion, They are
moreover obliged, to appear at the musters and traynings for three months in
the Spring, and three in the Autumn; the which are held in the great Cities
every day infallibly, where only a Tertia or third part of them do muster; but
in Villages they do all make their appearance every day.

The manner which they hold in this Militia, is thus. All the Soldiery,
whether of Foot or Horse, are drawn up into a Body, and if any be found
missing, there is an other put in his place; and in that place and degree, into
which they are once admitted, they almost ever remain, or are but little
advanced, I said, almost always, because on the Frontires, if any Soldier
perform any notable exploit, they sometimes make him a Captain, and he is
advanced to his degrees without being examined: but this is a thing which
falls out very rarely.

For to make Captains, Lieutenants, and Corporals, etc. there are
examinations; and in them two degrees are conferred; which (to make them be the
better understood) we will call Licentiats in arms, and Doctors in arms. The
first examination is held in the chief Cities of the Provinces, whither all
pretenders do resort, (and in the same university or general Palace, where the
students are examined;) and there they are to be examined, giving them for a
point, or Theme, certain doubts in matters of war, to which they answer with
their pen, making thereon discourses and compositions. The speculative trial
being ended, they come to the practick.

They must shoot nine arrows, standing still upon their feet, and other nine
on horseback, against a great Target, whilst the horse is in his speed; and
of those who behave themselves best, both in the trial of shooting, and in
that of composing, some are chosen, on whom the first degree is conferred;
which has also its ensigns and ornaments. The second degree is conferred at
Court in the same year; where all those who have obtained the first degree, do
assemble themselves; and the examination is held in the same manner as before;
only there are more doubts concerning matters of war proposed, than before.
Their ensigns are the same with those of the Doctors in learning; which is to
be understood in the Cities, while the Kingdom is in peace; for in war, or
public actions, where they assist as Soldiers, they have their particular
ensigns and ornaments of Captains. The graduates are employed the same year,
in the office of Captains; and so are advanced by degrees, til they come, it
may be, to be Captains General, although there be no war. They who remain
only with the first degree, are employed in the lesser, and more ordinary
charges of the war; but they are always to be in something of command.

As for their Arms, I say first; that the use of Powder is very ancient in
China: and in fireworks, wherein they are excellently skillful, they spend
more powder in a year, than in their Armies, at this time, in five. Anciently
it seems, they used it more in the war. For even to this day, there are to
be seen on the gates of the City of Nankim, on both sides of the town, great
Brass Bombards, or Cannon, which though they be but short yet are very well
made; from whence it may be concluded, that they have formerly been in use. But
now they know not how to make use of them, and keep them only for ostentation.
Nevertheless they make some use of Mortar pieces, or Spingards; but they have
but few, and those ill-made. They have also Dagges two palms long, of
Musket-bore; they do stock three, and sometimes four of these together, and
shoot them off all at once. In their ships of war, they carry Guns, but they
are very small ones, neither do they know, how to level them at a mark. But
now, since the Officers of China have made many fire-armes in Machao, by means
of the Portughesses; Muskets began to come into China: but the Arms which they
commonly serve with, are, Bows and Arrows, Lances, Scimitars.

In the year 1621 the City of Macao sent, for a present, to the King three
great pieces of Cannon, with their Cannoniers belonging to them, to acquaint
him with the use of them; which accordingly they did in Pekim, to the great
affrightment of many Mandarines: who would needs be present to see them
discharged. At which time, there fell out an unhappie accident; which was, that
one of the Guns violently recoyling killed one Portughese, and three or four
Chinesses, besides many more that were Scared. These Guns were highly
esteemed, and carried to the Frontiers against the Tartars; who not knowing of
this new invention, and coming on, many together in a close Body, received such
a slaughter from an Iron piece, that they were not only put to flight at that
time, but went on ever after with more caution.

For defensive Arms, they use round Bucklers, Caskes or Head-pieces, and
certain plates of Iron three fingers broad, laid one upon another, of which
they make Back and Brest-pieces; they are but of little proof, and are made
only against arrows.

In a word both their Arms and Soldiers are but little worth at this time.
The occasions thereof are many; the First is the great ease and idleness, in
which they have lived these many years, since the Kingdom has been free from
war. The Second is, the great account they make of learning, and the little
esteem they have of Arms; so that the least magistrate will dare to baffle a
Captain of Arms, let him be never so great. The Third is their manner of
electing Captains by way of examination, as we have said, being all raw
Soldiers, that understand nothing in matters of war. The Fourth is, because
all Soldiers, are either courageous by nature, or Spurred on to Gallantrie by
the example of those Noble Persons, who lead them; or else they are animated by
the discipline, their Captains do bring them up in. But the Soldiers of China
want all these occasions. For commonly their courage is but little; their
Nobility less; their Education least of all; for they will bastinado a
Soldier for any fault, as if he were a child that went to school. The fifth,
because in their Armies, over all the Captains, and also the General
himself, there goes a Generalissimo, who is always a man of the long robe:
This man marches always in the middle of the maine Battalia, and from the
place of Battle is many times a days journey off; so that he is too remote to
give orders, and to run away, in any case of danger, he is most ready. The
sixth is, that in their Counsels of war (of which they have two; one in the
Court of Nankim; and the other in that of Pekim; and each has a President, two
Collateralls, and eight or nine Colleagues) there is not one Soldier, or
Captain among them, or any that has ever seen the wars; and yet for all
that, the whole Militia of the Kingdom is ordered by them, especially by the
Council of Pekim.

Only there might be answered to what has been said, that the Chinesses do use
training, and exercises of war, for three months in the Spring, and three in
the Autumn every year: which cannot be done without some profit, exercising
themselves in shooting arrows at a mark, and shooting also very well. But in
truth this exercise of theirs is the most rediculous thing in the world: For
dividing their men into squadrons, part feign themselves to be enemies, and
part Chinesses, (as among us in Portugal, the boys divide themselves into
Moors and Christians) one part comes, as it were, a far off to war with
the other; then they send out spies, and send away messengers to the Mandarines
(who are sitting not far of under a Canopie, or Pavilion of silk) giving
them notice, that they are in such a place, and the enemy in such a place;
then the Chinesses send out a party against them, who encountering knock their
Swords and Lances one against the others, just as plaiers do upon a stage; and
this, or very little more is all they do.

CHAP. 21.
Of the war which the Tartars made upon China.
WHen Humun the first founder of the royal family that governs at present,
drove the Tartar out of the Kingdom, who had kept all China under his
subjection ninety years, he not only re-gained his own Kingdom, but entered
likewise into those of the others and conquered those Kingdoms, that lay
nearest him toward the North, obliging them to pay him tribute: neither did he
let them remain in the manner of Kingdoms, but the same Humun divided them
into 160. families or States; giving them diverse dignities and offices. These
States grew so great, that they divided themselves into three Kingdoms; one
toward the West; another toward the North, and the third toward the East. The
two first presently withdrew themselves from their obedience to the Chinesses;
only he of the East remaining their friend, treating with them, and performing
his obligations.

This continued for many years; till the Chinesses seeing that Eastern
Kingdom to increase much, whether it were for reason of state, or for some
other particular respect, they resolved to fall upon it, and to bring them
under, so that the Tartars forced by desperation, resolved at once to invade
upon them; this is the usual effect of Extortion and Tyranny, and where the
Prince would have more from the people, than they are able to give. Whence
Theopompus King of the Lacedaemonians, when his wife told him, that because he
had eased his people of many taxes, he would leave his soon a poorer Kingdom,
than he had received from his Father, answered, Relinquo, sed diuturnius. That
is, I shall, leave him a more lasting Kingdom. The Tartars therefore secretly
levied Soldiers, and on a sudden fell upon a fort in the Province of Leaotum,
and took it; making afterward many in-roads to their profit, and to the great
damage of the Chinesses.

The Tartars of the West and of the North, whether it were out of love to their
Country, or out of intrest, which is more probable, raised also an Army, and
came in to the Succor of their Eastern Countrymen; and by little and little
grew so numerous, that in the year 1618 two very great Armies, one Chinesse,
and the other Tartar, came to a field-battaile; in which the Chinesses were
vanished and put to flight, with a very great loss of men. And that it might
the better be understood, how the state of things were then, I will set down
here a memorial or petition, which the President of the Council of war gave
the King concerning this business; which I translated at that time, and sent
it into Europe for news, and now I have found it here printed, and it says
thus.

A memorial, or petition, presented by the president of the Council of War
to the King.
IN this six and fourtieth year of your Reign, in the sixth Moon, (which was
the year 1618 in the month of August) the President of the Council of War
presents you with this Memorial, as to our Lord and King, upon occasion that
the Tartars are entered within the walls toward the North, in which he humbly
petitioneth you, that you would attend this business, and presently open your
Treasures, and assist this War with men and ammunition. For the truth is,
that in this month I have received intelligence from the Captains, that reside
in the Province of the walls toward the North; wherein they give me notice,
that in all parts of that Province there were proclamations published, wherein
they did declare, that the Tartars were gathered together to Conquer this world
of China; and gave me intelligence of the day appointed for the Battle; the
which accordingly was fought at that time, with a great strength and multitude
of people: and entering within the walls, they have taken some of our men, to
Sacrifice them: and the day before the battle they did Sacrifice them with
great acclamations to their King; and have already proclaimed him King of
Pekim. They bring with them many hundred thousands of Soldiers; and each
hears about him several sorts of Arms. Our men, who met to encounter and
suppress them, were two Captaines-Generall, ninety six ordinary Captains, and
300000 men at arms. They joined battle, and in the first encounter they
killed thirty eight of our Captains, amongst whom was one of our Generals: the
others are slain without number: they took also some thousands of prisoners;
and in the retreat, by reason of the confusion and disorder, there were killed
by them above a thousand of our men. The people of the Cities are fled, as also
those of the other Towns. Whereupon, the same day they made themselves masters
of three Cities. Upon the reciept of this news we assembled the Council, the
Colao, and other Mandarines of this Court, that in so weighty a business we
might find some good expedient: And in truth it seems to us, that heaven
does favor the enemy, who otherwise could not have been able to have made such
a slaughter of our people in one day, and to have taken three Cities: and so it
seems heaven is angry with us. As also the Prodigies, which we have lately
all seen, do demonstrate no less, In the Province of Pekim the last year it
reigned not at all; and the people went about like men half dead: and in the
Province of Xankim, there was so great a dearth and famine, that the people did
eat one another: and into Nankim came an infinite multitude of Mice; neither
was it discovered, whence that plague came. In the royal palaces, of five
parts the fire burnt down two, and the wind overthrew five Towers of this
City: we saw two Suns together, and the one did Eclipse the other. These are
all things of evil Prognostication: but above all, we saw a man enter into the
royal Palaces with resolution to kill the Prince; which he had done, had he
not been hindered (This fell out when the King would have constituted his second
son heir of the Kingdom; who was grown very powerful by the favor and
art of the Eunuchs; and, at that time, there came in a man to have killed the
eldest son; but he was hindered by his fear, and the women, who helped the
Prince.) And the worst is; that, a Mandarine having spoken something high,
showing therein his fidelity to you, our Lord, but for his Loyalty you made
him a Traitor, and commanded he should be put in prison, and although we made
great means to free him, by declaring his innocence, yet you never gave ear
unto us. (This imprisonment was, when the King showed his eldest son to the
Mandarines in the royal hall, whom they would have had declared heir of the
Kingdom, and the King would not: and one of them took the boldness to
speak, and to plead for the true Prince, and was therefore committed prisoner
by the King.)

Many times the Mandarines presented Memorialls; wherein they did relate the
miserable condition of the people, desiring that their Taxes might be lessoned,
a thing worthy of much consideration; but neither did you make any account
thereof. We the Mandarines of this court have several times petitioned, that
you would come out, and give Audience in public, as your Predecessors
hitherto have done; that the government might be conformable to that of heaven,
as it is most fitting: you answered us sometimes, that you were not well; other
times, that the weather was cold and rough, and that we should meet another
day: we expected till Spring time, then till the beginning of Summer, that you
would perform what you had promised; but you not only gave no answer to the
second Memorial, but you commanded it to be burnt: and in this manner you live
retired in the Palace, without making any account of what imports you most.
For this reason are the calamities so great; and we persecuted with wars.
Peace is wanting; and, as it seems, it will be wanting; for we are come to
see rivers of blood running down: and above all, in the third moon last past,
there came some from the Province of Xensi, to tell us, that there had appeared
there a man clothed in yellow, with a green cap on his head, and in his hand a
fan of feathers, who spoke thus, Vanli (that is the name of the King) does not
govern, though he has reigned long: he sleeps always: the Kingdom is
ready to be lost, the people will die of hunger; the Captains will be slain
and pierced through with lances: and when he had said this, he vanished. The
Mandarines were amazed. The Viceroy used great diligence to know who this man
was: but could not possibly find him out, seeing therefore the calamites,
famine, war, and other evils, which the Kingdom now suffers, we plainly
perceive, that it was a prognostication of these things. Wherefore we are
again returned to require you, speedily to open your treasures of money; that
fresh leavies of men may be made, and some remedy put to so great evils.

This is the Memorial, which was presented in the year 1618 since when, the
Tartars have continued every summer (for in the winter, by reason of the great
cold, nothing can be done) to make considerable inroads; wherein they are
commonly gainers, to the great loss of the Chinesses. So that the year 1622,
two principal Madarines of the fort of Quamsi, where; as being the chief
fortress of that Province, the Viceroy, makes his residence, (whether it
were, that they were discontented, or had hopes to better their condition by
it) made a secret agreement with the Tartars to deliver the fortress into
their hands; which accordingly they did; for the Tartars falling on upon that
side, which was assigned them, as soon as ever they began the assault, they
easily took it, by the Treason, which the others had plotted, and put to
flight all them, who knew nothing of the treachery; who, together with the
Viceroy, escaped to Xamhai, the last fortress (as it were) of that Province,
and the first of the Province of Pekim; the key and strength of the whole
Kingdom.

As Soon as the news of this last route came to Court, both the King and his
Grandees were in great disorder, and deliberated to change his abode, and to
remove to the Court of Nankim, as farthest off from danger; and it had
accordingly been put in execution, if a principal Mandarine (for there is
always found some one or other, who takes care of the public good) had not
presented a Memorial to the King, wherein he demonstrated to him, that this
alteration would be the best and readiest way to destroy the whole Kingdom, or
the greater part at least, by dispoyling of all strength, the Court and
Province of Pekim, that was so near the other Province, which was now ready to
be lost.

This Memorial took effect; and by it the the design of flying and seeking a
new habitation, was broken off; it being formerly resolved, that Nankim should
be fortified. There was therefore a proclamation sent out, which under great
penalties, did prohibit any to go out of the Court, not only Mandarines and
people of quality, but even the common people also. Upon this the people began
to be quieted, especially seeing, that the City was strengthened with new
Garrisons, Guards, Watches, and a rigorous strictness at the gate. The
chiefest care was to fortify the pass at Xam Hai Quan, which, as I said
above, is on the very frontire of the Province of Leaotum, which was already
lost, and on the entrance of the Province of Pekim, and by reason the place,
streightened on both sides with very high mountains, is impregnable: they sent
thither great store of Ammunition, and fresh Soldiers in so great number, that
it was reported that at that post only they had 80000 men of War. The King
also sent new Captains with ample power; which would have been of greater
effect, if he could have given it them over the Tartars, to conduct them that
way: who seeing it was not possible to make their entrance at that place, both
because it was so easy to defend, as also that it was well fortified with men,
began to wheel off to the East side thereof, through part of Corea, giving off
their design of going toward Pekim; which if they had done with so powerful
and victorous an Army, they had put that Court into a greater fear and danger,
than ever yet they had experience of. The Chinesses met them not far from the
Court, where there began so furious a Battle, that many men lost their lives
both of the one and the other side; yet at the last the Chinesses had the
victory: so great endeavor will men use to defend their own home.

A little while after this fight arrived at the Court of Pekim a Portughess
named Gonsalvo Texera, who was sent thither with an Embassy and a Present from
the City of Macao; who seeing the insolency of the Tartars, and the fear of
the Chinesses, and judging that by it they might do service to the Crown of
Portugal, and a kindness to themselves, in what the King of China might do
for them, offered to the Mandarines, in the name of the City of Macao, some
Portughesses to assist them against the Tartars. The profer was kindly accepted
of, and a Memorial was presented to the King, who presently returned a
favorable answer. The Council of War dispatched a Father of our company to
Macao, (who was already gone along with the Ambassadors to negotiate this
assistance) with several orders to the officers of Cantone, to expedite the
business as much as they could, with all liberality, and provision, and
convenience for the men that were desired of them.

Four hundred men were put in order, that is 200 Soldiers, of which many were
Portughesses, some whereof were borne in Portugal, and some there: but the
most of them were people of that Country, who although they were Chinesses,
borne in Macao, yet were bred up among the Portughesses after their manner, and
were good Soldiers, and shot well in Guns. To each Soldier was given a youth
to serve him, who was bought with the Kings money, and so large pay for
themselves, that with it the Soldiers clothed themselves richly, and provided
themselves with arms, and were after all that left very rich too.

These Soldiers set out from Macao with two Captains, one whereof was named
Pietro Corderio, the other Antonio Rodriquez del capoo, with their Alfieres and
other Officers. When they were come to Cantone, they mustered themselves with
so much gallantrie, and with such salutes of their Musquetrie, that the
Chinesses were astonished.

There they were furnished with boats to pass up the river, with all
convenience, through the whole Province, being presented by the Magistrates,
when they came to any of their Cities and Villages, sending refreshment for
them all, of Hens, Beef, Fruit, Wine, Rice. etc.

They passed over the Mountains which divide the Province of Cantone from that
of Kiamsi (and is less than a days journey from the other River) all on
horseback, even to the meanest of their servants. Presenty, upon the other
side of the Mountain, they were imbarqued again, and going down the River,
they crossed after the same manner almost all the Province of Kiamsie, till
they came to the Metropolis thereof, where I lived at that time, and had under
my direction a good number of Christians, there they stayed only to see the
City, and to be well looked on by them. They were invited by many of the noble
men, that they might look upon the Fashion of their habit, and other things
which seemed strange to them; they treated them with all manner of Courtesy,
and commended and admired all, except the Slashing and pinking of their
clothes, not being able to conceive, why, when a piece of stuff is whole and
new men should cut it in several places for ornament. But, when they had seen
this City, these men returned, without any other effect, but the expense and
great loss of the Chinesses, occasioned by the Tartars in several encounters,
because they were deprived of this succor.

The occasion of their return was, that the Chinesses, who traffic in
Cantone with the Portughesses, and are their Correspondents for their
business, from which they draw a vast profit, began to perceive that by this
entrance and the good success thereof, of which they made no doubt at all, it
would be an easy thing for the Portughesses to obtain license to enter into
the Kingdom, and to do their business, and sell their Merchandise themselves,
and by this means they should come to lose their gains: therefore, before the
Portughesses set out, they used all their endeavor to hinder their going,
presenting many papers against it, and at last, the Magistrate answering, that
he could do no less, having already parted with the money, and distributed
among the Soldiers, not only ordinary, but very high and advantageous pay,
they offered, at their own charges, to re-imburse the whole money to the King.
But seeing that this way neither they could obtain their ends, it is reported,
that they sent to Court that money, which they would have given, and presenting
it to the Mandarines, prevailed so, that those very men, who had proposed the
Portugesses to the King, as an important succor, did again present a
memorial, wherein they expressed, that there was now no need of them; The King
answered, (and I my self saw the Royal answer,) It is not long since that ye
did propose to us, that these men should enter into the Kingdom, and assist us
against the Tartars: now ye say, they are not necessary. When ye propose any
thing, it were good you considered of it better, howbeit, if they are not
necessary, let them return.

In this manner did that expedition of the Portughesses come to an end, without
any profit at all to the Kingdom, but much to the Soldiers, besides that they
had an opportunity to see a good part of China. The Tartars have ever since
continued the war after the same manner, and do continue it to this day; and
have forced the Kingdom of Corea to pay them tribute, as they paid to China;
although they still pay to the Chinesses as much as they did formerly.

CHAP. 22.
Of the King and Queens of China, and of the Eunuchs.
ALthough the Chinesses have been so diligent in their Chronicles and Records,
that they have preserved the memory of above 3000 years to this time;
nevertheless they have suffered a great loss and damage in the knowledge of
many things contained in them by the burning of those books, which are called
by them The History, and in reality, the business was thus.

A King named Tien, (whither it were as some think out of the hatred he bore to
learning, or as some hold with more probability, that he might extinguish the
memory of his Ancestors, and leave only his own to prosteritie) excepting
only the books of Physic, as only necessary to the Commonwealth, commanded
by a rigorous law, that the rest of their books should be burnt, with so much
severitie as if every volume were guilty of high treason, and under so great
penalites for any that hid them, that it was to cost him no less than his
life, and in effect he caused forty Litterati to be burned together with
their books which they had hid.

This persecusion lasted the space of forty years, at what time they began to
renew their ancient Chronicles, by means of certain books and fragments that
had escaped, some of them being buried under ground, and others immured in the
middle of walls, and after many years and a diligent search, they set on foot
again the more principal matters; yet there were many things wanting, and
especially concerning the first Kings and Princes of this Kingdom.

However it is certainly known, that their first Government was by way of
Families; every one governing his own, as anciently the Patriarks did. The
second was Monarchical, but it is not certain how it began: neither have they
any thing certain concerning the original of it. They do commit a notable
error in the time of their Chronologies: for the Emperor Yao, from whose time
they do begin to give credit to their Histories, even according to the most
favorable computation, from the creation of the world to Noah, they make to be
twelve years before the flood; nevertheless, although there be an error of
the time in the History of this Emperor and those that follow, it is
certain, that the matters related, are very coherent with their successions.

Now this Emperor Yao, without having any regard to the natural and lawful
succession of his son, left the Empire to Xun his Sonne-in-law, only, because
he discovered in him parts and qu^lities worthy of the Government. Xun
likewise for the same respect gave the Empire to You, who was no kin to him.
These three Emperors are much esteemed by the Chinesses for holy men:
concerning whom they relate many things. And truly there is no doubt, but that
they were Philosophers, well inclined to moral virtues.

They do attribute much merit to the last of these three, for the Adjusting of
the waters (as they call it:) which was done by him through the Kingdom, which
in that time did abound in lakes and moarish places, and therefore in many
parts could not be tilled. This King going in person, and commanding large
trenches to be made, (wherein many years were spent) he gave vent to that
multitude of waters, and by that means recovered a great deal of ground which
was of great profit for tillage. There are some in Europe who believe that
these waters were the relics of the flood. The Chinesses, although they make
a large mention of these waters in their books, of the draining of them, and of
the benefit which accrued thereby to the Kingdom, do not say any thing of any
occasion or original of them.

After these three Emperors abovenamed, the Empire was ever continued by
succession; but not in the same family; for there were many Princes and Lords,
who although they were subject to the Emperor, yet, sometimes for particular
respects, and otherwhile under pretense of evil Government and Tyranny, made
wars, confederacies and disorders, with which they either disturbed and
troubled the Monarchy, or divided it, or else usurped it all to themselves; So
that although it lasted in some families many years, as in that of Tham for
400. years, and in some other families little less, yet the Monarchy from the
beginning, to this present day, has been changed into two and twenty several
Families.

The Lords of particular states continued in China 2000 years, till in the year
of our redemption 1206, the Tartars, who then possessed another Country, began
to make themselves Masters of China; and advanced so far by degrees, till at
length they brought it all under their subjection, reigning there as absolute,
till the year 1368. At what time, Hum Vu, the founder of the family, which
reigns at present, seeing the strength of the Tartars to be diminished, and
their Tyranny increased, and the people so wearied therewith that they were
well disposed to shake off the yoke, and set themselves at liberty; gathered
together an army with such good success, that he not only discomfited the
Tartars, and drove them out of the Kingdom, but entered also into their Country,
and conquered a good part thereof.

The Kingdom being thus re-establisht in its natural estate, Hum Vu seeing
himself become absolute Lord thereof, set on foot an admirable kind of
Government, differing in part from that of all other Monarchies; yet it is such
a one, as has now been conserved almost 300 years, with so much subjection,
communication and dependence from its head, that so great an Empire, seems to
be but, as it were, one well governed convent. This King in the first place
conferred many favors and graces upon all his subjects: Liberality being
that, which does most demonstrate a royal mind: he created new officers, yet
retained he some of the former ones, as we shall relate in its proper place.

To the chief and principal Captains he assigned large revenues, to the
second a very competent maintenance, and to those of the third sort,
sufficient. He took away all the Princes and Lords of vassals and subjects,
without leaving one: he prohibited by a rigorous law, that none of the Royal
family, neither in peace nor war, nor in any case, might bear office in the
Commonwealth, either civil, criminal, or military; neither might they be
suffered to enter into the examinations, to receive their degree (the which
last prohibition, as I have formerly said, has been lately taken away in
part.) He placed the whole Government in the Litterati, who are created such by
way of concurrence, (as has been declared, when I spoke of the examinations)
without any dependence at all on the Magistrates, or the King himself, but
only by the merit of their learning, good parts, and virtues. He did not annull
those ancient laws, which concerned good Government, and hindered not his
intent; which was only to perpetuate the Monarchy in his Posterity. But he
made many new ones, and modelled the Commonwealth and the Government into that
form, wherein it stands at present; although in so many years, and in so vast
a Monarchy, it has not been possible, but that it should receive some
alteration, though not in any essential part thereof.

The King is called by diverse names. For the better understanding whereof, you
must know that there are thirteen things remarkable at his Coronation. The
first is the changing of the account of years, beginning their supputation a
new from the entrance of the new Kings reign; and this not only in their
ordinary discourse, but in all letters, dispatches, provisoes, writings, etc.
The second, that there is coined new money, with the letters of his name,
although the former continues current also. The third is, That he Crowns his
true wife, making her as it were, Empress. The fourth is, That he gives the
name of Queen to six Concubines. The fifth is, That there are great sacrifices
made to Heaven, to the Earth, to the Spirits, etc. The sixth, That there are
great store of Alms given to the poor. The seventh, That all prisoners are
set at liberty, whose freedom is not prejudicial to a third party. The
eighth, That there are sumptuous banquets made for the Magistrates. The ninth,
That all the women are to depart out of the Palace, that have been Concubines
to the former King. The tenth, The Palaces, which are four in number, wherein
the other women lived, are furnished again with new women, picked and chosen
throughout the whole realm: in time of which search there are many marriages
made, every one endeavoring to deliver his daughter from that subjection. The
eleventh, The Nobility of the blood royal do send deputies (not every one,
but all those of one City) to render obedience to the King, and to acknowledge
him for such: In like manner also do the Tituladoes, which cannot do it in
their own persons. The twelfth is, That all Officers, from Vice-royes to the
meanest Judges of Towns, go in person to Court, to render the same obedience,
on the behalf of their Provinces, Cities, and Towns. Lastly the Kings name is
changed, as is used among us at the election of the Pope; and this is that
name, which is written in all public acts, on moneys, etc. It is a name of a
particular, but royal person, as that of this Kings Grandfather was, Vam Lie;
of his father, Thai Cham; of his Brother who reigned first, Thien Khi; and of
this King, Teum Chim.

They have moreover three names, which signify a King: The first is Kiun, and
by this they use to call foreign Kings: The second is Vam, and by this name
they call the Infantoes, or Kings children; joining them together Kiun Vam,
they make a name, by which their King may be called. But the principal name is
Ho Am Ti, that is, Emperor.

In the Palace, the Women, Eunuchs, and other domestics thereof call him Chu,
that is, Lord. They call him also Thien Zu, which is to say, Son of Heaven;
not because they believe him to be such, but because they hold, that Empire is
a gift of heaven; as also to render the respect, which is due to the royal
person, more sacred: and in realitie, the reverence which they use toward him,
seems more befitting a Divine, than humane person; and the manner how they
behave themselves at this day in his presence, is more proper for a Church,
than a profane Palace.

I said at this day, because in former times it was not so. For then the Kings
of China lived according to the fashion of the greatest part of the other
Princes of the world: They went abroad, conversed, hunted; and there was one of
them so greedy of this recreation, that, whereby he might have the opportunity
of spending whole months together in hunting without returning to Court, and
attending upon the affairs of government, did substitute one of his Sons in
his place. The Emperors did visit in person the whole Kingdom, at what time
there happened that story which is so famous in China, and which deserves
likewise to be known in Europe.

The Emperor going this progress, in a certain way met with a company of
men, who were leading certain prisoners. He caused the coach to stop, and
enquired what the matter was; which as soon as he had understood, he fell a
weeping. They who accompanied him began to comfort him, and one of them said
unto him, Sir, It is not possible, but that in a Commonwealth there must be
chastisements; it cannot be avoided; so have the former Kings, your
predecessors, commanded it to be; so have the laws ordained it; so does the
government of the state require it. The King answered, I weep not to see these
men prisoners, nor to see them chastised: I know very well, that without
rewards the good are not encouraged, and without chastisement the wicked are
not restrained, and that chastisement is as necessary to the government of a
Kingdom, as bread is for the nourishment and sustenance thereof. But I weep,
because my time is not so happy, as that of old was, when the virtues of the
Princes were such, that they served as a bridle to the people, and their
example was sufficient to restrain the whole Kingdom without any other
chastisement. This was a Heathen, who spoke thus: and who sees not how much
reason we have to envy these Heathens, who, although they are exceeded by us in
the knowledge of things belonging to faith, do yet oftentimes surpass us in
the practice of moral virtues?

According as I have said, the ancient Kings did personally attend the
Government, giving audience very easily and very frequently to all their
subjects. In the time of King Tham there was a Colao, who having been his
Master, was very powerful with him, who, to preserve himself in his grace and
favor, studied more to speak what should please the King, than to tell him the
truth for the good of his state: a most abominable thing. But the Chinesses
seeing his honor was great, and the Kings favor toward him very
extraordinary, did dissemble it all; notwithstanding they forbore not to speak
of it among themselves, and to tax the flattery of the Colao, One day certain
Captains of the guard discoursing among themselves in the Palace concerning
this point, one of them, being a little warmed with the discourse, secretly
withdrawing himself out of the company, went into the hall, where the King
then was, and kneeled down upon his knees before him, the King asking, what he
would have? He answered; Leave to cut off the head of a flattering subject. And
who is that, replied the King? Such a one, that stands there, answered the
other. The King being angry, said, Against my Master dare you propose this, and
in my presene? Let them take him away and cut off his head. When they began to
lay hands upon him, he caught hold of a wooden balanster, and as there were
many pulling of him, and he holding with a great deal of strength, the
balanster broke. By that time the Kings anger was over; and he commanded they
should let him go, and gave order, that the balanster should be mended, and
that they should not make a new one, that it might remain a witness of the
fact, and the Memorial of a subject, that was not afraid to advise his King,
what he ought to do.

Such was the facility, with which, not only the Officers, but any one
whosoever of the people, might have admission to the King, so that within the
first gate of the Palace, there was always a Bell, a Drum, and a Table
overlaid with a white varnish, as it were, playstered over; upon this, he that
would not speak to the King in person, wrote what his request was, which was
presently carried to the King: But whosoever would speak with him, rang the
Bell, or beat the Drum, and presently they were brought in, and had audience.

The Drum remains even to this day; but as it seems to me, rather in
memory of the times past, than for any use of the present: for during twenty
two years time, I do not remember, that it was ever beaten above once: and he
that did it, was presently paid his pension in ready Bastinadoes; for having
disquieted the King, who was about half a league off. After this hard penance,
he was heard, and allowed, not to see or speak to the King, but according to
the custom now in use, in a petition. So that the Kings are now become so
retired, and removed from the sight of the people, and as it were, so idolized,
and mewed up in their Palaces, that they give them occasion to think in other
Countries, that the King of China never suffers himself to be seen, and that
he is always shut up in a glass, and only shows one foot, and such like
things.

He who first put himself in this manner of living, was Vam Lie, the
Grandfather of him that reigns at present; he had some occasion to do it,
because he was so fat, that it put him to great pain and trouble, to carry
himself in public, with that Gravitie and Majesty, that is proper to a King;
and therefore he did exempt himself wholly from this trouble. He gave no
Audience; he went not to the sacrifices; he went not out in public:
nevertheless he was a person of great prudence and judgment in managing the
government: He was much esteemed of the Mandarines, though he made little
account of them. He used to say many times, when any one was troublesome by
replying often with their memorialls or petitions, in which kind the Chinesses
are very importunate, I was a King, and governed before this fellow was borne,
and yet he will undertake to teach me.

His son, who succeeded him, changed also the former fashion, as also they
that followed, going out indeed in public, but so moderately, that it is only
sometimes in the month to hold a Royal Audience, and four times a year they
go out of the Palace, and out of the City, to Sacrifice at the four seasons of
the year, to Heaven, and to the Earth, in a Temple built for this purpose
without the walls of the City.

This Temple is truly Royal, as well in the greatness thereof, as in the
exquisiteness of the workmanship: the figure of it is round, with three rows
of pillars one above another, for it stands as it were on a Hill or Mount
compassed about with those pillars. The wall of the Temple begins at the top
of the third row; there are four pair of stairs by which they ascend to it,
placed toward the four winds, all of white marble and very well wrought.

The Temple of Nankim is a very perfect and complete piece of workmanship, it
has five Isles sustained by pillars of wood, which have no painting or
ornament upon them, except on their Pedestalls, that it may be seen that each
is made of one entire piece of wood. Truly they are the goodliest trees, the
biggest, highest, most uniform and equal (although they are very many) that
can be imagined. And as for my part, I confess it is one of the remarkable
things I have seen in China; and that one shall hardly find in all the rest of
the world, so many trees of that beauty and uniformitie. The Seeling is all
gilded, and although it be above 200 years since it was done, and that it be
far remote from the eye of the King, (the Sacrifices not being made therein,
which are wont to be performed only at the Court, where the King resideth) yet
it does to this day keep its splendor. In the middle thereof are raised two
Thrones made of the most precious marbles, on one of them the King used to sit
when he came thither to sacrifice: the other was left empty for the Spirit, to
whom the Sacrifice was offered. The gates are all adorned with plates of
Copper, enriched with several works and embossments, all gilt: without the
Temple are many Alters, with the statues of the Sun, Moon, Planets, Spirits,
Mountains, Rivers etc. Round about the Temple are several cells. They say
that anciently they were Baths, where the King and the Ministers that were to
Sacrifice, did wash themselves. The Grove, which stands on the rest of the
plain, consists of several trees, but the greatest part are Pines: not so
much as a Twigge of them may be cut off under most grevious penalties. The wall
that encompasseth it is covered with glazed Tiles, some of yellow color,
others of green. The circuit thereof is twelve miles.

To this Temple, as I said, the King comes, and when he comes forth, the
ways are Barracado'ed, leaving only free that part through which the King is
to pass: who brings with him so many Eunuchs, who encomepasse him, so many
Officers that accompany him, and so many Soldiers that guard him, that it is
altogether impossible for him to be seen, especially being carried in a Sedan.

These are the only occasions, wherein the King either appears or goes
abroad. All the rest of his time he staieth at home in his Palace, like a King
of Bees, without either seeing or being seen. Many are persuaded, that this is
not to live like a King, but like a criminal Person condemned to perpetual
imprisonment. How ever, it seems to me a great matter, that a man, without
being seen, by his power only should be the most reverenced, the most obeyed
and feared, of all the Kings in the world. And as for the prison, if we will
call his Palace so, it is very large and pleasant for to give him delight,
besides that he has the liberty to go out whenever he pleases, and his
habitations therein are so commodious, and full of all manner of entertainment,
of pleasure and recreation, that he has no need to seek abroad wherewith to
content himself.

His Palaces, laying every thing together that is contained in them, I think
are the best that are to be found in the world. Those of Nankim, which are the
biggest, contain about five miles in circuit. Those of Pekim, are somewhat
less, but much the better. These are not all one Palace, but many, at a good
distance one from the other. That of the King. That of the Queen. That of the
Prince. That of the Younger Sons. That of his Daughters who are married. That
of the Second and Third Queens. For the Concubines there are four, at the
four corners, and are from them named the Palaces of the Ladies. There are
also some Palaces for the old and Penitent women, which they call Lemcum, that
is, the cold Palaces. Besides there are colleges for the Eunuchs, for the
Litterati, Priests, singingmen, Comedians etc. and almost infinite habitations
for so many Offices as there are there within, and for that multitude of people
that are employed there, who are at the least 17000 persons.

The structure of the Palaces is very exact, having many things in it after the
manner of ours, as Arches, Balansters, Columns and, such like, of Marble
excellently wrought, with several little works and curious enrichments, as
also embossements, or figures in relieve, so well raised and standing out, that
they seem to hang in the air. That which is wrought in wood, is all varnished
over with their Charan, painted and gilded very exquisitely.

The Halls and Rooms, although they are not, as it is here reported, one of
Gold, another of Silver, another of precious stones, neither do they use any
hangings; yet the hand of the Architect, and the pensil of the painter does
supply all other ornaments. The Base Courts are very neat and spacious. There
are also many pleasant Gardens, and a River which runs among the Palaces,
and yields them much delight with his windings and turnings. There are many
artificial mounts with very rare Beasts and Birds, many Gardens made with
exquisite diligence, and all manner of curiosity. There was a certain King
among them, who being discontented at the spoil which the winter made in the
beauty of the trees, depriving them both of leaves and flowers, commanded that
many artificial ones should be made, with great labor and expense, and little
satisfaction of the Magistrates, who did much blame him.

The whole fabrique is encompassed with two walls that have four gates opening
to the four winds, East, West, North, and South, and this last is the
chiefest, and makes a beautiful and sightly facciata or aspect to the Palaces.

At every gate there stand every night five Elephants (which are not bred in
that Country, but come from other parts) with their Soldiers belonging to
them, and the whole wall round about is guarded with Soldiers.

Within the said Gates, there is a Court able to contain 30000 Persons; and
there stands always a Guard of 30000 men.

At the uper end of this Court there are five Gates, which lead into a very
large Hal of the Palace; in the midst whereof is placed a Royal Throne, which
stands empty, and is called, The Throne of courtesies, because all they, who
go out, do make their reverence to it, as you shall hear anon.

As for the Women, there is only one of them, which is the Kings true wife, and
has the name of Hoam Heu, which signifies Empress; and is acknowledged for
such, having her seat behind that of the Kings. There are also other six
Women, who have the title of Queens, and are also much respected. In the
Palaces of Nankim, which because they are empty, are more easy to be seen,
there is a Royal Throne raised upon several steps, and a cloth of state over
it, with two Royal seats, one for the King, and the other for the Queen. And
lower behind that, there stand six, three on the one side, and three on the
other, for the six Queens. The King has thirty Women more; who are all much
honored and respected.

The other Ladies of the Palace, who as they say, are about 3000 in number,
have their Appartments in the four Palaces abovesaid, and are beautiful
Damsels, sought out on purpose through the whole Kingdom. To these the King
goes, when he pleases, and to which of them likes him best.

The present King has the reputation to be chaste, and they use to say of him,
Puycu Cum, that is, he goes not to the Palaces. There have been formerly other
Kings, like to him in this, who are much commended in their histories; as on
the contrary, others who are much blamed; such was one of them, whose beastial
appetite, not being able to determine to what Palace, or to what part of it he
should go, used in this irresolution to suffer himself to be lead and guided by
beasts, that is, he had a little chariot drawn with Goats, in which he rid to
the Palaces, and wheresoever they entered, or stopped, thither he went in.

Another, to save himself the labor of going to the Palaces, caused Pictures
to be drawn of every Lady, and according as he fancied each Picture, he sent
for the original to be brought to him; leaving the beauty of each of them in
the power of the Painter, she being still made the fairest, whom he favored
most, or from whom he received the best Present.

But concerning the Kings children; if the Empress and true wife of the King,
has a son, at what time soever he be borne, he takes place of the rest: but
if she have none, the first son of any of his women whatsoever, takes
place; although the King desire, that another should have the precedence. So it
happened to Vamlie, who although he had none by his lawful wife, the Empress;
yet had two sons, one by a waiting maid, which was the eldest, and another
younger son by one of the Queens his Concubines; which son he loved very
much; and by reason of the particular affection he bore him, would by all means
leave him the Kingdom, saying, That by reason he had no Son by his lawful
wife, the succession was not due by right to any of the rest, but that it
belonged to him, to elect which of them he pleased: and because the elder was
the Son of a servant, he chose rather to leave the Kingdom to the other;
notwithstanding, the Officers of the Court did very stoutly oppose him, saying,
That since he had had commerce with that servant, she was enobled by a
superior law, and that her son, being the eldest, he ought not to lose the
rights and privilege of his birth. There happened upon this a Tragedy, with
several acts of discontent. For the King persisted to carry on his intention,
and the Officers in resisting him: whereupon many lost their offices, the King
taking them away; others left theirs of their own accord, and having laid
down the ensigns of their dignity, hung them up at the gate of the Palace,
and departed to their own houses, despising at once the honor, profit, dignity
and revenue of their places, only for the defense of reason, and of the laws
and customs of the Kingdom. A courage worthy to be imitated, in divine affairs
at least, if not in all secular causes. At length the King, being no longer
able to contrast, was forced, besides his wont, to hold a Royal Audience, and
taking his eldest son, now as Prince, placed him next behind him, and
showing him to the Mandarines, he recommends unto them the care of the public
peace, and quiet without doors, assuring them, that within the Palace all was
quiet, and that Thai Cham, that was the name of the present Prince, should
succeed him without fail in the Kingdom, as in effect it fell out. So
prevalent is reason, and the constancy of Counselors even against the most
powerful Kings.

Among the Domestics of the Palace, the Eunuchs make the greatest number. In
the year 1626. there were reckoned to be 12000. of them, and for the most part
their number is very little greater; or less. They are all distributed into
their Palaces, Colleges, Classes, Tribunals, and Occupations: So that within
the Royal Palace, there are as many Tribunals, to decide causes, as there are
without; not to speak of the women, who have their justice apart; there being
among them some, who are appointed to govern and judge the rest, and to decide
their differences; as also to condemn and punish them: and this, no more than
is necessary.

The first and principal College of the Eunuchs, is called, Su Li Kien; and
consists of the great Secretaria of purity; of the chancery within the
Palace, and of many Assistants, who are always advanced in the same College
according to their examinations and trialls. These always accompany the Kings
person; and when he goes abroad, have the place next his body. These may enter
without being called; and, the manner of the Kings governing, being by way of
petitions, and rescripts, every thing passes through their hands.

Next follows the College, which they call, Thum Cham Su, which is, as it
were, a Sovereign Tribunal of justice, over all the Eunuchs. This causes
their persons to be arrested, this condemns and causes them to be punished;
and not only the Eunuchs, but also other persons of great Authority, in matters
of high concernment are remitted to them; and it is the most rigorous Tribunal
of justice of all those in China. The President is also Captain of the Kings
guard, which consists of 9000. men, 6000. foot, and 3000. horse. In time of
war he enters into the Council of war, where he is allowed the highest
place.

There are also other Colleges and Tribunals; as those of several Treasuries,
the Treasury of Jewels, of rich Movables, of Habits, of Magazines, etc.

There is also a College of Judicial Astrologers, who observe the stars, and
the motion of the Heavens, who together with the chief Mathematician, who is
always a Mandarine abroad, do make the Almanacke for the year following.

There is a College of particular Priests, called Laon Su, (for the Bonzi are
not admitted, neither may they enter into the Kings Palaces) these have the
charge of the Divine service, the Chappells, Offices, and Sepultures of the
dead etc. There are also Colleges of Musicians, Comedians or Players,
Painters, Goldsmiths, every one performing his office requisite to a well
ordered Commonwealth.

Without the Palace many are prefects of the public works, of the guards which
keep watch every night without the Palaces, of the Kings sepultures, of the
Gabells and Impositions, and other such employments, by which they grow very
rich: and by reason they have no children (though they are most of them
married,) they make great expenses: they have sumptuous Country-houses without
the City, and within, Palaces full of all delights, richly furnished, and a
stately train of Servants. Their sepulchers are the most costly, they have the
strongest persuasion of the Transmigration of Souls, and, that they might be
well provided when they take their next new form, are the most devoutest
worshippers of the Idols.

The Eunuchs are exempted from all those Courtesies and complements, which
others are obliged to pay the Mandarines; as, lighting off their horses, or
coming out of their chaires when they meet them. In the Court they are not
permitted to have many servants after them, nor to wear very rich apparel,
and but few are allowed to be carried in a sedan, yet almost all of them are
suffered to ride on horseback.

When in the Palace there is not an Eunuch that is the Kings favorite, the
Eunuchs which live without the Palace are wont to make great Court to the
Mandarines, lend them their fair and commodious houses, and endeavor by all
observance to gain their good will. But if it happen, that the King have an
Eunuch to his favorite, as sometimes it falls out, presently they grow
insolent, the governments are conferred upon them, and then they get the upper
hand.

The last King had an Eunuch, who arrived to all that grace and favor with
him, that can be imagined: this fellow governed with so great insolence and
Tyranny, that he apprehended, chastised, and put to death, even Persons of the
greatest Quality. To touch him, though but in imagination, was an excess of
Treason. And though the Chinesses are very free and bold inspeaking the truth,
even to the King himself, yet none durst speak against him.

The Prince, who is now King, undertook the business; who only told the King
his father, that his subjects Persons of worth and quality were ill used. This
was sufficient to banish the Eunuch out of the Palace, who at length miserably
ended his days. For as soon as the King was dead, he poisoned himself; and
at the same time put a period to his favor and his life; but not to the
peoples hatred, who as soon as he was dead, dragged him about the streets, and
tore him to pieces: All his goods were confiscate to the King: they amounted to
a great value, for there was scarce any body who had not formerly presented
him, and many had given him very rich presents. Among other things there were
found two chests full of Pearl only; it was said, he had robbed the Kings
Treasury of them. The sumptuous works, which were either begun or ended through
the whole Kingdom, in honor of him, as Temples to place his statue in (which
they call Temples of the living, and use to erect them to eminent persons, who
have deserved well of the King and Kingdom) Palaces, Triumphall Arches, and
such like fabriques, were all cast down to the ground, leaving no other memory
of them, than a comedy, which was presently made of him, and is yet acted to
this day, concerning his disgrace and driving out of the Palace.

Now because some of these Eunuchs, are many times dismissed, and turned away,
others grow old, and many die, from time to time there are young ones chosen
in, to be put in their places: upon this account there comes almost infinite of
these Eunuchs to the Court, who are made such by their parents; either for the
profit which they make by it, because they are always bought of them for a
price, or else for the advantage they may receive by them, when they come to
preferment in the Palace, or for those other conveniences, which are certain
and assured to persons of this condition.

At every election, there are chosen about 3000 of them; at what time they
principally consider in their choice, their age, good shape and behavior,
their speech and graceful pronunciation, but above all, that they wholly want
that, which they pretend to have lost, and that they be completely castrated;
and moreover, every fourth year they are visited, least any thing should grow
out again, which has not been well taken away.

When the election is done, the rest are sent away from the Court, and those
that are chosen, are distributed to those lodgings, occupations and offices, to
which they are to apply themselves. This is done almost, as it were by destiny,
for without observing of them any more than a few days, some are put to study,
and go to the Colleges of the greatest credit, honor and profit, others are
chosen for Priests, others for Singers, Comedians, etc. And others for the
kitchen, and such like mean and laborious occupations.

This is that which passes in the Palace within the gates in what appertains
to the Kings person and service. That which passes without doors is also very
particular, and with so much exactness, that it exceeds all Hyperbole: and
although the kingdom be so vast and large, yet it is not sufficient to hide
one guilty person, that would make his escape. The very trees seem to be afraid
to cover him with their shade. If a person of quality be to be apprehended,
they send the Ministers of justice to him; who have no more to do, but to throw
the cord or chain at his feet; the which he himself takes up, and puts
about his neck, as if it were a chain of Gold; and the very name of these is
sufficient to strike a terror in any.

In the City of Sucheu in the Province of Nankim, there lived a Mandarine, a
grave Person, who had passed through most of the greatest Offices in the
Kingdom, with great satisfaction and good liking of the peopie, it was in the
time of that powerful Euneuch, of whom we spoke even now, this man had
intelligence that these Ministers of justice would be sent to him, he stayed
not their coming, but made a banquet to his kindred and friends, toward the end
thereof going out, as if it had been upon some other occasion, he cast himself
out of a Balcone into a fish Pond, where he drowned himself. His Guests seeing
him stay so long, went out to look him, and found upon a Table a paper having
these words written with his own hand, Turning toward the Palace, I perform
the reverence due to my King, whom I have always endeavored to serve with
resolutions becoming a faithful subject: and it is not reasonable, that I
should suffer from the hand of an Eunuch affronts worthy a base and criminal
Person.

There needs no more than two letters sent from the King, and put in any place,
to make it remain, as it were, enchanted: so that, if they want any thing in
the Palace, as Cha, Fruit. etc. it is sufficient to send to the Country, where
those things are they desire, to give them notice only, and to set up those two
letters, Xim Chi, that is, the will of the King, and presently every thing is
made ready, and none dare stir so much as a leaf of it. The same thing happens
when there is any extraordinary business to be done, which carries some
difficulty with it; for it is sufficient to set up the two letters abovesaid,
and all opposition is levelled, as it fell out when the King gave the houses of
an Eunuch, who was a prisoner, to the Fathers of our company, for a burying
place, by clapping the said letters upon them.

In all the Cities of the Kingdom every month, on the first day of the moon
the Magistrates assemble themselves at the tribunal of the Governor before a
Throne, where are placed the Royal Ensigns; and there they do reverence to
them in the same manner, as they would do to the King himself, if he were
present. They do the like also on his birth day.

At the beginning of every year each Province sends an Ambassador to visit
the King; and as often as they write letters to him, they do not send them by
way of the post, but a principal Mandarine goes to carry them. But their
memorialls, or petitions they send by the Post. Every three years, all the
great Mandarines of the Kingdom, go to do homage to the King.

None may enter into the Royal Palaces, no not into the first gate, if he be
clothed in Mourning, neither do they go to make their reverence in an ordinary
habit; but in that extraordinary one appointed for Courtesies, and the
Magistrates are to put on a red garment.

None, of what condition soever, may pass before the gates of the Palace on
horseback, nor in a Sedan, nor in any other manner, except on foot, no not if
they be women; and by how much the Quality of the Person is the greater, so
much the further off is he to light, and go a-foot.

All the Officers and Persons of Quality, who come to the Court, are presently
obliged either in the morning early, if they come, or late at night, if they go
out, to go to Kun Chao, that is, the Court of Ceremonies, as is abovesaid, and
before the Royal Throne, which is placed in a Hall, although the King be not
there, who at that hour is for the most part in bed, and when all that came in
that morning, are assembled, (there being no morning that there is not a good
number of them) the Master of the Ceremonies comes, and with a loud voice
declares the Ceremonies, which every one ought to perform, and they all in
the same manner put them in execution: and if by misfortune any one commits
an error or does any gesture not reverently enough, it belongs to the Master
of the Ceremonies to give the King notice thereof by a memorial, as in like
manner does the Person that is culpable, accusing himself, and requiring some
penance for it: but this is done purely out of Ceremony, the king never taking
any heed to it.

All Ambassadors are obliged likewise to the same Ceremonies, when they enter
into the Court, or go out thereof: they use to be lodged in one of the Palaces,
which are within a spacious circuit of wall, near to the Royal Palace, and are
always kept in a readiness for that purpose, where they are royally treated,
and at great expense; but they may not go out of that circuit, and if they
would have any thing out of the City, it is brought to them into that place:
they neither see nor speak to the King; but only the Council of Rites by the
Kings order treats with them, and dispatched them.

The Portughesses, those two several times they were sent thither from the
City of Macao, were not only treated with extraordinary magnificence, and
liberality; but had also that particular privilege to lodge out of that
place: and the first of them that were sent, saw King Thienkhie, the brother of
him who now reigns, he was very young, and out of curiosity to see men of a
strange Nation, he caused them to come to the Palace, and although it was at a
good distance, yet he saw them, and was plainly seen by them.

Every one in the Kings presence speaks to him on his knees, if he be in the
Royal Hall with the Magistrates, he goes away before they rise up, if he be
sick and they come to visit him, they speak to him in the same manner, and
before they rise off their knees a Curtain is drawn before him, or else he
turns himself on the other side. When they speak to him, they hold in their
hands before their mouth a Tablet of Ivory a palm and a half long, and three or
four inches broad: it is an ancient Ceremony, for in old time, when they spoke
in a more familiar manner to the King, out of reverence they held something
between, to keep their breath from coming to the Kings face, and also when they
discoursed with him of many businesses, they carried the heads of them written
thereon, that they might not forget them. But now that they speak to the King
at such a distance, and not so long, this Ceremony might be excused, if it
were not, that they will keep up an old custom.

The Kings Garments differ not in fashion from those of the rest, but in the
stuff, which is very rich, and in certain Dragons which are woven and
embroydered in them, and no other Persons may wear them, but only the King,
and those that are of kin to him; as the Princes of the Blood, and particularly
the women, and the Eunuchs of the Kings family, but with some distinction. The
color is yellow, not but that other colors may be worn in the Palace, for
they wear light colors of all sorts, but yellow is so proper to the King, and
to all that he wears, that none else may use it.

CHAP. 23.
How the Kings of China are Married.
AT that time, when there were several Kings and Lords in China, they took one
another daughters for Wives, as they do in Europe. But they being at an end,
and the Monarchy reduced under one only Lord, and he being never to take a wife
out of the Kingdom, it is necessary, that he marry a daughter of one of his
subjects. Persons of Quality will not give him their daughters; for he being to
see them, whether he likes them or no, and they being to be turned off, if they
please him not, no person of any Quality will show his daughter, because she
may be refused, after she is seen; especially by reason that the sight and
trial of them is to pass further then to what is seen in the outward
frontispiece. They do not, nor may not marry with their kindred, though in
never so remote a degree: and therefore there is sought through the whole
Kingdom a Damsel of twelve or fourteen years of age, of a perfect beauty, of
good natural parts, and well inclined to those virtues, which are required in
a Queen, in the same manner, as in ancient times the Shunamite was sought out
for David, and Esther for Ahassuerus: and this is done without exception of
persons: whence for the most part the Queen is the daughter of some Artizan.

When they have found out such a one, as they looked for, they consigne her to
two ancient Matrons, who see that which all may not see; and if they find no
displeasing mark, or deformity about her body, they make her run to put her
in a sweat, that they may examine, whether there be any unpleasing smell from
it: when these Matrons are satisfied with the diligence they have used, she is
brought to Court, with a great train of women and men servants, and with an
equipage becoming a person, who from hence forward does appertain to the King:
to whom she is presented in his Palace, who after he has ended his
complements, he gives her to the Prince for a wife: and this is afterward the
true Queen: Within the Palace, they appoint to wait on her virtuous women, of
prudence, and understanding, that they may instruct her, as well in virtue, as
in complements, and the style of the Palace, endeavoring to breed her in such
manner, that she may deserve the name of a Queen, whom they commonly call Que
Mu, that is, Mother of the Kingdom: And as their Histories relate, there have
been many of these of great worth and merit. They are very commonly devoute and
charitable; and many of them have been prudent and virtuous.

Such was one of them, who being the daughter of a Mason, after she came to be
Queen, she kept always by her an Iron Trewell; and when the Prince her Son,
upon any occasion, behaved himself more haughtily than became him, she sent to
show him that Instrument, with which his Grandfather used to lay stones for his
living; by which means, she reduced him to his Devoir. In old times when Kings
took it in good part to be reproved for their errors, King You had a Colao, who
at the Royal Audience would tell him his faults without any indulgence: One
day, whether the King had given more cause, or that the excess was on the
Colaos part, the Audience being ended, the King returned into the Palace very
much offended, saying, He would cut off the head of that impertinent fellow.
The Queen asked him the cause of his displeasure: the King answered, There is
an unmannerly Clown, that never cease to tell me of my faults, and that
publicly, I am resolved to send one to take off his head. The Queen took no
notice of it, but retired to her Appartment, and put on a particular garment
proper only for feastivalls, and visits, and in this habit she came to the
King, who wondering at it, asked her the cause of this Novelty. The Queen
answered, Sir, I come to wish your Majesty much joy: Of what, replied the King.
That you have a subject, said she, that fears not to tell you your faults, to
your face, seeing that a subjects confidence, in speaking fo boldly, must needs
be founded upon the opinion he has of the virtue and greatness of his Princes
mind. that can endure to hear him. There have been many other like to this
Queen.

The kindred of the Maiden are presently exalted to honors and employments:
The family is already accounted, rich and honorable; and by how much more the
Queen gains favor within, they without are so much the more advanced.

The rest of the Kings Sons are ma^ried after the same manner: only they do
not use so much diligence, and caution in finding out the bride, but for the
most part she is sought for, and found in the Court it self. But the manner of
marrying the daughters is very different. There are twelve young men sought out
of the age of 17 or 18 years, the lustiest and the handsomest they can find;
these are brought into the Palace to a place, where the Princess may see them,
and not be seen; and when she has well considered them, she selecteth two of
them: These are presented to the King, who chooses which of them he likes
best, to be his Sonne-in-low.

Vamlie, the Grandfather of the present King, upon the like occasion, seeing
one of the two young men presented to him, very well clothed, and the other,
though neat, yet poorly habited, asked him, what was the reason, he was not so
well clothed as the other. The youth answered, Sir, my father is poor, and
cannot afford it me. Then replied the King, I will have you that are the
poorest for my Sonne-in-law: and being thus chosen, he did afterward carry
himself worthy of commendations. And truly a youth ought not to be ashamed of
his poverty, nor a King for having chosen a poor man. The rest are sent home
again, but are accounted Noble ever after, for having had the honor to be
admitted to that election.

Presently two Mandarines of the most considerable in the Court, are appointed
for Tutours unto these Fum Ma, so they call the Kings Sonne-in-laws; to
instruct them in learning, manners, and Courtly behavior etc. He is obliged
every day to make the four ordinary reverences upon his knees to his wife,
till she has brought him a child, as soon as she is delivered, this obligation
cease, although there are still a great many other constraints, and
inconveniences upon them, which is the reason, that no man of Quality will be
the Kings Sonne-in-law. For this reason the usual custom of choosing twelve is
now left off, and if the King do earnestly invite any person of Quality, or
Litterato of reputation, to be his Sonne-in-law, (as it has sometimes fallen
out) he excuses himself with all the skill and friends he has, for if the
Princess take a dislike against her husband (as it often happens) she gives
him affliction enough for all his life.

CHAP. 24.
Of the Nobility of China.
THe Nobility of China at this day is much changed from what it was anciently,
when, by reason there were many Kings and Sovereign Lords, they matched into
one another families, and the Kings themselves, made many noble men, whom they
used to employ, as also their nearest kinsmen, in charges and governments of
the greatest importance, and by this means their families continued on foot for
many years. At this day the most of the Nobility have been raised by their
learning, to the highest honors, from a low condition, many of them having
been the Sons of Artizans and Handicrafts-men, as also, for want of learning,
their families decline and grow again into poverty, so that it is rare thing
to see a family last to the fifth generation: for as the first beginners, being
forced by necessity, and stirred up by a desire to advance themselves, study
and take pains to obtain their degrees, and consequently Governments and
other Preheminences; So the rest, who follow, and are borne rich, and bred up
in delights, and wantonness, suffer themselves to be carried away with the
pleasures of living high, and the vices which accompany it, study little, and
spend much, so that in a short time, they find themselves reduced to the first
condition of their Ancestors. Notwithstanding, there is some shadow and
resemblance left of the ancient Nobility, and it may be reduced to five
orders, not mentioning those common people, who are of no account.

The first Nobility is of the King, Prince, the Kings Children, and the Royal
family, which is preserved in this manner. The Prince succeeds his father in
manner abovesaid.

To his Younger Sons the King assigns a habitation, out of the Court, in
such a Province or City as shall seem best to him, with Palaces, Furniture, and
Servants suitable to his high quality; and lands and revenues, which he
purchases for him in the same place; as also a competent pension out of the
Kings exchequer.

He that dwelt in the Province of Xensi, where I lived, for sometime, had, as I
was informed, 360000 Crowns per annum, and the title of a King conferied on
him; and all the Officers of the Province were obliged to pay him respect
suitable to his Title: whence every first and fifteenth day of the Moon they
went to do him reverence in like manner, as is done at Court to the King; there
being nothing wanting to him to make him an absolute King, but only Authority
and Jurisdiction; of which he had nothing at all, neither over the people, nor
in the government; the King reserving all that to himself; neither has he
liberty to go out of the City and Territory, where he has his residence.

The Eldest Son succeeds his Father in his estate and goods; the rest marry
and make several Families, which still grow lesser, although they be great; and
the King gives them an allowance competent for them; and as they are removed
still to a further degree from the Kings blood, so likewise their pension
diminishes, till it comes to fourscore Crowns a year, and there it
stops; there being none so remote from the Royal Stem, that has not, at
the least, this Revenue. Yet nevertheless, all this is to be understood only,
if those that are descended from him, have certain conditions, that are
required of them; for if these be wanting, they have nothing given them at all.

The First condition is, that they be Males; for if they be Females, there is
no account made of them, and the Father marries them to whom, and when he
will; but not to Princes of the blood; (neither may the Sons marry, but with
Women of other Families) and he is to marry them at his own expenses.

The Second condition is, that the Son be lawfully begotten on the true wife;
not only bastards being excluded, but also the Sons of their concubines, if
they have any.

The Third is, that as soon as his Son is borne, he do give a memorial to the
King, to give him a name, which is to be registered in the roll.

The Fourth is, that having attained the age of 14 years, he give another
memorial to the King, praying him to give order, that he may receive half his
pension, which he after receives every year at set times.

The Fifth, that when he comes to age to be married, there be another
memorial given to the King, wherein is required leave for him to marry, and
then he receives the whole pension which is assigned him.

These are the Princes of the Blood, descended from the King by a right male
line. These are not to live in the two Courts of Pekim and Nankim, nor in all
the Provinces indifferently, but only in some certain places; and are so
numerous, that they are believed to amount to 60000, and are all maintained by
the King. But they have this advantage, that they may help themselves by their
industry, in buying and selling, and playing the Merchants.

For the government of them; and to present their memorialls to the King; to
decide their controvesies; and to punish them, if there be cause, they have a
particular Mandarine, that is proper to them. But if they have any suits with
others, who are not of the blood Royal, such causes are under the cognizance
of the ordinary justice, who may reprove them, but has not the power to punish
them; but if any of them commit any notable disorder, he gives notice thereof
to the King, who for such occasions has a Castle in the Province of Kiamsi,
encompassed with a very high wall, whither he confineth them during life.

The Second Order of Nobility is of the Titulati, or Noblemen that have Titles
conferred upon them: who notwithstanding are but the shadow of what they were
in former times. These are divided into four orders. The First they call
Quecum, a new Title, and are only four Families, who were raised by the King
Humvu, and are descended from four valiant Captains, who served the said King
against the Tartars. They are, as it were, Dukes and Captaines-Generall of the
Militia, and do assist in that Quality, at certain military actions of great
importance, when they are done in the Cities where they inhabit; but they never
go to the war. The Second are Heus. The Third Pe. The Fourth Chi Ho Ei, all
ancient Titles. They have Offices in the Militia, and a competent revenue, and
all of them succeed their Fathers in their power, authority, and command. They
give place to many Officers of the Litterati: but, at an assembly in the Royal
Hall, they precede all of them.

The Third Order contains all them, who either have or do admininister in
the Government of the Kingdom, whether they be officers of of war, as
Generals or Captains, or of the Politic and Civil Government; whether they
be supreme, such as are the Colai, or inferior Ministers, as well the
Mandarines of other Cities, as those of the Court, even to those of the
smallest Burghs and Villages: neither are they excluded from this order, who
neither Govern, nor have governed, but are in Election to be received into the
Government; such are all Graduates, as Doctors, Licentiates and Batchelours.
In a word, this order consists of Litterati.

The Fourth is of Students, who, although they have never taken any degree, yet
only for being Students, and that they are in a way to obtain them, are put
into the rank of the Nobility, and treated as such, although they have no
privilege or authority.

The Fifth is of those Persons, whom they call Netti, or cleanly men, who live
either of their Rents or Merchandise: and when their wealth is much, their
honor is not little: and although without learning their power and credit is
not so great as among us; yet they are much respected by the people.

CHAP. 25.
Of the Government of China, and of the Officers.
THe principal Government of China, which embraces the state of the whole
Monarchy is divided into six Councels, called by them Pu. These do not only
govern in the two Courts where they do reside, but from these, as from the
first movers, the rest of the government depends: and to these persons,
causes, and matters, according as appertains unto each, all is subordinate,
with an incredible dependence and obedience.

Every one of these Councels has its President, whom they call Cham Xu, with
two Assistants, one of the left hand, who is the first, called Co Xi Lam; the
other of the Right, named Geu Xi Lam. These are the chiefest and most
profitable offices of the whole Kingdom, except the Colai, of whom we will
speak hereaster: so that when a Viceroy of any Province, even of the most
principal, after he has given good Testimony of his ability, is to be
preferred, he holds himself well provided for, not only if he be made
President of one of these Councels, but also if he come to be one of the
Assessours or Assistants, either of the left hand, or the right.

Besides these, who are the chiefest of the Council, there are ten others of
the same Tribunal, almost all equal in dignity, who are distributed into
several offices and employments. To these are added other great and lesser
officers, as Notaries, Scribes, Secretaries, Ministers, Captains of Justice,
and many others, who are not usual among us in Europe.

The First and chiefest Council, which is of the greatest authority and
profit, is the Council of State, called Si Pu. To them it belongs to propose
the Mandates of the whole Kingdom, concerning Officers, to change and promote
them: for after any one has been once provided of an Office, he always rises
by degrees to greater employments: nor are they ever excluded from the
Governmen, tunlesse it be for some notable fault committed either by
themselves, or by such as appertain to them, as their Sons, near kindred, and
the like. To this Tribunal also belongs the power to restore again any that
is turned out of his office: as, if a Mandarine, by some accident, lose his
office, they can easily put him in again: and upon this account they have very
many, and very great bribes given them.

The Second is the Council of War, called Pim Pu. This also, as well as the
Council of State, has authority over all the Magistrates of the Litterati,
as also over the officers of war, and takes cognizance of all affairs
belonging to the Militia, and is of great profit.

The Third is the Council of Rites, named Lim Pu. This, although it has not
so great command, nor brings so much profit, is notwithstanding more
considerable, because the Mandarines thereof are of the Royal College, and
are from hence preferred to be Colai, which is the chiefest dignity in China.
To this College does appertain all affairs concerning Letters, Temples,
Ceremonies, Sacrifices, the Bonzi, Strangers, Ambassadors, and such like
things.

The fourth is the Council of the Kings Patrimony, called Hu Pu, it takes
care of the Kings Revenues, Taxes, Impositions, Gabells, Excise, Tribute, and
generally whatsoever concerns the Kings Domaine.

The fifth is called Cum Pu, it is super-intendent over all public works,
particularly the Kings buildings, as those of the Palaces that are made for the
Kings children, for the Officers; over Walls, Gates, Bridges, Cawsewaies,
cleansing of Rivers, and whatsoever belongs to the Ships and Barks, as well
for the service of the King and the public, as for the Arma^oes,

The sixth has the care of all Criminal matters, and to inflict punishments:
it is called Him Pu, and is Judge of the highest Criminal matters, and other
things appertaining thereto.

Besides these six Counsels, which are the most principal of the Court, there
are other nine Tribunalls, called Kicu, Kim, with several offices which do
particularly belong to the Kings household.

The first is called Thai Lisu, as one would say, The great reason: it is, as
it were, the great Chancery of the Kingdom. They examine, as being the last
appeal, the judgments and sentences of the Tribunalls of the Court; and
thither are brought all facts of great moment. It consistenth of thirteen
Mandarines, that is, one President, two Collaterals, and ten Counselors.

The second is called Quan Lo Su, and is as it were, High Steward of the Kings
household, to whose charge it belongs to provide the diet, for the King, the
Queen, the Ladies, the Eunuchs, and to have the laying out of the whole expense
of the Palace; to pay the Salaries to the Officers of the Court, and to all
those that come thither upon public business; to Ambassadors, which come
from other Countries, and other such like Persons. It has a President, two
Assessors, and seven Counselors.

The third is Thai Po Cu Su, and is, as it were, Chief Master of the horse to
the King, and they have not only the charge of all Horses for the Kings
service, but of all that belong to the Posts, and generally of all others,
which belong to the public service of the Kingdom. It has a President, and
seven Counselors.

The fourth is, as it were, Master of the Ceremonies and complements of the
Court. It belongs to them to assist at all the Ceremonies of the public
Actions of the King, at feastivalls, and other times and occasions which
present themselves, and also at the daily Ceremonies, which are performed in
the Palace, by those that come in, or out, as is abovesaid. It has a
President, two Assessors, and seven Counselors.

The fifth is of Rites in more particular matters, and in that it is different
from the first, but it has the same form with its Assessors. It takes care
of the sacrifices, of the Royal sepulchers, of Mountains, Groves, and all
that belong to them, as Singers, Instruments, living creatures for sacrifice,
etc.

Moreover, China has another Tribunal, which has only charge of the
Memorialls, which are presented to the King, and is, as it were, a Chancery of
Requests; so that such petitions, as are not approved of by them, are never
given the King. This Tribunal was the occasion, in the time of the persecution
of the Christians 1616, that when we would have given an account of the law,
which we preached, and of the things which were imputed to us, our Memorial
could never pass, it being still rejected by them.

There are other three in the same form, with several charges and offices,
Beside the abovesaid Tribunalls, there are two more, one called Quoli, the
other Tauli: these, although they have their eye upon several Provinces, each
upon those matters which appertain to them; nevertheless their proper
occupation and principal office is, to take notice of the errors and
disorders of the Kingdom, and to advertise the King of his own failings, if he
has any, as also of the faults of the Mandarines and their Government: and as
it was never hard for any to tell the faults of others, yet these have a
particular Talent in it, and do it with great liberty, though many times with
little Justice.

Their manner is to frame a Memorial, and present it to the King (for those of
these two Tribunalls do not pass through the Chancery of Memorialls) and then
presently, (as they call it, Fa 'C Heo that is,) to transscribe it, and so to
send a copy of it to the Notaries, whereof there are many destined for this
work. These write many copies of it, which are sent by the next posts, from
the Court to be dispersed through the whole Kingdom: and by this means it is
presently known every where, by whom, and against whom, this Memorial is
presented, and the misdeeds contained therein, of what quality soever they be.
As Soon as this Memorial, which they call Puen, is published, presently the
Magistrate, or other person, against whom it is framed, is obliged to do two
things, whether it be with, or against his will, (which is more ordinary.) The
first is, that he give in a Memorial, not in his own defense, (for to excuse
himself were to show little humility,) but he must say therein, that the Tauli
has great reason; that he has committed a great error, and is in fault, and
does deserve to have a penance laid upon him, and that with all subjection, he
will submit to any punishment, that shall be imposed. The second is, that he
presently retire himself, and leave the Tribunal, and so all Acts of Justice
are suspended, so that he neither gives audience, nor ends any suite, until
the King have answered his petition, and declared his pleasure thereon; the
which is sometimes in his favor, and then he continues his office; and
sometimes against him, more or less, according to the quality of his fault.
There is no doubt, if this way were executed with reason and good conscience,
but that it would be much in favor of Justice, and the good Government of the
Commonwealth; as on the contrary side, it is an open gate to many causeless
troubles and disgraces. It falls out many times, that a Mandarine in
performing his office, and acquitting himself of the duty of his place, does
make himself many enemies. Some one of these, if he be a person that has
interest with any that is an Officer of those two Tribunals, as kinsman,
friend, etc. he gives account of i^ to the Court, the Memorial flies abroad,
and God help the poor Mandarine. When they are lesser Mandarines, as Judges,
Assistants to Governors, or Mandarines in Arms; at one blow, they lay him
flat on the ground. If they be great Mandarines, there is more difficulty: but
if they know, how to find a hole in their coats, and the Tauli and Quoli get
him in their claws, they never give them over, till they have un-horsed them,
so that the King himself is hardly able to save them.

The like accident happened to that Tyrant Xin, who in the year 1626 (being Xi
came in Nankim) raised a persecution against the Christians, and caused the
fathers to be benished, as shall be related in its proper place. He arrived
afterward to the dignity of a Colao; and caused four ensigns to be hanged
out at the 4 corners of his Palace, (I was then present in the same City that
is in Hamcheu) and made other demonstrations of extraordinary joy. But whether
it were, that the Lord would chastise him for the persecutions he raised
against his elect, or whether he deserved punishment for any other particular
crimes according to humane laws, or for both together, as soon as his orders
were come, and before he was departed to go to Court, there was so ter^ible a
Memorial put in against him, that a Christian Mandarine told me, it would not
be possible for him to hold up his head: and so he was presently glad to take
in his Standard, and depart with ordinary Ceremonies. He was notwithstanding a
politic crafty man, and had purchased with his money in the Palace, the good
will both of the Ladies and the Eunuchs, who are not wont to sell their favors
at a low rate. These did not only cause a Memorial to be dispatched in his
favor, but used means for him to be sent for to Court. At length he went, but
after a few months there was another Memorial given in against him, and after
that several others, to the number of twenty seven; and the crimes laid to his
charge were such, that the King could not help him, so that he was forced to
quit his Government, and retire to his house.

Beside these two Tribunals, there is another which is superior to all the
rest, and is the supreme dignity of the Kingdom; to which none do arrive, but
those of the Royal College, called Han Lin, after they have Governed a long
time, and given such testimony of their ability and integrity, that never any
Memorial was given in against them. They are called by the name of Colao, they
are commonly but four, and may never exceed the number of six.

The old King (Grandfather to him that reigns at present) never made but one
of them at a time; saying, That more were superfluous. These have no particular
office, but have an eye over the Government of the whole Kingdom. We may not
unfitly call them the supreme Presidents of all the Counsels, and of the
whole Government, although they are never present at them, but assist the King
at all dispatches of affairs; and now that the King does not use to be present
there himself, they always assist in the Palace, to receive and answer all
business, and the Memorialls, which are every day given in. These report them
to the King, who pronounces the last sentence upon them. These Colai are very
much respected by all the Magistrates, and at set times they do them reverence
as to their superiors, in a public Hall. The Colai stand up, and all the
Officers of the Court pass before them in their order; and when they come
right over against them, they turn toward them, and make them a profound
Reverence to the very ground. They call this Ceremony Quo Tham, that is, To
pass the Hall. Their ensigns, or badges of honor, are different from those
of the rest, and their girdle, which they call You Xe, is richly set with
precious stones. They only are allowed to wear it, and it is given them by the
King, as in Europe Kings do use to give Collars of their orders to their
knights. And when they are sick, it is only to these, that the King sends to
visit them with Regaloes and dainties from the Palace, and they do sufficiently
gratify the Eunuch that brings them, for the least they give him is fifty
crowns, which is more in that Country, than 200 here.

Beside these supreme and general Governors at the Court, who do not only
govern that, but the whole Kingdom also, there are likewise particular and
ordinary Governors and Judges of every City, and these observe the same manner
of Government as well in the Cities and Towns of the other Provinces, as also
in those of Pekim and Nankim, where the two Courts are, as shall be related
hereafter.

CHAP. 26.
Of the Government of the thirteen Provinces.
WE have formerly spoken of the universal Government of the whole Kingdom,
which resideth in the two Courts, it followth now, that we should speak of the
particular Government of the Provinces, every one whereof is a large Kingdom.
This Government resideth ordinarily in the Metropolis or chief City of each
Province. In each of these there are five Tribunalls, that have a general
command over the whole Province, and distinct offices among themselves. Of
these five, two are supreme, to which all others, both of the Cities and
Towns, are subordinate: But they among themselves are not subjected one to the
other, but are immediately subbordinate to the King and the Royal Tribunalls.
These consist of one President, or Judge, without any Assistant or Counselor,
although they have many other Officers.

The first of these two is the Viceroy of the Province, whom they call Tut
Ham, or Kiun Muen. He has power over all the Magistrates, and people of the
Province. He Governs for three years, and has constant Posts, that come and
go from the Court at set times, being to give account of whatsoever passes in
the Province. He is received into the City in great pomp and state. When he is
ready to depart the Court, many of the Officers of his Tribunal go thither, to
receive him, others meet him a good part of the way, where from City to City he
is honorably accompanied both by horse and foot: And three miles before he
comes to the City, where he is to reside, there go out certain Captains with
3000 Soldiers to receive him, after these follow the Magistrates, and after
them an innumerable company of people.

The Second Office, which is also absolute, is called Cha Iven, we have no
Office in Europe, that is answerable to it: he is, as it were, Visitour of the
Province. It lasts only a year, it is of great rigor and much feared. He
has authority to take Cognizans of all causes both Criminal and civil; of
the Militia; of the Kings Patrimony; in a word, of all. He visits,
enquireth, and informs himself of all, even to the Viceroy himself: the
inferior Mandarines and Judges he may punish, or turn them out of their
places. Concerning the greater Mandarines, if there be cause, he is to give in
Memorialls, and they are from thence forward suspended from the function of
their Offices, till the Kings answer come from Court.

To him it belongs to cause the sentences of Death, given through the whole
Province, to be put in execution, in order to which he assigns the day and
the City, whither all those that are condemned, shall be brought to him: and
there he is presented with a List of their names; then taking his pensill, he
marketh six or seven of them, (for if he prick more they count him cruel)
these are presently carried to execution, and the rest returned to the prisons
whence they came. It belongs also to him to visit the Walls, Castles, and
public places etc. He sets forth with a great train and pomp, having
banners carried before him and other Ensigns of Rigor and Majesty. This is
usually every year.

There is another extraordinary Officer of the same name. He is created from
time to time at the Queens request: he has great power and authority, but it
is only in favor of Piety and Mercy: he visits all the Prisons of the
Province, and freeth all such as are imprisoned for light faults, and that have
no prosecutours, and all those miserable wretches, that have no means to free
themselves: he takes into protection such causes as have been rejected, and
parties that could obtain no favor: he revoketh such sentences, as have been
unjustly given: he makes himself Protector of the poor, and in a word, his
whole authority is employed about works of mercy.

The Third Office is the Treasurer, who is superintendent of the Kings
Patrimony through the whole Province. He is subordinate to the Council of the
Patrimony at Court. He has two Assistants, one of the right hand, and the
other of the left: each of these have their house and Tribunal within the
circuit of the Treasurers Place. He has under him 26 lesser Mandarines, that
have several charges and employments, besides other Officers great and small,
of which sort there are very many belonging to this Tribunal.

To him it belongs to overlooke the customs, excise, and other duties
appertaining to the King, of what kind soever: to regulate all weights and
measures, all suites, controversies, punishments and sentences appertaining to
the Kings Patrimony, or at least to remit them to what Tribunal he pleases:
to pay the ordinary salaries, to all Magistrates, to the Kings kindred, to the
Captains and Soldiers: to provide all expenses for the examinations: to
furnish and give the badges of honor to all Graduates: to lay out money for
the public works, as Bridges, Highwayes, Palaces of the Mandarines, Ships for
the Navy etc. In a word, he is superintendent of whatsoever is spent or
received of the Kings Revenue immediately from the Governors, Judges and Tauli,
each for his own precinct; and though the sum be never so small, they must
always be paid in fine Silver, which is afterward melted by the Treasurer
into Ingots, weighing fifty Crowns a piece, with the Kings stamp and the
Founders name upon them, that in case any of them be falsified, they might know
whom to accuse; and in this form they are returned into the Kings Exchequer.

The Revenue of the Province is divided into three parts: one whereof is put
into the Treasure of the City, for extraordinary expenses; the other into the
Coffers of the Treasurer, for to defray ordinary expenses. This Treasury,
beside that the doors and locks are made as secure as can be, yet it is
guarded every night by a constant watch of Soldiers. The third is sent
publickely to Court, but with a strong Guard.

This Silver is put into round pieces of wood, sawed through in the middle and
hollowed within, and joined together with Iron hoops and both ends closed fast
with plates of Iron. Within every one of these pieces of wood is conveyed as
much Silver as two men are able to carry. The revenue of the whole Kingdom
(according to the supputation of Father Matteo Riccius, who lived many years
in China, as appears by his book printed in the year 1621) is said to amount
to an hundred and fifty Millions of Crowns. Father John Rodriquez, who also
travailed much about China, and was very curious to know the affairs of this
Kingdom, in a writing which he left behind him concerning the four notable
things of China, faith; That it does amount but to fifty five Millions, To make
them both agree, my opinion is, that the whole Revenue is a hundred and fifty
Millions, as Father Riccius said; and that which is brought to Court is but
fifty five, as Father Rodriquez would have it; the rest remaining, as has been
said, in the Provinces. As I have not made any diligent enquiry concerning this
matter, so I will forbear to add any thing to the Testimony of these grave
Personages.

The Fourth Tribunal is called Began Cha Sci, and is, as it were, a Tribunal
Criminal; it has Assessours, Councillors, and Tauli. And, as every Province
is divided into Shires, and Precincts, according to the number of the Cities
thereof, it belongs to these Tauli to visit them, and to do justice in the
several places assigned them; punishing Malefactors, and exercising their
jurisdiction, which extends it self even to the Souldierie, and the affairs
of the Sea, if the Province be maritime.

The Fifth Tribunal is over learning and letters, to examine, and confer
degrees, and the like, and is particularly set over all them that have taken
the degree of Batcheller; but Doctors are exempt from their Jurisdiction. There
is a Chancellor over the whole Province, who, at set times, visits all the
Cities and Towns, holding examinations, and informing himself of every ones
behavior; and according as he finds it, he reproves, chastises, and
sometimes depriveth them of their degree, but leaving them always the
liberty, as I have said, of returning, (if they please,) to a new examination.

There are moreover in every City two, whom they call Mandarines of the
Sciences, Hioquan; who belong to the same Tribunal; but their Jurisdiction
does not extend it self further than to the Batchelers of the same City, and
the territory thereof. And although they have not the power to confer a
degree, or to take it away, but only to punish them; nevertheless it is they
that give them the most trouble, by reason, that living always in the same
City, they often call them before them, examine them, etc. They are, as it
were, Prefects of the Classes.

All these offices whereof I have spoken, have authority over the whole
Province, and over all the Cities, Villages and Towns thereof.

But the Cities have moreover their particular Government, as among us in
Europe. In every City there are four principal Mandarines, one whereof is
President, whom they call Chi Fu, and is, as it were, Governor of the City:
the rest are Collateralls, they are called Thum Chi, Thum Phuon; Chiu Quon.
Every one of these holds his Tribunal apart, and has greater and lesser
officers belonging to him.

Beside these, every City has nineteen lesser Magistrates employed in several
Offices subordinate to the principal. Two whereof have a President and four
Councillors, the nine others have only one President and an Assistant, and the
other eight have only one President, but they have all of them their Officers,
Ministers, and a convenient number of Servants belonging to their Courts.

The Villages have a Judge and three Councillors. The Judge is called Chi
Hien. The First Counselor Hum Chim. The Second Chu Phn. The Third Tun Su.
They have each of them their Palaces and Tribunals apart, as also their
subordinate Officers, Notaries and others. The Judge may give sentence of
death, but cannot put it in execution.

Besides these Mandarines, which reside in the Cities and Villages, there are
others who have not the power either to Chastise or condemn, but only to make
their report, and are, as it were, Referendaries. There are also of them in
Castles, if they be great, and far from any City or Village: these are made
ordinarily out of the inferior Notaries of Tribunals, for out of the great
ones are commonly made the Councillors to the Judges of Villages.

But it must be observed, that both the greater and the lesser officers have
not so much authority, as ours in Europe. Besides, every Hamlet (whereof there
are almost Infinite in China, no labourer, or husbandman dwelling either in
City or Village, but in the Fields) has a Head or Thithing-man called Licham.
The houses are divided by tens, like Tithings or Decuries, with a Head or
Tithing-man belonging to each, by which means the Government becomes more
easy, and the contribution which is exacted, more certain.

CHAP. 27.
Of the Badges of Honor, or Ensigns of the Mandarines.
ALl Officers, who either have, or have had command, have their Ensigns, by
which they are distinguished, not only from the people, but from others, as
well Litterati, as Noblemen of another rank. These consist in five things, that
is, the Cap, the Habit, the Girdle, the Boots, and the Gown. The Cap is of
black Silk, lined with a certain stiff and strong Stuff. They all of them
have it made after the same fashion, only in the Caps of the Colai there is
some difference, it is called in the Chinesse language Xamao.

The Habit, (for so they call it, and we have nothing in Europe that answers
to it,) is a square piece, which they wear on their breast, richly embroydered
round about, in the middle whereof is the device of their Office and dignity;
and, as those are diverse, accordingly their devices are different. It is
called Phizu. The Magistrates of letters have an Eagle, a Hearn, a Bird of the
Sun, or such like: the Magistrates of arms, have a Panther, a Tiger, and
Unicorns a Lym etc.

The Girdle, which is not made to Gird them withal, for it is so wide, that
they are fain to fasten it at the sides, to keep it from falling, is called
Quon Thai; it is four fingers broad, and divided into little squares; it is
fastened before (if the Girdle be rich) with large Buckles of Gold or Silver:
some wear them nine inches broad. There are nine sorts of Buckels, that is, of
Bufalo, of Rhinoceros horn, of Ivory, of Tortoise-shell, of Lignum Aquilae, of
Calambu, of Silver, Gold, and precious stones. Every one may not wear them
indifferently according to their Fancies, but suitable to the quality of the
Office which he bears. The last Girdle, which is of a precious stone, called
You Xe, is given by the King himself to the Colai, when they enter into their
Office, nor is any other suffered to wear it.

The Boots, (which they call Hive,) are not ordinary, but of a certain
particular make. They are all black, and turned down.

The Vest, or Gown, is worn over their ordinary habit, and is in all, of the
same fashion. It is large, loose, and very becoming. The color is at their own
choice, but for the most part it is modest: but on Feastivall days it is
Crimson.

These are the Ensigns of the Magistrates, when ever they appear in public:
for at home they leave them off, and wear only the ordinary habit of the
Litterati: and in the same manner they go among their friends to Banquets, and
places of recreation, especially in hot weather. Their external Ensigns, when
they go abroad, are the Sedan, or Litter, inlaid with Ivory, and richly gilded,
all open, without any cover at top, to the end they may be the better seen.
There are some of them carried by two men, others by four, others by six, and
some by eight, according to the quality of the Mandarine. When there are six
or eight men, only four do carry the Sedan, the others go by on each side, and
take their turns. The train which follows after them is more or less
according to the dignity of the Magistrate: those of the greatest Quality
cause two men to march before them at a great distance, with a round staff in
the hands of each, of something more than a man's length, only for terror (for
the king only may strike with a round staff) and all the way they go, they
make a cry. Then follow two men bearing two Tablets silvered over, whereon is
written in great letters the Title of his dignity, then come four or six
more, trayling after them cudgells made of a great tree called Bambu, wherewith
they are wont in those Countries to give the Bastinado to Delinquents; then
follow others with chains in their hands, and other instruments of Torture. A
little before the Sedan there marches one with an Umbrella, or Sun-skreen, and
sometimes two; they are made of silk, and are as big as three of ours. Close
by the Sedan on one side, is carried a great gilded fan, so big that a man
is hardly able to bear it, with which the Sun is kept off from him, for the
Umbrellas serve only for show and Parade. Immediately before the Sedan is
carried the Kings seal in a gilded Coffer, placed upon a Machine, (like to
that which we use in our Countries, to carry the Images, and Relics of Saints
upon in procession) under a cloth of state borne up with four small pillars.
This is carried by two men. Behind the Sedan follow the Pages, and other
people, both on horse and foot.

When he goes through the street, if there be any thing unseemly at the
windows, as clothes hanged out a drying, or such like things, presently they
are taken in: if they meet with any Beers, or Hearses, such as the dead are
carried to burial withal, they overturne them to the ground: people of
Quality turn down some other street to avoid meeting of them: they that are
on horseback alight: they that are carried in chaires are set down, and the
people set themselves in rank on both sides the way. If it be a great
Mandarine, the multitude that stand looking upon him, keep a profound silence.
In the mean while he sits in his chair with so much gravity and composure
of body, that he does not so much as move his eyes: for to but look on one
side or other would in them be esteemed a notable fault.

When they make their first entry into any City or Town, besides the train
which is appointed to accompany them, all the way they go, and the Soldiers
which guard them, through the Towns and Cities where they pass, and the
Officers of their own Tribunal, who go many days journyes off to receive
them, and the Soldiers of his own Government, who go out many miles to meet
them, and all the inferior Mandarines, who go out of the City to congratulate
them; at the gates of the Town or City, stand all the old men of that place in
great number, with their reverend white beards, who on their knees bid him
welcome in the name of the people.

The Mothers and wives of the Officers, as their Sons or Husbands are
preferred and advanced to higher offices and dignities, are appointed by the
King certain honorable distinctions in their habit, as also Titles, whereby
they are called; such as are among us, your Honor, and your Excellency; not,
that they are the same, but that they have some resemblance more or less.

When any one of the most Eminent Officers die, the King sends away post a
Mandarine of the Court to solemnize his funerals, and this not only to the
confines of the Kingdom, but even out of it, as to the Island of Hainam, as it
happened in the year 1617 at what time I spoke with him who was sent hither by
the King, only for that purpose.

The King also, after his death, bestows the office of a Mandarine upon his
Son, or Nephew: and if the deceased person be a Colao, he bestows the like
honor upon all his Sons or Nephews, who, if they give a good Testimony of
their ability in their Government, are advanced yet higher, and come to be
Governors of Cities.

The Palaces where they inhabit are large, convenient, and stately, their
Tribunals, where they do Justice, are magnificently adorned, and attended by
great store of Officers. In the City of Nankim, beside many others, there are
five Tribunals, four of the four winds, for so they call them, and they are
accordingly placed in the City toward the North, toward the South, etc. The
fifth is in the middle of the City: yet are they inferior Tribunals, for every
one has a President and two Collaterals, and the President is no more than a
Doctor, and the two Collaterals are either simple Batchelers, or else raised
from the office of Notarie. It is true that in small and ordinary causes, these
are the hands and feet of the Mandarines, being faithful and diligent
executers of whatsoever they command them. There are in every one of these
Tribunals more than 300 men, who serve them, as Notaries, Clerks, and
Sergeants, some to apprehend men, others to whip them, others to carry letters
and writings, and such other Commissions; but they do not serve all at one
time, but take their turns in order.

Now that I have treated of the small Tribunals, I will speak of a great one,
which is that of the Viceroy of Cantone, which, for some causes, I had
occasion to observe very distinctly, as also many others. The Tribunal, wherein
the Viceroy does Justice, is joined to the Palace, where he has his residence.

There is first a great square Court, which looks toward the South, without
having any gate in the wall right before it, but only two at the two sides
thereof. At the four Corners of this Court there are four very high Masts, on
the top of each is displayed a white banner, whereon are written two letters so
big, that they almost take up the whole flagge. The letters are Kiun Muen,
that is, Viceroy. Within, round about the Court, are Chambers for the
Notaries, for great and lesser Officers, and many small Mandarines, who are to
be always ready at the Viceroys beck. In the middle of the Court is a Theater
of stone, with steps to ascend to it. There stand drums, flutes fifes and
Corners of Brass: and before the Vice-King gives audience, all these
instruments are sounded with certain pauses or Intervalls. They are sounded
three times for some space, and at the end of each, there are three Bombards,
or old fashioned Cannon, discharged; at the third and last time the gates are
opened, and all they, who have any business with him, are permitted to enter
into the first Court.

On the North side whereof, which answers to the front, where there is no
Gate, there is, a great Portal, which leads into another quadrangular Court,
which is longer than it is broad. This Portall has three gates in it, after
the fashion of our churches: that in the middle is the biggest, the other two
are lesser: each of these gates opens upon an entry, which is raised three or
four palms from the ground, and is seven or eight palms broad, but that in
the middle is larger. At each entry stand two ranks of Soldiers with their
arms in their hands: through the middle of whom those that have business are
to pass, entering at the left gate, and coming out at the right; for at the
middle gate, none either go in, or come out, but the Viceroy, and they that
visit or accompany him. At the end of this Court is the place of the Viceroy*
which has neither Hall, nor Gallery, but is a kind of building, that
participateth of both. It is like a Hall for its form, and like a Gallery, in
that it has no door, but lies all open. In it stands a small Table covered
with a Carpet of silk, whereupon lies the Kings seal, with red and black
ink by it, and stones for to grind it small, and pensills for to write
withal; but above all, there is the Case of the Cheu Cu, that is, Little
Tallies of wood, each of which imports five lashes: so that when the Viceroy
throws down two of them, in the languages of Justice, it signifies Ten
lashes; if he throws down six, Thirty, and so of the rest. Near unto the
seat of the Viceroy on each hand stand twelve Captains richly clothed, with
their Morions on their heads, and their Scimitars by their sides. Behind,
stand two Pages with fannes in their hands to make wind, in case the weather
be hot; but in winter they do not use them. All Tribunals are not of this
form; although there are many things common to them all, and the rest is
proportionable to the dignity of the Mandarines who hold them.

CHAP. 28.
Of the prisons, sentences and punishments of the Chinesses.
THeir prisons for Malefactors are more commodious and spacious than ours.
They are all, throughout the Kingdom, of the same form, with very little
difference; so that by treating of one, we shall give a description of them
all. They are for the most part either joined, or not far distant from the
Palaces and Tribunals of the Mandarines, to which they belong. They have no
grates toward the street; but within the outward gate there is a narrow entry,
which leads to a second gate, within which is a Court, which is always
bigger or lesser according to the receipt and concourse of the prison. Then
follows a third gate, where the lodgings of the keepers and warders are, who
are commonly three; beyond that is another gate, which opens into a great
square Court, a long the four sides whereof are the chambers of the prisoners,
which have no walls toward the Court, but in stead thereof, Columns of wood
placed so near together, that they rather seem to be grates. The doors are
not made of board, but of grates of the same wood, so that all is open to the
air: these Lodges or Chambers, are the Prisons of the ordinary Prisoners. At
the end of one of these rows of chambers, stands the secret, or close
Prison, for such as are committed for crimes of a higher nature. This they call
Chum Kien, that is, the heavy Prison: so that having passed through the common
Prison, there are other grates made in the like manner as the first, within
which are the close Prisons, where the most criminal Persons are, who are
always kept locked up: the other Prisons are opened every day, and the
Prisoners have liberty to go from one chamber to another, and to converse
together in the Base-Courts.

Every evening there is a view taken of the Prisoners, causing them all, for
this purpose, to come into the outward Court, and one of the warders with a roll
in his hand calls them over one by one: each man as he is called, goes into
his prison, where he is locked up for that night.

Those of the close Prison, although they go not out of it, (which happens
only to those, who have no money, for if they have wherewithal to fee the
Gaolers, they go out when they will, and are lodged where they please.) Yet are
they all day at liberty in their Prison: but at night they are secured in this
manner, They sleep at night upon planks, at the lower end whereof, where their
feet lie, there is a great piece of Timber laid athwart, which has store of
holes in it, wherein their feet are put, and so locked up: on their hands they
put manacles: on the side of each are two Iron rings fastened into the Boards,
through which is passed an Iron-Chaine of a good bigness, and is carried over
their breasts from the right side to the left, so that if this Chain be
straightened a little (which is at the courtesy of the Keepers) the poor
Prisoner is not able to turn himself, having not only his hands and feet, but
his whole body bound. This is the caution which they use for the night.

In the middle of the Court where the aforesaid chambers are, there is, as it
were, a little corpse do you guard, where there are four who keep watch by turns.
If there happen any noise, or stir, in the Prisons, or any thing which gives
suspicion, although it be only the going out of the light, which is to be kept
burning all night long, presently they give notice thereof to the Gaolers, who
immediately come in have to take care of it.

They are visited every month by one of those Mandarines, who have the care of
the Prisons committed to them. As Soon as he has taken his seat in the outward
Court, he causes to be brought before him all those who have been condemned to
die. Those wretches present themselves before him with their hair hanging down
and uncombed, a sickly countenance, their head hanging on one side, and almost
falling off; but as soon as they are remanded to the prison, and have lost the
sight of the Mandarine, they begin to skip, and are as sound as a fish. The
reason of this dissimulation is, because if the Mandarine find them fat and in
good liking, he causes them to be bastinadoed, which they call Ta Foiti, that
is, to fall upon the fat ones; saying, that they keep them there, to do
penance, to grow lean and die, and not to make good cheer. The other
Prisoners also are brought before him one by one, and the Mandarine enquireth
of the Gaolers, how they behave themselves, and accordingly he dispenses his
Bastinadoes, to those that are troublesome, unquiet and Gamesters.

After that, he visits the chambers of the Prisoners, where he sufferreth
them to have no manner of conveniencie, if he find either, Seats, Tables, Beds,
or such like things, he causes them presently to be taken away; for they will
not have their Prisons to be as ours are, for the securing only of their
Persons* but also to punish their bodies.

They who are committed to prison, are not only subject to the imprisonment,
but also to many contributions and paiments. The Mandarines have a tablet done
over with a white varnish, whereon is written the name and crime of the person
apprehended, this is given to the officer, who having received it, carries him
away presently to Prison, and makes him pay for his journey, which fee they
call Tablet-money. When he enters the second gate, comes the Notarie
General of the Prisoners, who is commonly one of them himself: he has his
Seat and Table (which is only that whereon the Prisoners eat) he asks him
his name and the cause of his imprisonment, which he presently enrolleth in the
book of Prisoners, making him pay for the honor which he receives in having
his name entered. Next after that, he is delivered to the Gaolers and overseers
of the several chambers, or to some one of them, and if the Prisoners are
many, they begin to distribute them to one another: if it be one man only, they
bid him go to the chambers of the North, or of the South etc. and presently the
overseer of that is to be paid his fee. As Soon as he is come to his quarter,
there comes to him another little scribe, whose office is only to take his
name, and to write it in the particular Table of that ward, which always
hangs up there; and here he is to pay another fee for this writing. After
that comes another, who is the sweeper of the Prison, and tells him, Sir,
Cleanliness is very necessary here, this place is to be swept and kept clean;
your fire to be made etc. all which cannot be done without opening the purse.
In the mean while comes one of the Prisoners with a pair of Iron Manacles, the
streightest he can find, which he puts on upon him: about half an hour
after he comes again with another wider pair, and tells him, Brother, I
know those Manacles are very straight and painful, I will therefore change them
for these wider, if you will pay me for the courtesy; and if he has no money
to give him, he takes his Cap, or else some part of his clothes. These are the
small charges, with which the poor Prisoners purse is drained.

Then follow the Gaolers; who being to receive a greater fee, allow him longer
time: for two days after his imprisonment they let him alone* to see what he
will give of his own accord, and if in that time he present them not with
something, for every night after, till they are satisfied they give him trouble
and torment enough. This payment is not limited, but is at the discretion of
the Gaolers, who endeavor to draw from every one as much as they can, that is,
a great sum from those who are rich, less from the poor, and from those that
have nothing, they take nothing.

This duty is no sooner satisfied, but the last Rights must be paid, that is
for the sacrifices of the Idol, or Pagod of the Prison, for in every one of
them there is a Chapel or two, where every month the Gaolers offer Sacrifice
on the first and fifteenth day of the Moon; which consists commonly of a
Cock, a piece of Pork, two Fishes, Bread, Fruit, and other things. These they
sees a little in water, and the Cock is to be boiled no more than that he may
be made to stand upright upon a Table which is placed before the Pagod, where
the other things are set in handsome order about him, and after it has stood
there an hour, they come and take it away, and dress the Fish and Flesh anew,
seasoning it very well, and then they make a Banquet.

The new Prisoners must contribute to furnish this expense; they, who are
admitted after this Sacrifice, till the next, which is fifteen days after,
furnishes the expenses of the next Sacrifice; and they that come after that,
of the next, and then they are freed from paying.

These Chapels dedicated to the Idols, do not only serve the Prisoners to make
their Sacrifices there, but also for other more common uses; that is, for the
Prisoners to make their vows, to draw lots, although many times with an
unfortunate event, for having liberty and a happy deliverance promised them
by the lot, they receive afterward at the Tribunals Bastinadoes and torments.

I was one day present when a poor heathen drew his lot, kneeling on his knees
with much devotion, and because he could not read, he called another to
instruct him out of the little book, which is kept for that purpose in the
Chapels: having drawn his lot, says this poor man, well, what have I got?
Shall I be tormented at the Tribunal? The other reading over the leaf cried
out, Be of good courage, all is well, you have a good lot. Shall I not have the
Rack given me, replied the poor wretch? Which was a kind of torment which he
was much afraid of. Fear not, answered the Interpreter, you shall have no
harm. That very morning this poor Gentile was brought to his Trial, who in
truth was innocent, the fact, for which he was committed, being done by his
brother, who had received stolen goods into his house, and knowing that he was
discovered, fled away; and so this poor wretch was apprehended in his stead,
When he was examined, the Mandarine, not satisfied with his answers, commanded
he should have the Rack given him. He being loath to be carried away, made what
resistance he could, so that they were fain to drag him by main force, and
being a strong sturdy young man, defended himself with so much courage and
violence, that ten or twelve men were not able to rule him, but tumbling up and
down from one side to another, and catching hold of whatsoever he came near,
he hit by chance against the Mandarines Table, and overturned it to the ground
with all that was upon it, by which accident he did so anger the Judge, and
enrage the Sergeants against him, that when they had seized him, they gave him
the Rack in so cruel a manner, that they were feign to send him back to Prison
upon other men's Shoulders, having his heel-bones out of joint. The next day,
when his pain was something mitigated, and he more capable of reason, I went to
visit him, much compassionating his sufferings, he related to me all
particulars of the story, and I began to touch upon that point of the lots and
their interpretation, saying unto him, what has your Idol done for you: The
Devil, said he, take the Idol and his lots, for they are all such as he is; and
some other words, which are not proper to be related here.

The Prisoners do pass the summer well enough, but in winter, as the cold is
very great, and the sustenance of many very little, they must needs suffer
much: and although the Mandarines, for the good of the poor Prisoners, do often
commute Corporal punishments into Pecuniary Mulcts; yet when this is done,
there is not enough for all. Thieves, when they are taken, are generally
abandoned of their friends and kindred; neither is there any, who will own
them, and so, many of them perish miserably. I have often seen six or seven
dead bodies thrown out at a time.

They have anotable Superstition concerning the dead, which is, that they will
not suffer the Body when it is dead, to be carried out at that Gate whereat it
entered when it was living. And to take away this difficulty, in the outward
Court, whereof we have spoken, there is a little door, or hole in the wall,
where they are thrown out; if it be a person of quality, there is always
leave obtained for him to go out of Prison before he dies, that he might not
have his Carcass thrown out at that hole, accounting it the most shameful
disgrace that can befall them. Hence one of the most horrible imprecations and
curses that is used in that Kingdom is, La Laoti, that is, may thou be dragd
through the hole of a Prison.

The Prisons, having no grate on the outside of them, they, who would visit or
speak with any Prisoner, must of necessity enter into the Prison; and there is
this inviolable custom among them, that none is to visit a Prisoner without
bringing him something to eat, more or less according to his ability, and if
by accident he brings nothing, he makes his excuse for having, broken a
custom so generally received. But perhaps some will ask me how I came to be so
expert in these points? Truly I must answer him in a word, that though this
knowledge be not much worth, yet it cost me very dear.

Their trialls differ very little from ours, but only that the delays and the
replies are not so many: every thing is done by way of Petitions or Memorialls,
and in these every one is allowed to say what he can for himself. There are
some who get their living only by drawing up such writings as these for
Prisoners; but we do not admit them to the Sacrament of Baptism, unless they
leave this employment: for they tell so many lies in them, that the Mandarines
had need of a great deal of experience, and discretion to find out any truth
amongst so many falsehoods: but sometimes, when they are taken in them, they are
well paid for them in Bastinadoes.

The Viceroy of Nankim, who was a great friend to our Fathers, and, though a
heathen, was well affected to the Christian religion, and well acquainted with
the doctrine of it, told me one day this story, As I was giving audience, said
he, at my Tribunal, and hearing of causes, there was one, who among others,
presented me a Memorial, I took it and read it, and found it full of nothing
but revilings and Slanders against the Christian Religion, and the Christian
Chinesses of that City, speaking sufficiently ill of both. I asked him then, Do
you understand this law, and do you know this people? Yes Sir, answered he, It
is an upstart, perverse, strange law, etc. Speaking yet more evil of it than
he had written in his Memorial. I presently put my hand to my Tallies, and
flung out six, the Officers presently gave him thirty Bastinadoes (and those
which are given at these Tribunals, are commonly well set on) as soon as he had
gotten up upon his legs, and had a little composed himself, I told him, that
I saw his petition was not well enough digested for a business of so great
moment, and bid him go and consider better of it, and more diligently inform
himself, and to come and give me an account of it; but from that day to this I
never heard more of him.

The petition is presented by the party, or by some other in his name, after
this manner. The Court, before the Tribunal, is commonly full of people that
have suites there, but there is an entry in the middle of them, which leads
directly to the Mandarines seat that is always kept empty, and free to pass
through. He that has a petition to present, when his time comes, kneeleth on
his knees in that passage, having his petition in his hand lifted up as high as
his head. Then the Mandarine sends one to take it, and if he has any
question to ask him, he asks it; then if he accepts the petition, he
foldeth it, and lays it on the Table; if not, he presently throws it away;
and if he judges the petition to be impertinent, he appoynteth a certain
number of Bastinadoes, to be bestowed on the petitioner, as has been already
said: and many times for no other reason, but because the Judge is in ill
humor, although he that presents the petition is not the party whom it does
concern. I saw the like case happen to a Bonzo, (for they also are subject to
the secular power) for no other reason, but that the Mandarine was peevish.

The Bonzo used the ordinary Ceremony with his petition: his acceptance was,
that the Mandarine presently turned toward the Table, and cast down two
Tallies of wood, which was no sooner done, but presently there were two men,
that took the Bonzo, one by the head, and the other by the heels, and
throwing him down to the ground, stripped down his drawers to his very feet,
and bestowed ten Bastinadoes upon him, with so much dexterity, that the
business was done before any was aware of it.

Their condemnations are for the most part pecuniary, and sometimes, though
seldom, they are sent into banishment, or to the Galleys, or rather something
equivalent to it. For to speak the truth, they have not that punishment, but
one very like it, that is, they are put to work on the rivers, in the Kings
ships and vessels, they tugge at the oar, and do other services, being bound
two together in one chain.

They only are condemned to death, (which is commonly executed by hanging,
strangling, or cutting off the head,) who falsify the Kings money, or commit
murder: if there be many guilty of the same crime, one man only is executed,
the rest have other punishments inflicted on them: but robbers by the
highways are all to die, if the fact be sufficiently proved. Lesser thieves
for the first fault, if the theft be of small value, are Bastinadoed, and
imprisoned for a certain time. If they be taken a second time, they have the
same punishment with some advantage; or else they have these two letters Za Tao
imprinted on the outside of their arm, both which do signify Thief. These
two letters are neatly carved on a piece of wood, and being rubbed over with
ink, they do make the impression of them on their flesh, and then with another
piece of wood, wherein are four needles conveniently placed, they do prick
holes in that part of their flesh which is colored with ink, and when the
blood comes, they rub it with their hands, to give entrance to the ink; and
by that means the impression remains for ever. Adulterers are severely
punished, although not with death, and besides other chastisements they are
sufficiently laden with Bastinadoes. The women also taken in the same fault,
if they have been formerly of honest repute, are whipped or Bastinadoed, with
their drawers or Calzones pulled down to their heels, to make them the more
ashamed, and sometimes also they are whipped in the public streets: but, if they
have formerly lost both their shame and their honor, they beat them only upon
their Calzones.

They do many times die of the Bastinadoes they receive, especially if the
delinquent deserve death, and they have a mind to dispatch him; for it is
impossible a man should live, after he has received seventy or eighty
Bastinadoes, especially as they are laid on, when it is before a great
Tribunal. In the year 1617 there was in the City of Nankim a kind of
Confraternitie, or society of fifty men, called by them Thien Came. These
according to an agreement made among themselves, did always assist one
another: an injury resented by one, was vindicated by all, and by this means
they committed a thousand insolences: at length they were almost all
apprehended, and distributed to the several prisons of the City; where there
are at least fourteen or fifteen: at their very first entrance, they put about
the neck of each a Kian Hao (of which we will speak hereafter) so heavy, that
it was impossible for him that bore it, to stir out of his place; and when
any of them was to be brought out, he was forced to have two men to help him to
carry it. They were brought to a trial before the Governor of the City, who
caused them to receive threescore and ten blows a man, whereof they all dyed.

For ordinary crimes they inflict a certain punishment, that is not in use
among us in Portugal; they call it Kian Hao It is a great thick board, four
or five Palms square, with a hole cut in the middle of it about the bigness
of a man's neck. This they fasten about their necks, and to it are hung two
scrolls of paper of a hands breadth, wherein are written his fault, and the
cause of his punishment; they serve also to show that the board has not been
opened: and so with these great boards about their necks, these poor wretches
are brought out every day, and exposed to shame in the public streets, for
fifteen, twenty, or thirty days, according as they are adjudged by their
sentence, whose greatest rigor is, that during all that time these boards are
not taken off their necks, neither night nor day. And all this must be
understood to be done after they have received their Bastinadoes, which are
never wanting, there being no condemnation in China, (unless it be pecuniary,)
without this previous disposition: neither is it necessary to make mention of
it in their condemnation, this being always understood to be their first dish,
and as a necessary, though accessory circumstance; and then follows their
sentence, as the principal verb. And the truth is, that, as the Giapponesses
are wont to say, they cannot Govern without the Catana, that is, the Scimitar
or Sword; so it may be said of the Chinesses, that without Bambu, that is, the
cudgel or Baston, with which they use to beat men, it is not possible they
should be ruled. For the better understanding of this, I will briefly declare
the use of it.

In every Tribunal of China, when the Mandarine gives audience, there stand
near unto his Table ten or twelve men on both sides thereof, with long
Cudgells in their hands, rested upon the ground (and sometimes for the greater
terror, they will place forty men about them, as they did, when the fathers
were brought before them for their Religion.) These Cudgells are seven palms
long, being at the bottom about a hands breadth in circumference, tapering
still toward the top, where they are small and slender, that they might more
commodiously be used with both hands. They are made of Bambu, which has some
resemblance to Cane, in that it is knotty and hollow within, but is different
in this, that it is a massy, strong, heavy, hard wood.

Moreover, on the Table of the Mandarine stands that case of wooden Tallies,
whereof we have spoken, and every Tally imports five blows; wherefore when
the Mandarine would have any one Bastinadoed, he throws down as many
Tallies, as make up the number of the blows he would have given. Every one of
the Upi (as the Portughesses call them who carry the Bastons) is ready to take
his Tally, others to sieze the patient, and to lay him on the ground. As Soon
as his breeches are pulled down, presently one of the Upi lays five
Bastinadoes upon his naked flesh, according to the import of his Tally, and
withdraws himself. Then comes another, and lays on other five, and so it
is always done by a fresh hand, till he has received the number assigned him:
when the Mandarine throws the Tallies out of the case, he is not to give any
reason for it, neither must he be asked, but his commands are presently put in
execution, and only in some smaller offenses the patient may obtain with his
money, that the blows be not altogether so fierce and cruel.

This is to be understood, when the Mandarine sits on his Tribunal, for in
no other place he makes use of those Tallies, although he be always waited on
with those Cudgells; and by reason the use of them is so frequent, they always
accompany the Mandarine, who makes use of them in any place, and upon any
occasion. It were a sufficient cause if any one that met him on horseback did
not alight, or that he crossed his way, which because it is a slight fault, is
chastised only with five or ten blows. And the Mandarine has this power, not
only in the Towns and Cities of his own Jurisdiction, but also in any place
whatsoever, though it be not properly under his Authority.

Before I left the City of Nankim, (the Metropolis of the Province of Kiamsi,
where we have a Church, a house, and a good number of Christians,) there came
thither a Mandarine, who was Judge of one of the neighboring Towns, and
passed through our street, which is one of the most frequented of that City.
There was, in a remote corner thereof, a fortune tellers, one of those, who used
to sell good fortunes to the people, sitting in his chair, with his Table,
books, and other things before him. The Mandarine passed once up, and another
time down the street, and the Suon Mim (for so they call these Diviners) never
moved himself off his chair, either the first or the second time. After a few
hours the Mandarine had occasion to pass through the same street again, and
coming to a little Piazza, in a corner whereof this unhappy fortune tellers had
his seat, the Mandarine called out to him, saying, you make no difference of
men, neither do you do your Courtesy to the Kings Mandarines: take him away,
and give him what he deserves; presently in the street, before his own seat,
they gave him ten Bastinadoes. Go your ways now said the Mandarine, and learn
manners, and study better that art of yours, since you have not been able to
foresee this good fortune, that has befallen you: with so much facility do
they bestow their Bastinadoes; neither do men make any account of them,
although they always pay them in ready coin; all do give them, all receive
them, and all have felt them, neither does it seem strange to any one, nor
does any hold himself aggrieved for them. In the same manner do Lords and
Masters chastise their servants, except only, that for the most part they do
not take down their breeches. The like do Schoolmasters use in their
Schools to their Scholars, of what quality soever they be; beating them on the
buttocks with their breeches on, and laying them not upon the ground, but upon
a form. The same also do they use to little children, for they have neither
whips nor disciplines, but rather abhor them; wondering how we can chastise
our children with a whip, which they apprehend to be a very cruel thing; and
the children themselves, because the whip smarteth more, and it is struck upon
their naked skin, do rather choose the Bambu. And that you might want nothing,
there are in China certain persons, who do buy these Bastinadoes at the
Tribunals; or (to speak more correctly,) do sell the receiving of them in stead
of others. But this is only in some slight causes, for in others they neither
may nor will. But when the cause is such that this may be done, he agrees with
the party for so much a Bastinado, and appears before the Mandarine in the
place of the delinquent, and receives them for him.

The Rack is used also in certain necessary cases. I do not know that they have
above two kinds of it. That of the feet, and that of the hands. For the feet
they use an instrument called Kia Quen, it consists of three pieces of wood
put in one Traverse, that in the middle is fixed, the other two are moveable,
between these their feet are put, where they are squeezed and pressed, till the
heele-bone run into the foot: for the hands they use also certain small pieces
of wood between their fingers, they call them Tean Zu, then they straiten them
very hard, and seal them round about with paper, and so they have them for
some space of time.

CHAP. 29.
Of some particular things, which do facilitate and rectify the Government in
China.
THe First is, that the King does bear the charges of his Officers, furnishing
them with all manner of expenses, by this means, taking from them all
occasions, which might, through their necessities either engage them to
several Persons, or run them much into debt, obliging them by the same
means more strictly to observe the laws, and to walk more directly in the
paths of justice.

After that a Doctor, or Licentiate, or any other has an employment bestowed
upon him at Court, and departs thence to go to his Government, all the
expenses of his person, Servants and Family, as well in traveling by water as
by land, including the hire of Boats, Carts, Horses, Porters, and other things,
are all defrayed by the King.

Throughout their whole journey they never lodge at Innes, but in all the
Towns and Cities, there are Palaces appointed for to entertain them, where all
things fitting are provided for them. They always send a man before as an
harbenger, so that by that time they arrive, all things are in order for their
reception. And if it fall out, as sometimes it does, that they cannot reach to
a good Town, there are in certain places, houses built for this purpose by the
King, which they call Yeli, where every thing is provided for them. The worst
is, that because it is all at the Kings charges it is done more profusely and
lavishly than is requisite: as for example, when the Mandarine has occasion
for ten horses to carry his family, they require fifteen or twenty; and there
is likewise provision made for so many through the whole journey, and the
greatest part of them receive this in money.

Neither does the matter stop here, but goes yet further. There being some,
who have not so much care of their credit and reputation, as of their purse;
and when they are to have so many dishes, and so many several sorts of meat,
according to the Kings appointment, they give order, that the provision should
be less and receive the rest in money, nevertheless there are but few who
dare be guilty of such baseness.

Neither does the King only furnish the expense of their persons, but that
also, which is requisite to sustain the honor and dignity of their places,
as, men on horse back, and on foot to accompany them from Town to Town through
all places where they are to pass.

The Second is, that in the places where their Governments are, he provideth
them Palaces for their habitation, in case they have none of their own, as also
rich Furniture and movables, and all manner of Servants within doors, and
without doors even to the pages, who are never so few, but that he allows
eight or ten of them to a Judge of the smallest Town; yet they do not wait all
at one time, unless it be when the Mandarine gives a particular command for
it.

The Third is, that the Mandarines, in treating with the subjects, are very
wary and circumspect, never discoursing nor treating in secret with any, but
always publicly, so that every one may be witness to what they say. Their
Palaces are always kept shut within and without. After they have given
audience (which they do constantly every day, and many times both morning and
evening, for there is always someting to do) they retire, and the Palace is
shut within, for the Mandarines, and without, for the Officers. And although
the gates are opened as often as he has a mind to go abroad, yet it is never
done secretly, but one beats a drum within, to whom another answers
without, and presently the Officers and other people, who are to accompany him,
come together; as soon as they are all assembled, the gates of the Palace are
opened, and the Mandarine comes out.

The Fourth is, that no person of their house, whether they be Sons, Cousins,
or Servants that dwell with them, may go out to visit, converse, or treat of
any business, for fear least they should receive any bribe or present. The
Pourveyour, or Caterour, dwells without, and is of the same Tribunal, as
well as the rest of the Officers, and has every day given him in writing, what
he is to buy. And because it is not convenient that the gates of the Palace
should be opened upon every small occasion, they have all turning wheels, by
which they receive in, and send out, whatsoever there is occasion for.

The Fifth is, that they govern only three years in one place, by which means
they are prevented from establishing themselves too strongly, and from
contracting any straight alliances or friendships. None governs in his own
Country, except the Captains, who are presumed, when there is occasion, will
defend and preserve their own Country, with greater affections and endeavors
than strangers.

The Sixth it, that among the Mandarines, there is a great subordination of
some to others. The inferiors with all reverence and obedience, respect their
Superiors, and also visit them courteously, and at certain set times do make
them presents.

The Seventh is, that there is a strict watch kept over the Government. For
besides the Tauli and Quoli, whose office it is to inform themselves of
whatsoever passes, and accordingly to give advice thereof to the King, every
Province has a Visitour, not for many years, but a new one every year, to the
end he might do his Office more exactly, and that he might either chastise, or
give notice to the King of such as do not comply with their duty, according to
their obligation.

The Eighth is, that every three years there is a general visitation held upon
all the Mandarines of the Kingdom, partly by means of the information of the
Visitours, and partly by private inquisition, and it is held the same year,
wherein, from all parts of the Kingdom, the Mandarines go to render obedience
to the King in Pekim, and so the execution of this review is done at the Court
it self by chastising some, abasing others, and taking their offices away. The
principal causes for which they are punished, are these following.

First if they sell justice, by receiving bribes, these lose their Offices, and
are sent home to their houses.

The Second is, if they be rigorous and cruel, punishing men beyond all
humanity, these lose both their Office and honor, and are put into the rank
of the common people.

The Third is, if they be negligent or careless in their government, they lose
their Office, but retain still the Ensigns of their dignity.

The Fourth is, if they be hasty and precipitate, and not deliberate enough in
giving their judgment, these are abased to lower Offices, as from a Governor
to a Judge, and the like.

The Fifth is, if they be too young, and their Actions light and Iuvenile,
these are likewise degraded, and employed in lower charges.

The sixth, if they be old, and have not strength to undergo the pains
requisite in their audiences, and other services of the King, they give them
their Quietus est, and send them to take their ease at their own houses. And
although this be not a fault, but only a failing of nature, yet it is the worst
of all, because they, not being able to remedy the incommodities of their old
age, this defect still increases upon them by time, and they are by consequence
made incapable of return to their Offices.

The Seventh is, if they be careless in the conduct and government of their
house and Family; whither it be that, where they actually dwell, or that which
is in their own Country, which is governed also by their order, to which both
their servants, kindred and sons, do yield an exact obedience (which is not
hard for them to obtain, by reason of their great authority) these likewise
lose their Office.

The Ninth thing, which much facilitateth good government, is, that the Kings
will hear the Mandarines speak, although it be in a business that is
displeasing to them; and the Mandarines will freely speak to them, although it
be with some hazard to themselves; so that both the one and the other are much
to be admired, In the Mandarines, their liberty in advising, And in the Kings,
their facility in hearing, In the Mandarines, their zeal to justice and good
government, And in the Kings, their sincerity and desire to settle and
establish it. They have many examples of this in their History, and I am
willing to set down two or three of them.

From a certain Province, there was sent unto the King, a damsel of a rare
beauty, and incomparable features. Now his predecessor had been formerly
intrigued and engaged in the like occasion, and very great damages had
resulted thereby unto the Kingdom (for such like persons are seldom causes of
much good) and the same inconveniences were feared at present. A Colao
undertook the business, and resolved to speak to the King about it: he was
admitted, and spoke with so much efficacy and persuasion that the King told
him, that as soon as she was brought to the Palace, she should be dismised and
sent away. Sir, replied the Mandarine, your Majesty would do well to command
her to be sent away suddenly, immediately, for if she once enter into your
house, and that you have seen her, and heard her speak, your hands will
tremble, for women have the power to enchaunt without witchcraft: neither will
I go out at one gate of the Palace, till she be first sent away at another. The
which was accordingly put in execution.

There was a King so taken with the love of Birds, that he caused the most
curious and beautiful Birds to be sought for through the woods of the whole
Kingdom: and as the Kings will is like the primum mobile, in giving motion to
the hands of his subjects, this search was put in execution with great labor
and oppression of the people, especially of one Province, where this chase was
continually made by many, insomuch that the husbandmen could not attend their
Ploughing and Sowing: so that by this means they came to suffer great want. It
happened that a Mandarine passed through that Province, as he came from
another, who had more zeal and compassion for them, than they who governed
there. As Soon as he was come to Court he presented a Memorial to the King,
wherein he did so lively set forth the small importance of that chase, and the
great trouble and disturbance which it caused to the people, that the King, not
only bounded his curiosity, and commanded they should desist from taking any
more Birds; but also gave liberty to those, which were already taken,
commanding the doors of the Aviaries and Cages to be set open, that they might
fly away.

In the City of Pekim, in the Palace of one of the Kings daughters, whom they
call Cum Chu, there was one of her Servants, who was very insolent, having
committed many high crimes, and one among the rest, which deserved death: the
Mandarines much desired to apprehend him, but in the Palace they could not, and
he never went abroad, but when he waited on his Princess. At length there was
a Mandarine, who resolved to take him by any means he could, and to this
effect, when the Princess went next abroad, he with his men set himself before
the coaches, and made them stop, and then presently laid hands on that man, and
carried him away. The Princess, resenting the afront that was done her,
returned presently to the Palace full of indignation, and was so transported
with colar, that she would not stay till the King came back from the audience,
where he then was, but went thither her self in person to complain, The
Mandarine was presently sent for, who had put himself in a readiness, well
imagining he should be called: he presents himself before the King, who
sharply reproved him. He answered him, Sir, I have done nothing but that which
your Majesty commands, and the law ordains. But you ought, replied the
King, to have sought some other time and opportunity. I have sought it long
enough, answered the Mandarine, but I should never have found it. At least,
replied the King, ask my daughter pardon, and bow your head. Where there is no
fault, answered the other, there is no need of pardon, neither will I ask
pardon for having discharged my Office. Then the King commanded two Mandarines,
that by force they should bow his head down to the ground: but he by strength
kept himself up so stiff, that it was not possible for them to do it; so that
the King was constrained to send him away. A few days after the King gave
order, that he should have a better Office bestowed upon him, being much
satisfied with his integrity. I forbear to relate many like cases, which I
might bring in confirmation of this.

The Tenth is the strickt watch and ward, which is kept in the Ci^ies, Towns
and Villages; in every street there is placed a man, and if it be long, two or
more; who are appointed to take care of any disorders that may arise there. In
every street likewise there is a kind of prison called Lemphu, that is, the
cold shop, where upon a sudden occasion they may imprison a delinquent, until
notice be given thereof to some Magistrate.

The Eleventh is, that every night infallibly all the gates of the City are
shut up as we have already said. The streets also are shut up with grates made
for that purpose: But the streets are not always shut up, nor in all parts of
the City, but only in some, and that upon some certain occasions and
occurrences.

The Twelfth is, that persons of honor and authority do bear great respect
one to another, and it would be accounted a great disgrace for any of them to
quarrel with another openly. Hence it happens, that although many times they
have occasion of disgust and hatred, yet outwardly they always observe their
Decorum; neither do they, upon this account, avoid any meetings that they might
not come together.

The Thirteenth is, that none do bear arms except the Soldiers, and they
only at their musters, or when they do accompany the Mandarines. The common
people, who contrariwise do easily quarrel one with another, do make use only
of their fists, and he that catches the other first by the hair gains the
battle; nay, if they have any thing in their hands, that might draw blood, as
a staff, a piece of wood or iron, or such like thing, presently they lay it
down, and go to it with their fists.

The Fourteenth is, that the whores and curtezans, who are many times the
causes of great disorders, do lodge without the walls, neither is any of them
suffered to dwell within. They have no particular houses, but many of them live
together with a man, who has the care and government of them, and is obliged
to give an account of any disorder that falls out in their lodgings.

The Fifteenth is, that they forbid all commerce with strangers within the
Kingdom, least they might infect them with new customs and manners, and
disturb their ancient way of government, which is a law, that was in part
observed also by the Lacedaemonians, upon the very same motive. Yet they have
never prohibited Ambassadors from other Kingdoms, and accordingly many are
received, who are sent from the neighboring Kings: only they lay this
obligation upon them, that when they are arrived at the first City of the
Kingdom, they are to stay there, where the Magistrates do treat them with all
honor and respect, and presently give the King advice of their arrival, who
sends them leave to come to the Court, without which license, they are not
permitted to go forward. When they are come to Court, they are lodged in a
particular Palace, whence they may not go out, but in the manner we have above
related.

Above all, they have their certain laws, statutes, and ordinances, by which
both they and their Kingdom are governed. These are of two sorts, The first
consists in ancient rites, customs and ceremonies, common to the whole
Kingdom, and are contained in five Books, and are esteemed to be, as it were
Sacred. Of the second sort are the laws of the Kingdom, according to which,
Justice is administered in particular cases, both civil and criminal,
concerning all that is to be observed in the execution of them. These are
likewise very ancient, and are all founded upon those five Cardinal virtues,
so much esteemed by their Ancestors, and which are at this day held in great
veneration among them, that is, Gin, Y, Li, Chi, Sin: Piety, Justice, Policy,
Prudence and Fidelity.

Gin, say they, signifies Piety, Humanity, Charity, Reverence, Love and
Compassion. Which they expliane after this manner, To esteem ones self less
than others, To be affable, To succor those that are afflicted, To help those
that are in necessity, To have a tender and compassionate heart, To bear good
will to all men, and, To use all this more particularly toward their parents,
sustaining them while they are in health, and taking care to have them cured
while they are sick, serving them while they live, and honoring them with
funeral obsequies, when they are dead.

Y, according to their exposition, is Justice, Equality, Integrity,
condescension in things reasonable and just. In this manner the Judge is to
give every man his own. The rich man, To take heed he be not proud of his
wealth, and, To give some part of it to the poor, To worship heaven, To
respect the earth, Not to be contentious, Not to be obstinate, To yield to what
is just and conformable to reason.

Li, they say, is Policy, Courtesy, to honor and reverence others as is
fitting: which consists, In the mutual respect one man is to bear another,
In the mature consideration and circumspection, which is to be used in the
ordering of their affairs, In the modesty of their outward deportment, In
obedience to the Magistrates, In being affable to young men, and respectfull to
old men.

Chi, signifies Prudence and Wisdom, the which they place, In reading of
books, In learning of Sciences, In being perfect in the liberal arts, To be
learned in matters of Antiquity, To be well versed in the knowledge of modern
affairs, To observe well what is past, thereby to better regulate the present
and future occasions, To discern right from wrong.

Sin, they say, is Fidelity and Verity. It consists in a sincere heart and
a real intention, To do only that which is good, To imitate what is just, To
make their works and words agree, and that which is hidden within, to that
which appears outwardly.

According to this distribution of their doctrine, they reduce the
Commonwealth to five orders of persons, correlative to one another in what
concerns the observance and duty of each, that is, the King and the Subject,
Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Elder Brothers and Younger Brothers, and
Friends one to another.

The King is to observe toward his Subjects, Vigilancie, Love and Clemency,
and the Subjects toward the King, Loyalty, Reverence, and Obedience. The Father
toward his Children, Love and Compassion. They toward their Father, Obedience
and Piety. The Husband toward the Wife, Love and Union. She toward her
Husband, Fidelity, Respect, and Complacency. The Elder Brothers toward the
Younger, Love and Instruction. The Younger toward the Elder, that is, to all
their brothers that are elder than they, Obedience and Respect. Friends toward
one another Fidelity, Truth and Sincerity.

This is the manner of living, which they observed in ancient times, and in the
golden age: when their laws were few, and they that gave Obedience to them
many, being all founded upon the light and principalls of nature, as is yet to
be seen in their books, expressed almost in the same terms they are in ours:
when men took no pleasure in governing, but retired from the Court, and left
their government, if they saw the people were not profited by their authority
and example, or that Kings did not moderate themselves by their admonitions;
and so withdrew themselves to their own possessions, which they tilled with
their own hands, as I have already touched in another place.

But after that Ambition and Avarice prevailed over virtue, and private
Interest had blinded Honor and Generositie, this manner of living began to
decay, and laws to increase: the new Princes changing some, moderating others,
and adding many, especially Humvu, the first of this family which reigns at
present, who finding the Kingdom, by having been some years under the Tyranny
of the Tartars, to have changed many of their ancient customs, for those of
strangers, wholly altered the form of government, and reduced the Kingdom,
which was formerly divided among many Princes, into fifteen Provinces and one
Sole Monarch: whence he was constrained to make new laws, having
notwithstanding always regard unto the ancient ones.

Moreover, the Chinesse have their Commandments, and in some Provinces they
print them very well, and stick them up on the posts of their doors toward
the street; I believe they are not very ancient, and have some correspondence
with our Decalogue, as Not to kill, Not to steal, Not to lie, To Honor their
Father and Mother, etc. And in this point of Honoring their Parents, we have
much to learn of the Chinesses, as also all other nations, who, in my
judgment, are all exceeded in this, by China. Many excellent ancient things
about Honoring their Parents, are to this day grown out of use, not in their
speaking and writing, but in the execution of them, wherein they are now too
negligent. But there are others, which although anciently they were better
ordered, yet are to this day in force and vigor enough, and are exactly
observed from the King even to the meanest Plebeian, not only in sustaining
their Parents, making much of them, and having a special care of them, and so
much the greater, by how much the elder they are, but by respecting of them
also with an incredible reverence and submission, and this, what degree, age,
and condition soever their children are in.

The King himself, on certain days of the year, visits his Mother, who is
seated on a Throne, and, four times on his feet, and four times on his knees,
he makes her a profound reverence, bowing his head even to the ground. The
same custom is also observed through the greatest part of the Kingdom, and if
by chance any one be negligent, or deficient in this duty, toward his Parents,
they complain to the Magistrates, who punish such offenders very severely.

Nor is the respect less, which they bear their Masters and Tutours. And if
Alexander could say, that we owe more to our Masters, who instruct us, than to
our Parents who beget us, it seems to me, that in China only this duty is
understood, and discharged as it ought to be: for besides the respect, which,
during their whole life, they profess to their Masters, they are never wanting
at certain times to make them presents; and when they are advanced to degrees
and offices, they confer on their Masters very considerable benefits and
favors.

The Old men also in this Kingdom have their place and advantage, the Chinesses
honoring them no less than they were anciently esteemed among the
Lacedaemonians.

When they meet together, although there be some of the company, who are of
greater Nobility (if they have not a dignity or office; for these always
keep their place,) the Old men have the precedence, and the young men upon all
occasions pay them great respect. The Magistrates do them honor publicly,
especially, when they are not only Old in years, but also in virtue and good
life, having lived without scandal and reproach, and particularly, if they
have never been cited into any Court, not accused of any crime, which among
them is taken for a Testimony of very great probitie and goodness: hence came
their proverb, which says Xin Pu Kien, Quonzieu Xita Pao, that is, The man who
has never seen a Mandarine (they mean sitting in judgment upon him) is a
precious stone.

The Magistrates every year make them a public banquet, at the Kings charges,
with Royal magnificence and ceremonies of great Honor and respect, showing
thereby, what is due to gray hairs, which are venerable, not only for their
years, but also for their virtues.

To conclude, the Chinesses have their books full of Sentences and good
counsels, did they but as well observe them in the practice, as they keep them
carefully in their papers. I will only repeat some few of them, which come
first to my memory.

In doing service to our Masters and old men, the principal point is reverence
and courtesy.

We must hide other men's faults; and not publish our own perfections.

In the general Government, there must be no particular affection.

We must not do evil, though it be never so little, nor leave a good deed
undone, because it is not great.

The virtuous, although young men, are to be Honored, and the vicious,
although old men, are to be avoided.

CHAP. 30.
Of the Moors, Jews, and other Nations, that are in China.
I Have spoken briefly of the Kingdom of China, the people, their customs and
manners, as well as I have been able, in regard I am at this present out of the
Country, and deprived of the use of their books, out of which I might have
taken many things of worth and curiosity. But seeing that at this time I
cannot say all that is to be said of any thing, it will not be amiss, to say
something of all, and therefore I will now speak of the other nations, who live
among them.

In describing the Province of Cantone, I said that the Island of Haynam, which
is very great, and wholly appertains unto China, is divided into two parts:
the first, which is nearest to the continent, is, on the North part thereof,
inhabited by Chinesses, and governed by them: the other, which lies toward the
South, upon the confines of Chochin, China, is inhabited by a barbarous people,
who have their particular language, and their laws and customs different,
without meddling at all with the Chinesses, unless it be in some things of
commerce.

I said also, that between the Provinces of Chincheo, Cantone, and Kiamsi,
there are certain Mountains which unite them, as in Catalogna the Mountains
of Monferrat do unite that Province to the Kingdom of Arragon; and how within
those Mountains there was a small Kingdom, which was likewise Governed by it
self, not admitting any thing from the Chinesses, except Physicians,
Medicines, and some little traffic.

Beside these in the Province of Yunnan, which is very large, lying toward the
South, in the latitude of 24 degrees, there is a great Country inhabited by a
particular people, who use another language and other customs. They have a
little King called by the Chinesses, Thu Quon, a Mandarine of earth, they pay
tribute to the King of China, they use traffic, and live in peace.

The same things has been said of the Province of Que, Ciheu, where, in the
confines thereof, there is a people, who have their particular heads, and
Governors, without any other dependence on the Chinesses, than the Investiture
of the Title, by which they are called.

There are moreover in China, Moors in great abundance, not in all the
Provinces, nor in every City, but yet in the more principal. They speak the
language of the Country, and know nothing of their own tongue, a few words
only excepted. They are acquainted also with many things of the holy Scripture.

In Nankim I found one, who was born and bred in that City, that pronounced to
me David, Abraham and Isaac, as distinctly as I could do my self. In their
Physiognomie, nose,, eyes, beard and face, they are altotogether like the
Chinesses. They are Merchants, Physicians etc. They have Offices in the
Tribunals: they study and are admitted to the examinations, and come many times
to be Mandarines, but not of the great ones: for the most part they stop at the
degree of Licentiate. Commonly where they live, there are Beef-Shambles,
because they eat no Pork, therefore wheresoever they are, they kill and sell
Beef; and it seems to me to be the greatest advantage the Country ha^h by
them; for where they are not, there is Seldom any of that flesh to be sold.
They have their public Mosches allowed them by the King, They follow their own
religion, but not very exactly. They, who arrive at the degree of Litterato, or
to the dignity of some Office, do not much care to be advanced higher.

They preserve their Nation entire, by marrying with one another, although
sometimes they take Chinesse Women for their Wives; but they never give their
Daughters in marriage to the Sons of Chinesses. The reason is, because in
China the wife follows the husband, she is brought to her husbands-Fathers
house, there she lives and follows his religion; therefore when a Gentile is
brought to the house of a Moor, she becomes a Moor, and a Moorish Woman being
brought to the house of a Gentile, must infallibly become a Gentile.

The Chinesses despise them as being strangers, and call them Hociteu Hoci
Hoci. The letters, with which they write their name, has no other
signification, but only proper to express that people, nevertheless they are
very angry and grieved, when they are called by it. The name by which they call
themselves is Kia Muen, that is, the gate of Instructions. If they be despised
of the Chinesses, they no less despise them, because they worship Idols, and
are Gentiles: and thus the one is not behind hand with the other. In the City
of Nankim they have, as it were a mount of Piety, or Lombard, with which they
help only those of their Nation, but not those, who are Prisoners for their
misdeeds and wickedness.

They came into China about 700 years since being called from Turquestan, by
the King of that time, to aid him against a rebellion that was then in the
Kingdom, wherein they had so good success, that they who were willing to
remain there, were allowed to enjoy the same privilege with the natives of the
Country; since which time they have so multiplied, that at this time there are
many thousands of them. Afterward in the war which King Hum had with the
Tartars about 300 years since, they took his part and came in, to his
assistance; at which time the King gaining the victory they grew into greater
esteem and were admitted to take part in the government of the Kingdom.

We have already spoken of the entry which is made into China, every three and
every five years, with an Embassy and presents to the King; and though they
are all Moors, yet they are of several Countries and Kingdoms, and very
rarely any of them remain in China.

There are likewise Jews in China, although at this time no great number of
them: but when, or how they came thither I am not able to say. Anciently there
was greater store of them, but they have been diminished by little and little,
many of them turning Moors. There live more of them in the Province of Honan,
in the capital City thereof, called Cai Fum Fu, than in any other place. They
have there a Synagogue, well built and adorned in the fashion of a great
Chapel, and set out with curtains. They say they have there a very ancient
Hebrew Bible. Father Julius Alenes, one of our company, was among them for some
time: they showed him their Synagogues, but would not draw their curtains and
let him see the Bible. Father Matthaens Riccius affirms, that according to
the relation which the Jews themselves made to him thereof in Pekim, it was not
at all differing from ours. They have no knowledge at all of Christ, so that it
seems, they were entered into China before he came into the World; or at
least, if they have ever heard of him, the memory of it is quite lost: and
therefore it would be of great consequence to see their Bible: for perhaps they
have not corrupted it, as our Jews have done, to obscure the glory of our
Redeemer.

These, as they are in no great number, so it is not probable they should long
preserve themselves. They who at the Court had some discourse with our Fathers,
did much lament that they had lost themselves for want of the Hebrew Tongue,
and by the little knowledge they had of their law, and said, that after some
time they should all become either Moors or Gentiles: that the ruler of their
Synagogue at that time was a decrepit old man, and his son, who was to
succeed him in his Office, young and ignorant of the things of their law, and
that indeed there were very few among them, who were zealous observers of it.

Moreover these Jews did seem to be much troubled and weary of the reproaches
which the Gentiles laid upon some ceremonies of their law, which is a sign they
have no great affection for it: as, their not eating of Swines flesh, their not
touching a beast, which has been killed by the hand of a Gentile, but
especially the circumcising their Infants on the eighth day; which their wives
and Chinesse kindred tell them, is a cruel and barbarous thing.

At this time we have, in that City of Cai Funifu a house and Church; and (when
I left that Kingdom) a good number of Christians, which daily increased, not
without hope also, that some good may be done upon those Jews, who being so
ready to change their religion, will more easily embrace the true one, which
has more conformity to theirs, than any other.

CHAP. 31.
Of the Christian Religion planted many ages since in China: and of a very
Ancient stone lately discovered there, which is an admirable Testimony thereof.
IT has always been a well grounded opinion, that the Christian Religion has
been very anciently planted in China, Paulus Venetus making a relation of that
Country (from whence it is certain that he went many days journey into the
Country of the Tartars) assures us, that in that time there were a great
number of Christians in China, who had very sumptuous Churches, and named the
Cities where they lived. He wrote this with very much truth; for of all that
which he mentions, there are yet remaining many houses, and in other places
the ruins of them, as a Testimony of it.

To this may be added the Testimony of other grave Authors, wherein we read,
that the preaching of the Gospel penetrated as far as China, by the
Ministry of the Apostle St. Thomas and his Disciples. Among other writings,
out of which this may be drawn, the Chalde books concerning the Indian
Christianity cultivated by the means of the said Apostle, are of no small
moment, the which it is certain, are to this day preserved and kept in the
Archbishopric of Granganour, or Della Serra, (that is of the Mountains) as
it is vulgarly called; translated out of that language by order of the
Archbishop thereof Franciscus Ros, by the pains and industry of one of our
fathers, who was very skillful in that tongue. The translation is in Latin, but
that it may be more generally understood, we will turn what is cited out of
it, into the vulgar.

One of these books is a Breviary, which, in one of the lessons belonging to
the second nocturnall, has these words.

By the means of S. Thomas the errors of the Idolatry of the Indians were
dissipated. By the means of St. Thomas the Chinesses and Aethiopians were
converted to the truth. By the means of St. Thomas they obtained the virtue of
Baptism, and the Adoption of Sons. By the means of St Thomas they believed
in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. By the means of St. Thomas they kept
that faith, which they had promised to God. By the means of St. Thomas the
beams of the knowledge of life enlightened all India. By the means of St.
Thomas the Kingdom of Heaven flew and entered into China. And presently there
follows an Antiphona, which says,

The Indians, the Chinesses, the Persians, and the other Islanders, they of
Siria, Armenia, Graecia and Romania, in commemoration of St. Thomas do offer
their Adoration unto thy most Holy Name, O great God.

In the Summarie of the Constitutions synodall, part. 2. cap: 19, concerning
Bishops and Metropolitans, there is a Canon of the Patriark Theodotius, which
has these words;

In like manner also the Bishops of the great Province, such as are for the
most part the Metropolitans of China.

After the arrival of the Portugheses into Cocchine, the governor of the
Mountains of Malaber who was called Don. Diego entitled himself Metropolitan
of India and China: as did also Don Giuseppe, who died at Rome. These were the
Ancient Titles of that Church; and being taken al together are strong
arguments, that the Christian Religion did formerly flourish in China.

These were the powerful motives, that did engage us, after our arrival
thither, with much care and fervor to trace the ruins and footsteps of that
Ancient Christianity.

In the Histories of that Kingdom, which we have very diligently perused, we
found no mention thereof, to our great admiration, knowing well, how curious
and diligent Inquisitours the Chinesses are in the affairs of their own
Country, that they might eternize the memory of them. It is true, we had
information, that there were some in those parts, who did reverence the Cross
and made the sign of it over their meat, without knowing the reason why they
did it. When I was in the capital City of Kiamsi, I was informed by a
Christian, that in the little Town of Tamo, Xan, which was not far off,
there were some, who when they went out of doors, did make the sign of the
Cross upon their forehead, and being asked the reason of that custom, they
answered only, that they had learnt it of their Ancestors.

In the Court of Pekim, some of our fathers being one day to visit a Jew, he
discoursed more particularly to them concerning this matter, and named to them
the places and families, who did practice this signing with the Cross. We sent
a brother of our society thither, with this information, but with all the
diligence he could use, he was not able to discover any thing of what he sought
for, whether it were that they had a suspicion of him, or that really this
custom, or those families were extinct. Notwithstanding the Jew did still
affirm, That there were anciently many of these, who did reverence the Cross,
particularly in the Northern Provinces, and that having gained a great
reputation by their skill in learning and arms, they did cause the Chinesses
to have a great suspicion of them, so that thinking themselves no longer safe,
they dispersed themselves into several places: others who remained behind,
dissembled the Religion they had professed: others became, either Moors or
Jews, and by this means they came to be extinguished. This, as the Jew said,
was about 50 years before, and it is now about 30 years since he made this
relation.

During these thirty years, we have gone about all China, and founded Churches
in several of the biggest Towns, planting the Christian Religion, and using
all diligence to discover this truth, without having been able to obtain our
purpose in the least. It is true, we sound a small Bell, such as is used at
Mass, with Greek letters round about it, and a Cross very handsomely graved*
But this may have been brought in lately from other parts, upon some occasion,
such as fall out often in that Country: as it was likewise probable, that book
of Esops Fables in latin did, bound up after our manner, which I saw in the
Province of Nankim. We then, considering on one side the great scarcity of
evident signs for the proving a thing of so great importance, and which was
Authorized by so many pens and powerful reasons, it was no marvel, if we were
in doubt, and perplexity: and on the other side holding the thing for
infallible, as really it is, we made use of some other ways, to find out
other reasons and motives, why we thus failed of all manifest signs, different
from what the Jew had told us, discoursing with our selves in this manner.

When the Tartars conquered China there were many Christians, who had sumptuous
Churches, being much favored by them, as appears by the relation of Paulus
Venetus. Afterward when Humvu endeavored to re^gaine the Kingdom, and made
war upon the Tartars, the Moors took part with the Chinesses, and lent them
their assistance for the gaining of the Kingdom, and of the victory which they
obtained, in acknowledgement whereof they were allowed to remain in China,
with liberty of their Religion and of their Mosches. The Christians inclined
to the Tartars, and they being overcome in that war, the Christians also were
deprived of their Estates, and some being slain, others changing their
Religion, others flying and hiding themselves in secret places, in a short
time, all sign and memory of our Religion perished, so that it was not
possible for us to discover any thing, with all the diligence we used to that
purpose.

To conclude, we remained very disconsolate in the midst of so great darkness,
when it pleased The only fountain of light to draw us out of this obscurity,
with a most clear Testimony, that the Gospel had flourished there many ages
since: The thing fell out thus.

In the year 1625, as they were digging the foundation for to erect a certain
building near to the City of Sigan^u, the Capital City of the Province of
Xem^^, the workmen lighted upon a table of stone above nine palms long, and
more than four in breadth, and above one palm in thickness. The top of it,
(that is, one of the extremities, or ends, of the length thereof,) ends in
the form of a Pyramid, above two palms in height, and above one palms
breadth at the Basis. On the plain of this Pyramid, there is a well formed
Cross, the extremities whereof end in flower-deluces, after the fashion of
that Cross, which is reported to have been found graved on the Sepulcher of
the Apostle S. Thomas in the Town of Meliapor, and as they were anciently
painted in Europe, of which there are some yet to be seen at this day.

This Cross is encompassed, as it were, with certain clouds, and at the foot
thereof were three Traverse lines, each consisting of three great letters being
all such as are commonly used in China, very fairly graven: with the same sort
of letters is engraven the whole Superficies of the stone, as also the
thickness thereof, the which notwithstanding differs from the rest, in that
some of the letters graven thereon, are foreign, neither were they known here
at the first finding of it.

Scarcely had the Chinesses discovered and cleansed this notable piece of
Antiquity, when excited by the fervor of their natural curiosity, they ran
to the Governor to give him notice of it, who being much joyed at this news,
presently came to see it, and caused it to be placed upon a fair Pedestall;
under a small Arch, sustained by pillars at each end thereof, and open at the
sides, that it might be both defended from the injuries of the weather, and
also feast the eyes of such as are true Lovers of venerable Antiquity. He
caused it also to be set within the circuit of a Temple belonging to the Bonzi,
not far from the place where it was taken up.

There was a wonderful concourse of people to see this stone, partly for the
Antiquity thereof, and partly for the novelty of the strange Characters, which
was to be seen thereon: and as the knowledge of our Religion is at this day
very much spread abroad in China, a Gentile, who was a great friend unto a
grave Christian Mandarine named Leo, being present there, presently understood
the mystery of that writing, and believing, it would be very acceptable to his
friend, sent him a copy thereof, although he was distant above a month and a
halfes voyage, the Mandarine dwelling in the City of Ham^^^^, whither our
fathers had retired themselves, by reason of the former persecution, whereof we
shall speak in its proper place. This copy was received with a spiritual
Iubilee, and many exterior demonstrations of joy, as an irrefragable Testimony
of the Ancient Christi^^^y in China, which had been so much desired and sought
after: for no less was contained in this writing, as we shall show anon.

Three years after in the year 1628 some of our fathers went into that Province
in the company of a Christian Mandarine, who had occasion to go thither. They
founded a Church and house in the capital City thereof for the service of our
good God, that he, who was pleased to discover so precious a memorial of the
possession taken in that Country by his divine law, would also facilitate the
restitution thereof in the same place. It was my good fortune to be one of the
first, and I esteemed it a happy abode, in that I had the opportunity to see
the stone; and being arrived I took no thought for any thing else. I saw it and
read it, and went often to read, behold, and consider it at leisure, and above
all, I did much admire, that being so ancient, it should be so entire, and have
the letters so plainly and neatly graven.

On the thicknes of the sides thereof, it has many Chinesse letters, which
contain many names of the Priests and Bishops of that time. There are also
many other letters, which were not then known, for they are neither Hebrew nor
Greek: See the Syriack inscription explained by Kirkes in his Prodrom: Copt
cap. 3. page 73.
and (for as much as I now understand) they contain the same names, that if
peradventure some strangers, might not understand the letters of the Country,
they might perhaps be better acquainted with those of a foreign extraction.

Passing by Cocchine I came to Cranganor, where is the Residence of the
Archbishop of Costa, to consult about these letters with father Antoni
Fernandes one of our society, who is very skillful in the books and writings
of those ancient Christians converted by S. Thomas. He told me the letters were
Syriack, and the very same which are used there at this day.

But let us come now to the inscription of our Marble which no^doubt, ere this
has raised an appetite in the reader to know it.

Those three lines, which are at the foot of the Cross, each consisting of
three letters, as we have said, being faithfully translated, as also all the
rest, as near as possibly I could* say thus.

A Relation in the Praise and eternal memory, of the law of the light of
truth brought from Judea, and preached in China.
THe writing is graved on the plain side of this stone in its proper letters,
See another Translation somewhat differing from this in Kirchers, Prodrom. Copt
cap. 3 page 53.
placed in lines running from top to bottom after the Chinesse fashion. The
first line, which is the shortest says thus.

I A Prologue Made by the Priest of the Kingdom of Judea named Kim Lim. The
rest of the inscription in a magnificent Oriental style, contains that which
follows.

II Oh how true and profound is the eternal, and the incomprehensible most
spiritual speaking of time past, he is without beginning, and of time to come
he is without end, and always in the same perfection. He took nothing, and
with it he made all. He is a principal, consisting of Trinity and Unity, yet
without any real principle. The Lord Olooyu. He made the four parts of the
world in figure of a Cross. He moved the Chaos and made the two principles.
There was an alteration made in the Abyss, and heaven and earth appeared.
Nature at the beginning was pure, and exempt from disordinate passions, and the
heart was clean, without the unrulinesse of the appetites.

III Man came afterward to fall into the deceits of Satan, who covering with
words the mischief he had plotted, perverted the innocence of the first man.
From this principle sprang 365 Sects, which by reason they were so many did one
drive away the other, and of all of them was made a net, wherein the world was
caught. Some chose the creatures and appropriated Divinity to them: others were
plunged in that error of thinking that all is nothing, and ends in nothing.
Others make sacrifices to invite good fortun^ with Others (...) deceive the
world. The understanding corrupted with e^rours, and the will with passions,
are altogether obscured. Men walked forwards without (...) at the end they
aimed at. The world was all in a miserable (...). Man still multiplied the
darkness, and loosing his way, wandered long time in it, without finding the
truth.

IV. Then the Messiah, one of the three persons, covered his true ^ Majesty and
making himself a man, appeared unto the world. An Angel came to manifest the
Mystery, and a Virgin brought forth the Holy one. A Star appeared, which gave
notice of his birth to those of the Kingdom of (...): They (...) to offer him
Tribute, and all was done according to what had been foretol^ by the four and
twenty Saints. He published to the world the most pure law. He purified their
customs, and rectified the faith. He cleansed the world. He perfected virtue,
and therein founded the three virtues. He opened the way to life, and shut up
that of death. He manifested the bright day, and banished obscure darkness.
He conquered the obscure seat, at what time the devil remained wholly
subdued, and succored with his mercy the sinking world, that m^n might ascend
to the habitations of light. After he had perfected his works, ^e ascended into
the heavens at Midday. There remained 27 books of holy Scripture. There was
opened the gate to Co^version by means of that water, which cle^^seth, and
purifieth, His Ministers made use of the Holy Cross, they made their abode no
more in one place than in another, that they might illuminate the whole world.
The world being thus reduced unto Union, men did walk after their example, and
(thus) did they open the way of life and glory.

V. They suffered their beard to grow, and did show by this means, that they
were like other men in their external part. They out their hair, even to the
roots, upon the top of their head, and by this they showed, that they had no
internal wordly affections. They kept no servants, the Noble and the common
men were with them the same thing. They took no riches from men. They gave to
the poor that which they had. They fasted and watched to bring the flesh into
subjection to the spirit. Seven times a day they offered sacrifices of praise,
by which they helped the living and the dead. Every seventh day they did
offer. They purified their hearts to receive the holy innocence. The true law
has no name that does well suite with it, and that is able to explain the
excellency thereof; therefore because it wants another name, we will call it
The law of Brightness. The law, if it be not holy, cannot be called great: and
if holiness be not answerable to that which the law teaches, it may not have
that name. But in this law the holiness correspondeth to the law, and the law
to the holiness.

VI. If there be not Kingly Persons to favor it, the law cannot well be
propagated, if they receive not the law, they cannot grow truly great. When
they and the law do agree, presently the world is enlightened. By this means,
at the time, when a King named Tai Zum Ve^ Hoam did govern with famous
prudence and sanctity, there came from Judea a man of high virtue, by name
Olopuen, who being guided by the clouds brought the true doctrine. And in the
year Chin Quom Kieufu he arrived at the Court. The King commanded the Colao Fam
Kizulin, that he should go and meet him as far as the West, and that he
should treat him as his guest with all manner of kindness. He caused this
doctrine to be translated in his palace, and seeing the law to be true, he
powerfully commanded it should be divulged through the Kingdom, and presently
after, he sent forth a royal patent, which contained that which follows.

The true law has no determinate name. The Ministers thereof go about in every
part to teach it unto the world, having no other aim, but to be profitable to
those that live in it. In the Kingdom of Tachin, this Olopuen, being a man of
great virtue, has brought from so remote a Country Doctrines and Images, and
is come to place them in our Kingdom. Having well examined that which he
proposes, we find it to be very excellent, and without any outward noise, and
that it has its principal Foundation even from the Creation of the World: his
doctrine is brief, neither does he found his truth in superficial appearances;
it brings with it the salvation and benefit of men: wherefore I have thought
it convenient, that it should be published through our Empire.

He commanded the Mandarines of this Court of Nimfam, that they should build
there a great Church, with 21 Ministers weakening by that means the Monarchy
of Cheu Olao Fu, head of the sect of Tauzu: which was carried in a black
Chariot toward the West: so, the great Tam being enlightened together with Tao,
the Holy Gospel came into China and a little while after, the King commanded,
that Olopuen his Picture should be painted on the walls of the Temple, where it
shines, and his memory will always shine in the World.

VII According to the records of the Empires of Ham and Guei the Kingdom of
Tachin bordereth Southward upon the red Sea, and Northward on the Mountains of
Pearls, Westward on the Forest Delle Fule Per Li Santi, Eastward on the
Country of Cham Fum, and the dead water. The Country produces a Lake
Asphaltitis of fire, Balsome, Pearls and Carbuncles: it has no robbers, but
all live in joyful peace. The Gospel only is allowed in that Kingdom: and
honors are conferred only on those that are virtuous. Their houses are great,
and all is illustrious by their order and good customs.

VIII The great Emperor Caozum, the Son of Taizum, continued with good
decorum the intention of his Grand Father, enlarging and adorning the works of
his Father. For he commanded, that in all his Provinces, Churches should be
built, and honors conferred on Olopuen, bestowing upon him the Title of Bishop
of the great law; by which law he governed the Kingdom of China in great
peace, and the Churches filled the whole country with the prosperity of
preaching.

IX In the year Xim Lie the Bonzi of the Sect of the Pagods using their wonted
violence, did blaspheme this new and holy law, in this place of Tum Cheu: and
in the year Sien Tien, some particular Persons in Sigan, with laughter and
disparagement did mock at it.

X Then one of the chief of the Priests, called John, and another of great
virtue, named Kie Lie, with some others of their Country, Priests of great
same, being disingaged from the things of the world, began to take up again
that excellent net, and to continue the thread, which was now broken. King Hi
venzum Chi Tao commanded five little Kings to come in person to the happy
house, and to set up Altars. Then in the year Tien Pao, the pillar of the law,
which had been cast down for a while began to grow great: King Taciam Kium gave
command to Ca^lie Sic that the Pictures of five Kings his ancestors should be
placed in the Churches, with a hundred Presents to honor the solemnity.
Although the great beards of the Dragon, were afar off, yet could they lay
hands on their Bows and their Swords. The brightness which flows from these
Pictures, makes seem, as if the Kings themselves were present. In the third
year of Tien Pao, the Priest Kieh^ was in India, who guided by the stars came
to China, and beholding the Sun, came to the Emperor, who commanded that
John, and Paul, and other Priests should be joined unto him, to exercise Holy
works in Kim Kim, a place within the palace. Then were hung up in Tables in the
Churches the Kings letters richly adorned, by public order, with red and blew
colors, and the Kings pen filled the emptines: it mounted on high, and
transcended the Sun; his favors and donatives may be compared to the tops of
the Mountains of the South; and the abundance of his benefits is equal to the
bottom of the eastern Sea Reason is not to be rejected; there is nothing which
the Saints cannot do; and their deeds are worthy of memory. For this cause
king Sozun Ven Mim commanded, that Churches should be built in this Limvu, and
in five Cities. He was of an excellent nature, and opened the Gate to the
common prosperity of the Kingdom, by which means the affairs of the Empire
began to flourish again.

XI King Taizum Venvu caused happy times to return again; doing things without
labor and trouble: always at the feast of the nativitie of Christ he sent
Heavenly perfumes to the Royal Churches, to honor the Ministers of this holy
law. Truly, heaven gives beauty and profit to the world, and liberally
produces all things. This King imitated heaven, and therefore he knew how to
sustain and nourish his subjects.

XII King Kien Chum Xim Xin Venvu used eight ways of government for to reward
the good and chastise the wicked, and nine ways to renew the estate of the
Gospel. Let us pray to God for him, without being ashamed of it. He was a man
of much virtue; humble, and desirous of peace; and ready to forgive his
neighbor, and to assist all men with charity. These are the steps of our holy
law: to cause the winds and the raines to retire at their seasons: that the
world should live in peace, men be well governed, and affairs well
established; that the living should prosper, and the dead be in happiness; all
this proceeds from our Faith.

XIII The King gave many honorable Titles in his Court to the Priest Y Su, a
great Preacher of the Law, and also a garment of a red color, because he was
peaceable, and took delight in doing good to all. He came from afar off into
China, from the Country of Vam Xe Chi Chim. His virtue surpassed our three
famous Families; he enlarged the other sciences perfectly. He served the King
in the Palace, and afterward had his name in the Royal book. The little King
of Fuen Yam, who had the Title of Chum Xulim, and called himself Cozuy, served
at first in the wars of these parts of Sofam. King Sozum commanded Y Su that
he should assist Cozuy very much above all the rest: neither did he for this
change his ordinary custom; being the Nails and Teeth of the Commonwealth;
the Eyes and Ears of the Army. He knew well how to distribute his revenue; he
was not sparing in any thing: he offered a precious Gift, called Poli, to the
Church of this place of Lintiguen: he gave Golden Carpets to that of Cie Ki. He
repaired the old Churches, and established the house of the law, adorning the
chambers and galleries thereof, making them shine like flying lights; he laid
out his whole strength upon works of charity: every year he assembled the
Priests of the four Churches, serving them with a good heart, and making them
honorable entertainment for the space of fifty days; he sed the hungry,
clothed the naked, cured the sick, and buried the dead.

XIIII In the time of Ta So, with all his parsimonie, there was not such
goodness, as this to be seen: but in the time of this law we see such men, who
do such good works as these. For this reason have I graved this Stone, that
thereby they might be published.

I say then; that the true God had no beginning, but being pure and quiet, was
always after the same manner: he was the first Artificer of the Creation, he
uncovered the earth, and elevated the Heaven. One of the three Persons made
himself man for our eternal salvation: he ascended like the Sun on high, and
defeated darkness: in every thing he did discover the profound Truth.

XV The illustrious King, being really the first of the first, making use of a
fit time, put a stop to men's invention: the heaven was dilated, and the earth
extended. Most bright is our law: the which, when Tam came to the Kingdom, and
propagated the doctrine, and builded Churches, was as a Barque, both for the
living and the dead, and gave rest to the whole world.

XVI Caozum following the example of his Grand^Father, built new Churches. The
beautiful Temples of peace filled the whole earth. The true law was
illustrated; he gave a title of honor to the Bishop; and men enjoyed repose.

XVII The wise King Hi Vin Zum followed the right way; the royal Tables were
illustrious; the Kingly letters shone therein. The Pictures of the Kings gave
light on high, and all the people did reverence them; and all men had joy and
gladness.

XVIII When So Zum reigned, he came in person to the Church. The Holy Sun did
shine, and the bright clouds swept away the darkness of the night:
Prosperity was united to the Royal family; misfortunes ceased, the heat of
dissentions was abated: he quieted the rumors, and he renewed our Empire.

XIX King Taizun was obedient; in virtue equal to heaven and earth: he gave
life unto the people, and advancement to their affairs: he exercised works of
charity; he offered perfumes to the Church. The Sun and Moon were united in
his person.

XX When King Kien Chum reigned, he did illustrate famous virtue; and with his
arms restored peace to the four seas: and with his learning he pacified 10000
confines. As a torch he did enlighten the secrets of men, he saw all things as
in a glass: He received the Barbarians, who all took rules from him.

XXI The law is great and perfect, and extends it self to all things,
desiring to frame a name for it, I cannot but call it, The Divine Law. Kings
know best to dispose their affairs, I, who am a subject, can only cause them
to be recited on this rich stone, for to magnify our great felicity.

XXII In the Empire of great Tam, the second year of Kien Chum, the seventh day
of the Month of Autumn, was this stone erected. Nin Ciu being Bishop, and
Governing the Church of China. The Mandarine, called Liu Sicuyen entitled
Chaoylam (in which office before him was Tai Cheu Su Sic Kan Kiun) graved this
stone with his own hand.

This is the Interpretation of that Inscription, translated as faithfully as we
could possibly, out of the Chinesse Phrase.

It will not be impertinent now to make some Annotations upon the text, having
forborne on purpose to do it before, that I might not break the thread of the
discourse, and therefore we will take the Paragraphs in order, noting the words
which we will explain, and giving some advertisement upon them.

I Giudaea. This word is written just thus without any other difference, but
that the Characters are Chinesse. The same is found also in the other words or
names, of Satanas and Messiah, which are in the iii and iiii Paragraphs.

II Olooyu. This word is written just thus in the stone, and it is probable he
meant Eloi which is a name of God. The two principalls, of which he speaks
afterward, are matter and form according to their Phylosophie.

III The kingdom of Pozu, in the Chinesse maps, lies East of Judea. The 24
Saints may well be, The four great Prophets, The twelve small Prophets,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, Moses, Joshua, David and Zacharias, the father of
John the Baptist, who put together, make up that number, and have spoken the
plainest concerning the coming of Christ.

IV He conquered the seat, etc. It seems that he speaks of the Redeemers
descent into hell. Twenty seven books. It is probable he means the new
Testament, that is, The four Evangelists, The Acts of the Apostles, The
fourteen Epistles* of S. Paul, one of S. James, two of S. Peter, three of S.
John, one of S. Jude, and the Revelation.

V Seven times a day they offered etc. He seems to speak of the seven
Canonical hours. Every seventh day etc. Signifies the sacrifice of the
Mass, which was celebrated every Lords day.

VI. VII. The year of Chim Quom etc. According to the computation of their
Histories, it is the year of our Redemption 636. Weakening the Monarchy etc.
This clause is an Elogie given to that Prince by the Author of this
Inscription. Was carried in a black chariot toward the West etc. It is to be
understood, that it went away out of China.

VIII Caozum. It appears by their books, that he reigned in the year of our
Lord 651.

IX Ximlie. According to the Christian Computation, was the year 699. Tumcheu.
The opinion of the Translatour is, that it was a particular place in the
Province of Honam. Sien Tien is the year 712. Sicham, Called at present Sigam,
was the ancient Court in the Province of Xemsi.

X King Hi Ven Zum, etc. Began to reign in the year 714. Tien Pao lived in the
year 745. Cao Lie Sic, is the name of an Eunuch, who was very powerful with
that King. The Bear^s etc. This clause is another Elogie (made by the Author)
of those Kings. The Dragon etc. According to the interpreter, this is an
ancient fable of that Kingdom, which relates, That one of their Kings rid
through the air mounted upon that beast, which his subjects, who accompanied
him, had laden with their arms, but they which came after plucked off the
beard of the Dragon, and took some of the arms; that these might remain by
them as a memorial of that Prince, whom they did fancy to be present with them
in these relics. This fable might happily take its Orginall from the custom
which their Kings have, of embroydering Dragons on their garments, and other
things, which belong to them. The third year of Tien Pao etc. falls out,
according to our account, to be the year 745. Sozun Ven Mim, reigned in the
year 757.

XI. Tai Zun Vemvu, began to reign in the year 764.

XII Kien Chum Xim, was King in the year 781.

XII Vam Xe Chi Chim is a place in the Country of the Pagods, and signifies a
remote Country. Poli, says the interpreter, is some vessel of glass.

XIV. Taso was a Bonzo of the sect of the Pagods, who made a great assembly of
the Bonzi, to treat of the public affairs of that religion, and took care
to lodge them, and provide all necessaries for them.

XIX The Sun and Moon etc. Signifies, that all obeyed that King.

XXII Kien Chum, was the year 782. In the other Paragraphs whereon we have made
no Annotations, there is nothing of obscurity to require it:

It appears then evidently, by the testimony of this venerable Antiquity,
that the Christian Religion was planted in China by the means abovesaid, in the
year of Christ 636, nevertheless, it is not to be imagined, that it was not
formerly brought thither by the preaching of the Apostles, who as the holy
Scripture says, did disperse themselves through the whole earth: but, as it
happened in several other Countries, that after it had once been propagated
there by them, it came in time to be extinguished, and was again renewed by the
industry of others; so it fell out in India, where S. Thomas the Apostle had
once preached the Gospel; but all memory thereof being lost, about the year
800. a rich Armenian Christian, called Thomas the Canaanite restored the
ancient Religion in the City of Mogo Doven, or Patana, repairing the Churches,
which had been formerly built by that holy Apostle; and erecting others. And
upon this occasion of the likeness of their names, many have mistaken them to
be all built by the first Thomas. The same thing may probably have happened in
China, where the Gospel being received, presently after it, began to be
published to the world; and being afterward extinguished, it was introduced
again a second time, whereof this inscription makes mention; and lastly a
third time, whereof we purpose to treat in the second part. It seems
necessary thus to state the matter, that we may not derogate from the
Testimony of those grave Authors, whom I have formerly cited, how St. Thomas
the Apostle did preach in China, and converted it to the true Religion.

The time wherein the memory of the Holy Apostles preaching was lost, was not
much different both in India and China; for by several conjectures it
appears, that Thomas the Cananite renewed it in India in the eighth Century
after Christ; and by this stone it is manifest, that it was in the seventh
Centurie after Christ, when it was preached in China: and therefore without
much difficulty it may be Concluded, that this was not the first establishment
of the Christian Religion there; but rather a reestablishment of it.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART, Wherein is contained The Christianity of the Kingdom OF
CHINA.
CHAP. 1.
Of the first beginnings of the Preaching of the Gospel in China.
ACcording to the opinion of Socrates, he was to be esteemed no less
injurious, who spoke against the Sun, than he, who should deny the beauty
of the light thereof, with which it makes the day, and of that which is the
fruit thereof, as Tertul. allegorizeth it, that is, the flower. It would be no
less a fault, but rather more unpardonable in him, who treating of the
conversion of China, should deny Franciscus Xaverius to have bin the flower of
that day of Grace, which, having bin set there for so many ages, is now risen
again upon the Gentiles of that Monarchy. He was the first who came to the
gates thereof with that Treasure of the holy Gospel, after he had communicated
it to so many several Kingdoms and Provinces. The glorious Saint Leo speaking
of the Apostle St. Peter says, Iam Populos, qui in circumcisione crediderunt,
erudierat: jam Antiochenam Ecclesiam fundaverat: jam Pontum, Galatiam,
Cappadociam, Asiam atque Bithyniam, legibus Evangelicae Praedicationis
impleverat: nec aut dubious de provectu operis, aut de spatio suae ignarus
aetatis, Trophaeum Crucis Christi Romany arcibus inferebat. All India does
confess no less of their Apostle, to whom the bounds of the East, though very
large, seemed but narrow, having already instructed in the faith the principal
Cities thereof Goa and Cochin, having planted the Gospel on the coasts of
Pescaria, having converted the Country of Travancor, instructed Camba^a, and
propagated the faith at Malacca, preached the true religion at Macazar, and the
Molucche Islands; and finally, converted the King of Bungo in ^iappon, and
filled all that Kingdom with the knowledge of the law of Christ; yet still the
desire of a greater harvest, and to profit other Nations, suffered him not to
rest. Studium proficiendi aliis, otii illum impatientem reddidit, as Robertus
Abbas says of another Labourer in the Gospel: unde nec aut dubious de provect^
operis, aut despati^ suae ignarus aetatis Trophaeum Crucis Christi Sinicis
arcibus inferebat.

This was his aim, these were his hopes and desires, with which he undertook
the voyage of China, when being arrived at Sanciana, where the Divine
Providence had appointed he should end his days; (that being true which
Tertullian says, Deus omnium conditor nil non ratione providit, disposuit,
ordinavit.) And the Lord being well appayed with the intention of his servant,
and the ardent desires which he had, to sacrifice his life in this enterprise,
as Abraham had to sacrifice the life of his son Isaac, causing him to ascend
up into Mount Sancian, (as he did Moses into Mount Nebo, after he had showed
him the land he so much desired to conquer) Mortuus est, jubente deo: the good
man died by the ordination and appointment of Heaven; after he had seen and
showed unto his Sons that land, which he had gained (like another Jacob for
Joseph) with the bow of his will, and the arrows of his desires, leaving them
for an inheritance the conquest thereof, together with his hereditary spirit;
which his sons and followers having received (in part,) made their assault,
and at length entered this place; and it is now about fifty years that they have
kept it with many labors, travels, persecutions, imprisonments, Bastinadoes,
and in a word, Egentes, Angustiati, Afflicti; These being the arms with which
the standard of the Christian faith is set up in the Kingdoms of the Gentiles,
and by means whereof (together with the grace of God,) so many men have been
converted unto Christianity, as you shall find in this following relation.

After my return into Europe, and that my intention of seeking Laborers for
this vineyard was once divulged, presently there were so many pretenders, who
made suit to me to be received, that there is scarce a Province of our society,
from whence I have not received many letters from several of the fathers,
wherein they did not only offer themselves, but made it their most earnest
request, that I would accept of them, to serve as Soldiers in this enterprise;
as if the trouble and pains they were to suffer in these long and dangerous
voyages, and the persecutions they are so certain to undergo in this exercise,
were to this undertaking, as the prickles are to Roses, whereof S. Ambrose
says, That they are Amatoria quaedam illectamenta. And in the Province of
Portugal, as being most conveniently situated for this voyage, only out of
the two Colleges of Conimbra and Ebora, I had a list of 90 persons, all so
ready and desirous to labor in this Mission, that many of them, not being
content to declare their desires by ordinary words written with pen and ink,
have sent me very long letters concerning their holy pretention, all written
and signed with their own blood, witnessing in this manner, that they had a
holy courage, that could despise the threats of Martyrdom; offering cheerfully
to the Lord that little blood, as a Testimony of the great desire they had to
shed it all for his sake.

Who now can doubt, whether these be not the mavelous effects of that spirit
and zeal which Franciscus Xaverius communicated to them, occasioning inwardly
in the breast of each of them; that which a little while since he did outwardly
in that great Champion Marcellus Spinellus, by sending him to Giappon, where he
crowned that glorious enterprise with his blood.

Sancian is one of those many Islands, which, on that side, give a beginning to
the Kingdom of China: it is a high mountain covered with trees, and though very
pleasant, yet un-inhabited. When the Portughesses first began their trade with
China, this Island served them for a Port, and there they built houses with
straw, like huts, which served them only for the time of their Negotiation, and
whilst they expected their merchandise; but as soon as that came, they
abandoned that habitation, and presently setting sail, returned into India.
Four and fifty miles from thence, more within the Kingdom, there is another
Island named Gau Xan, and by the Portughesses Macao, it is but small, and so
full of rocks, that it is very easy to be defended, and very opportune for the
rendevous of Pirates and robbers; as indeed it was at that time, when many of
them having got together in that place, did much infest all the Islands
thereabouts. The Chinesses were in consultation how they might remedy that
mischief, but whether it was that they wanted courage to undertake it, or that
they chose rather to have it done without running any danger themselves, and at
other men's cost, knowing well the valor of the Portughesses, they set them
upon the enterprise, promising them, that if they could drive out the Pirates,
it should be granted to them for an habitation.

The Portughesses accepted of the condition with much pleasure and contentment:
and though they were but few and much inferior in number to the Pirates,
nevertheless being more skillful in military affairs, they put themselves in
order, and set upon them with so much courage, that without the loss of one
man on their own party, though with great slaughter of the enemy, they
presently became Masters, both of the field and Island. They began presently
upon this to build, every one taking that place and ground which seemed good to
him: But that which cost nothing at first, came after to be sold very dear,
and at so high a rate at this present, that it would hardly be believed, how
much the least piece of ground to build on in that City would cost. For, trade
beginning to fail every where in India, does here increase still every day,
and the Inhabitants are grown so rich, that the covetousness of the
Hollanders have made them have a great longing to it, and did once attempt to
take it.

In the month of June 1622. Fourteen sail of Hollanders came into that Port,
with so much resolution and assurance to take that City, that they had already
divided (in their thoughts) the principal parts thereof among themselves, and
many Captains and old Soldiers came along in this Fleet, only out of hopes to
have their former services paid them here, and to settle themselves in a
condition of ease and plenty after all the hardships they had endured. They
landed 700 men on Midsomer Eve, 300 of them staid upon the shore to guard the
Cannon, the other 400 having drawn up themselves into a squadron, went to the
Hill of our Lady della Guida, marching toward the City with so great order
and cheerfulness, as if they had the victory already in their hands.

They were no sooner discovered from the Mountain of S. Paul, but they were
received with two or three salutes from the cannon on that side, so well
levelled, that beginning to abate of their fury, they left the direct way
toward the City, and turned on the left hand toward the Mountain of our Lady
del buon porto: and because there was a Garrison there, they kept off about
twice Musket Shot, and fortified themselves on the sides of the Hill where St.
Mary's Church stands. But the Portughesses discharged upon them so seasonably,
and with so much valor and courage, that they put them to flight, and made
them run down the hill toward the Sea, where the other Soldiers stood by the
ships. They fled in so much disorder and confusion, that although there were
above 300. there to guard their Artillery, who did succor them with fresh
Men, and encourage them to face about, yet all was in vain, and so both the one
and the other forced to run into the water up to the chin, to get into their
boats: and these escaped well; for many went over head and ears; and a barque
by reason of the confusion and disorder of those that got into her, sunk down
right, and above 400 men were drowned. The number of the wounded, is not known;
but it is conjectured, they could not be few: for whilst they embarked, our
Musketeers, who stood upon a hill just over them, played continually upon
them. Of the Portugheses there were slain only three or four, and some
Servants. The Hollanders being ill satisfied with this entertainment, presently
set sail, and durst never since hazard themselves upon the like enterprise.

This was the cause of fortifying the Town of Macao, with a wall round about
it, having six Bulwarks: that of St. Paul, which serves as a cittaddell,
standing higher than the Town, having fifteen pieces of Cannon, a Court of
Guard, and a Castellan belonging to it. That of the Port, having fourteen piece
of cannon, among which are six great ones, that carry each of them a ball of 50
pound weight, and another Court of Guard. The third Bulwark is that of our
Lady del buon porto, with eight piece of cannon. The fourth, that of St.
Francis toward the Mountain, with other eight piece of Cannon. The fifth is,
that of St. Peter, with five piece of Cannon. The sixth is, that of St. John,
with three piece of Cannon. And because the Mountain of our Lady della Guida
commands both the Bulwark of St. Paul and the City, it was fortified in the
year 1637 in the same manner as the Rock of Charil is: it has ten great brass
Cannon.

The City is not great, there are in it about 900 or 1000 Portughesses, who
are all rich, and live very splendidly: there are many Chiness Christians, who
are clothed, and live after the Portughesse fashion; there are also Chinese
who are Gentiles, and are clothed, and live after the fashion of their own
Country all the Arti^ans of the City consist of this last sort, as also the
Shopkeepers and Retailers etc. and are in all about 5 or 6000.

There resideth also in the same City an Auditor, who is sent thither by the
King of Portugal, and is superintendent of the traffic and commerce of that
Isle. The trade with Giappon (not to speak of that of Manila, which is worth
very much) yields the King every year, for his rights and customs at ten per
cent. many thousands of Crowns per annum. In the year 1635 it was worth to him
14000 Taus, which are better than Crowns.

The City spends every year, one year with another, in their Artillery,
Gunpowder, and the charges of their walls, and other things belonging to their
Militia, (as appears by the books of public accounts) above 40000 Crowns.

The rights and customs of the Fair of Cantone, at 6 and 7 per cent.
imports about 40 or 50000 Crowns. The Navigation to Giappon with the Present
which is sent to the King, and other Presents to the Toni of that Island,
costeth between twenty and five and twenty thousand Crowns. Their house of
Mercy stands them every year in 8 or 9 thousand Crowns. They mantain two
Hospitals, three parish Churches, five Monasteries, four of Men and one of
Women, besides the continual Alms, which they distribute to the poor
Christians of those Countries; and particularly to them of China: and although
the ordinary Alms, which the King of Portugal allows them from Goa has
not been paid these 19 years, yet are they well relieved by the liberality of
the Citizens of Macao. I doubt not but the Lord does favor this City for
their many Almesdeeds, and for the great care they take about the Service and
Worship of God.

Finally, this City of Macao is a continual Seminary, wherein are educated
and brought up many of those Laborers, who cultivate not only China and
Giappon, but also all other Christianities of the Neighboring Kingdoms. It is
also a Sanctuary and place of Refuge, where, in times of troubles and
persecutions, they may all shelter themselves, as it were in another Moab,
being upon all occasions, Refugium a Facie Vastatoris.

One of the Convents of this City is a College belonging to our Society.
There are commonly between threescore and fourscore persons in it, more or
less, according to the number of the persons they receive, or send away. For
all Missions being furnished out of them, their number must needs be very
uncertain. There are in that College two Lectures in Divinity; one of Cases
of Conscience; one course of superior studies; two classes of Latin; one
school for children, so numerous, that the lower form thereof contains
above 90 children of the Portugheses, and people of that Country.

Out of this House, (which at the beginning was very small, and the laborers
there very few,) first came the Soldiers of this enterprise. Father Alexander
Valignan of happy memory, who was then Visitour, resolved to send some of the
Fathers into China to endeavor to convert that vast Kingdom to the faith of
Christ; when presently the first difficulties began at the College it self, a
manifest prognostication of the many that should happen in the prog^esse of the
work, and execution of the undertaking. For to some of the Fathers, by reason
of the knowledge and experience they had of the Kingdom of China, this
enterprise seemed not only difficult, but also rash and unadvised, wherefore
they advised the Visitour not to set his mind upon it. But our Lord, who
brings wonderful things to pass from weak and troublesome beginnings, would
have this design put in execution.

Father Michael Roggiero was the first, who was named to take pains in this
conquest; he was followed by the Fathers Franciscus Passius, Antonius de
Almeida Duarte, Matthaeus Riccius, and others, who came after and helped on the
work, and like the foundation-stones of that building, sustained the first
weight thereof and greater difficulties, labors and troubles, than any
Missions of our society had ever felt. For the difficulties in new Missions
into Kingdoms so remote and different, from our Europe in language, custom,
conversation, diet etc. are not ordinary; neither can they be few. But those
in the Mission of China do far exceed all others. The language seems more
difficult than any in the world, being all of Monosyllables, curt and
aequivocall: and in this difficulty the Fathers were without any Master to
teach them, without any interpreter to explain what was said to them; so that
they neither understood others, nor others them; but by force of diligence and
unwearied pains they went on conquering and gaining ground: and although they
never arrived at any perfection in the language, or good accent in pronouncing
it; yet they discovered the mysteries of that tongue, and set them down in so
plain a form, that they made it much more easy for those who came after them.
To this may be added the painful study of their letters, which of it self
alone is a business of incredible labor, they being so many and so various
and in this Mission, (contrary to what is done in others) the Fathers do study
them all with so much diligence, that they have not only learned to write, and
to read their books very perfectly, but do also compose others themselves, and
have of late published many to the great advancement of Christianity: and in
truth, the Fathers in China do justly deserve this praise, that that language
being so hard, and they having the letters too to be studied which are not very
easy, yet they do speak that language much better, than any others do those,
of their Missions; for of themselves they are able to catechize, preach,
treat, and converse with the greatest Mandarines of the Kingdom, and to speak
to the King himself, if there were occasion, without making use of any ones
tongue, but their own; their endeavors in this particular being
extraordinary, and such, as are not used in other parts: and our Lord by his
singular providence does sweeten this labor, and season those difficulties
they undergo for his sake with much joy and consolation. Moreover, there is to
be a general change throughout their whole bodies; in their beard and their
hair, which they must suffer to grow very long; in the fashion of their
clothes, in their manner of conversation, in their customs and behavior, and
all other things; which are as different, as they are remote from ours.

Besides all these ordinary difficulties, (which are found more or less, in
all Missions) it is not to be believed, how sharp a war the devil has raised
up against this; endeavoring by the strength of difficulties and persecutions
to make us desist from the enterprise: and it went so far, that Father
Valignan the Visitour, considering the great obstructions we found every where,
the extraordinary difficulty there was to enter, and the great trouble there
was to stay there, how little good we could do there, and yet how much we
suffered; resolved to call back the Fathers to Maca^, to employ them in some
other Missions of less danger and trouble, and where a greater profit of
Souls might be made. But the Lord, who had otherwise ordained it for the good
of his elect, would not suffer the Laborers to come away, and leave the work
begun in that Kingdom, where it was to have so advantageous a progress.

CHAP. 2.
Of the proceedings, and persecutions of the Fathers, before they arrived at
Nankim.
THe Fathers did still persevere in the Resolution they had taken to enter and
settle themselves in China; and accordingly three times the same year they
attempted with all diligence to make their entire, but were as often repulsed,
and sent back out of the Kingdom, with that resentment and grief, which is
easily imaginable they had, to find almost every spark of hope extinguished by
such extraordinary difficulties, as they found, and by that great aversion,
the Chinesses had to admit of strangers.

I have been told, that about that time, Father Valignan looking one day out of
a window of the College of Macao toward the Continent, the good old man cried
out with a loud voice, and the most intimate affection of his heart, speaking
to China; Ah Rock, Rock, when will thou open, Rock? But (as there is no
council against God, who sees and knows the times and moments of his divine
Resolutions,) when the entrance seemed more shut up than ever, and more
encompassed with difficulties, after so many attempts and endeavors had been
frustrated, nay, after they had been sharply reproved by the Viceroy of
Cantone, and by public order been sent back to Macao; then did the Lord our
God open the gate by such means as were not to be imagined.

The Fathers had not been full seven days returned to Macao, wholly despairing
of the business, when there arrived a messenger from the governor of Cantone,
named Chi Fu, bringing letters from the Viceroy, wherein he invited the
Fathers to Xaokim, the Capital City of Cantone, where the same Viceroy of
the Provinces of Cantone and Quansi, had his residence; offering them there a
place for their Church and House.

The Fathers entered into Xaokim in September 1583. with no little joy to see
themselves established in a moment, where, before with all their endeavors
they could never so much as set their foot. They built a house and Church, and
gave a beginning to their intention, by translating the ten Commandments, as
well as they could, into the Chinesse language; and setting forth, how
necessary the observance of them was. The worth of these new guests was more
admired in the City, for their good works and holiness of life, than for their
words, not being able yet to speak that language sufficiently; but almost
continual troubles and persecutions were never wanting to them. The covering
of their house was so laden with stones by the insolence of the people from a
neighboring Tower, that they were in great danger of their lives: and, because
a servant of the house laid hold of a little boy, and threatened to complain of
him, presently an accusation was set on foot against the Fathers, that they had
misused the Son of a Citizen: but in the end they were cleared by evidence of
the fact: soon after, other calumnies were raised against them, particularly
against Father Raggiero, whom they accused of Adultery; but his innocence was
soon cleared, it being proved, that he was at that time more than two months
journey from the place, where that crime was said to be committed. Then did the
people of Xaokim begin to throwing of stones again, with which they did so
ruin and batter the house, that the Fathers missed very little of being
killed: all this while did their condition seem like unto a tempestuous sea.
But amongst so great tribulations and dangers, the Lord was pleased to send
them some days of peace and tranquillity; and among so many thorns they
gathered some roses, and some fruit of their labors: which was the reason that
their sufferings did not seem so grievous to them, neither did they undergo
them without joy and delight, hoping to make a greater progress, when the
desired calm should happen. Neither were the Fathers wanting (particularly
Father Mattheus Riccius,) by their knowledge in Mathematiques, and principally
by a description of the world in a new Map, to give reputation to the
affairs of Europe; and to make acquaintance and friendship with persons of
quality; when behold, by the coming of a new Viceroy there was so terrible a
storm raised, that notwithstanding all the diligence and addresses which were
made, not only by the Fathers, but also by their friends, it was impossible to
find any remedy, or to put a stop to the sentence, which that Viceroy
fulminated against the Fathers; which was, That they should all immediately
return to Macao, without giving them any time of stay there, or suffering them
to go into any other Country; but that they should presently depart, and should
be brought precisely to Macao. They were forced to yield obedience, and so
leaving some things belonging to the house in the hands of their friends, and
carrying other things along with them, after they had made a short prayer unto
God, recommending unto him that little flock, which they were forced to leave
among Wolves without a shepherd, and after they had exhorted the Christians to
continue steadfast in the faith, wherein they had been seven years instructed,
they departed down the current of the river; both the Christians, which
remained there, as also the Fathers, who took their leave, weeping very much,
and recommending each other to the divine Province and Protection.

When they were arrived at the Metropolis of Canton, the Admiral of the
Chinesse Navy, or Haitao, who was to conduct them to Macao, was not to be
found: where, while they stayed to expect him, they wrote to the Visitour in
Macao, that after two or three days they were to be banished by order of the
Viceroy: but they had hardly passed a day there, when they espied a boat
coming toward them with all speed, sent from the Viceroy, to invite them back
again to Xaokim. It seemed to them, that they were returned from death to life
by the unexpected invitation; although they understood well enough, that they
were called back to undergo new troubles, no less than the former. When they
were returned to the Viceroy at Xaokim, he would have paid the charges the
Fathers had been at in building their Church and house, which by no means they
would suffer him to do; and (after several contrasts) they obtained leave of
him to dwell in another City belonging to his Government, called Xaocheu. With
this permission the Fathers departed from Xaokim on the 15th. day of August
1589. and being after a few days arrived at Xaocheu, they had enough to do to
avoid the lodgings, which were offered them in a Monastery of Bonzi. At length
by Gods assistance they were admitted into the City, and were well looked upon
by the Magistrates; they built a house and Church, and began to preach the
Gospel with their whole endeavors. Notwithstanding that, they were ever
accompanied with persecutions, contrasts and calumnies; and in truth, it is
hardly to be believed, how many of these they did undergo. I did once reckon
them up to satisfy my curiosity: counting those which are related in the
History of Father Trigaultius, and others which are not set down there, till
the persecution of Nankim, I found them in all to be fifty four, the greatest
part were at the beginning, and in the Province of Canton, which as it is a
passage to the rest, may be called the Promontory of Torments; so that as often
as we shall have occasion to mention it, there will always recurre some new
troubles and tempests.

Our servants were many times taken and Bastinadoed for no other occasion, but
that they had defended themselves against assaults of the insolent people; and
one time also brother Sebastan Fernandes, who went out to defend those
innocents with reasons and prayers, was put to public shame. But the
persecution was worse, which brother Francis Martines suffered through a vain
suspicion they had, that he had attempted to raise a rebellion in China, and
that he was a Magician: upon which occasion after he had been many times beaten
and tormented, and after a tedious and noisome imprisonment, and in the end,
after his last punishment by an unmercifull beating, being brought back into
the prison, he died, a death so much the more glorious, by how much it was
supported by an unspeakable patience, and for so holy an occasion, as the
procuring the salvation of that people was. After that, brother Francis Mendez,
going to the Metropolis of Canton upon occasion of business, and to help a
servant of ours, who was kept there in prison, suffered very much: for being
come into the prison, the Jailer presently clapped Manacles upon him, and
suspecting him to be a Priest, pulled off his cap, and searched whether his
crown was shaven or no: and finding no sign of any thing he could lay hold
on, only because he was a Chris^ian, and belonged to the Fathers, he suffered
him not to go out of the prison, till there were bestowed many uruell
Bastinadoes on him. Likewise two Fathers going from Canton further up into
China, that is, Father Julius Alexis, and another Father, were apprehended, and
after very great sufferings set at liberty.

The Christian Religion began to make some progress at our Residence of
Xaocheu; and in another place near unto it, named Namhim, whither Father
Matthaeus Riccius was gone, and had reduced some Gentiles to the sheepfold of
Christ. But the business was so full of difficulties and dangers, that brother
Sebastian Fernandes, (although a Chinesse by nation, (but brought up in Macao
by his Parents who were Christians;) and who entered into our society after he
was grown a man, and a rich Merchant, and served therein many years, even to
his death, with great pains to himself and a great example to all that
Christianity,) told the Father, we should do well to go to Giappon; seeing the
Lord did favor that Kingdom with so great a conversion, and so many Baptismes,
and spend our lives there where we might receive abundant fruit of our labors.
But the Father, who had a more lively faith, and a hope better grounded, seemed
to have answered him by the spirit of prophecy, that which afterward came to
pass, giving him hopes of more copious fruit, such as we find at this day: And
even at that time also, within four years, wherein he had cultivated that
vineyard, in spite of those great Tribulations, he made a good harvest of
many Christians; who many times do prove the best in times of trouble and
persecution: and there were some of them very eminent, with some of which I
have since spoken and conversed, who seemed to me, to be like Christians of the
Primitive Time; and by degrees there were many more also converted.

In the mean while about the year 1594 two persons of this House departed to a
better life; for if the people of this Province are not good, the temper of the
air is much worse. Till this time, the Fathers had gone in the same garb they
entered in, with their beards and the crown of their heads shaven, and their
hair cut short, as we wear it here in Europe; and there also the Bonzi, or
Priests of their Idols, who in that kingdom, contrary to the custom of
others, are in very mean esteem. But now they were better acquainted with the
state of things there, it seemed to them to be more advantageous for the credit
of our religion, as also for the preachers thereof, that they should take a
habit different from the Bonzi: and that seeing they were inwardly unlike them,
that they should no longer outwardly resemble them; especially, seeing that
first outward form was a great impediment to hinder them from treating with
Decorum and familiarity, with Officers and men of quality, who without the
vesture of courtesy and habit of a Letterato, do by no means admit any one to
familiar conversation with them. So that leaving their former garb and habit,
they took the other of Letterati, with a great applause of the Christians and
their friends; as also of the Magistrates; and because they had taken no degree
in their learning, they were accounted and esteemed, (as they are also at this
day,) for Letterati of Europe; besides many other good advantages and effects
which it produced.

In May the year following, Father Matthaeus Riccius, went to Nankim, in the
company of a Mandarine, who was a grave Person and his friend, who went
thither with commission to be General in the war against the Giapponeses in
the Kingdom of Corea; he wanted not troubles by the way, especially in a
dangerous shipwreck which he suffered, the barque being overturned, and the
Father falling into the water over head and ears, not having any skill in
swimming, nor any hope of life. But the Lord assisted him with his paternal
providence: for without knowing how it came, there he found a rope of the
Barque in his hand, by which he was pulled up: nevertheless he lost his
companion, who being carried away by the force and violence of the water, was
never more seen.

At length he arrived at Nankim; but the hour of that famous City was not yet
come. Wherefore although some friends there did desire to favor him; yet one,
with whom he had contracted in Cantone, and whose favor he did now endeavor
to gain, was not only wanting to him in what he requested, but was so far
changed from what he was, that he put the Father in great danger; and was the
occasion, that he was disgracefully sent out of the City; and all this upon no
other account, but lest it should be said, that he was the occasion of the
Fathers coming thither, contrary to the laws of China.

The Father departed from Nankim, and went into the Province of Kiamsi, which
lies between that of Namkim and that of Cantone, he was received into the
Capital City thereof, named Nanchum, and treated very kindly by the most
considerable people there; and especially by a great Lord, named Kien Gam Vam,
who was the Kings near kinsman. He was also very courteously used by the
Viceroy, with no ordinary demonstrations of kindness; which was none of the
least occasions that a residence was founded in this City; then, Father Riccius
using all diligence to obtain leave to set up a House there, the Lord provided
him of a companion, named Iacobus Socirus, sent from Macao very opportunely to
reside there; and then presently they purchased some few small houses in this
City; but not without the usual resistance and contradiction of the
neighborhood, as also from other parts; which in process of time did so
increase, that this House may well compare with that of Xaocheu for
persecutions: for if the people of that City are bad, truly, they of this City
are not very good. The Fathers were sometimes molested by the Letterati;
otherwhiles by the Nobility; of which sort there are many still residing in
this City: they were troubled also by the people; and sometimes by the
Christians themselves. For there is never wanting a Judas to raise persecution
among the good disciples. Nevertheless, it pleased God to make that House, and
Christianity there to flourish, and to bring into them many persons of
quality; and particularly that near Kinsman of the King, with his whole House
and Family; who by his holy life and other virtues did much edify that
Church. And though he had no children, while he was a Gentile, yet it pleased
the Lord to send him many, after he was become a Christian. There were also
many other Families converted, which, although they were inferior to his in
blood, yet did they not come much behind him in Christian Piety.

After that Father Riccius had a companion, to whose care he might leave that
House recommended, he began to undertake afresh the enterprise of Nankim: and
he had a good opportunity offered him by a Mandarine of quality, and his
friend, who took him along in his company. By this means he returned again to
that City in the year 1598. and although at the beginning, by reason of the
war, which the Giapponesses made against the Kingdom of Corea, threatening
also that of China, he found great difficulty to be admitted (for these two
always go together) yet at length it was facilitated by the good success of
Corea, and the friendship of some persons of Quality, and of the Viceroy
himself; the Divine providence always opening that way, which he knew was most
secure.

CHAP. 3.
Of what happened after, till the Fathers entered into Pekim.
FAther Matthaeus Riccius never ceased to endeavor a final establishment of
the Church in that Kingdom; which did wholly depend upon the entrance of the
Fathers into the Royal City of Pekim, where the King and chief Court do
reside: and so after he had assayed diverse means, at length he resolved to go
thither in the company of the same Mandarine his friend, who had brought him to
Nankim; and so he took no house at that time in Nankim. He departed then along
with Father Lazarus Cataneus his companion, and two Chinesses who were
Brethren, taking their way by water; which was above a months voyage, although
the Mandarine got thither in a shorter time by land.

But at length being arrived at Pekim, without any hinderance or disturbance,
the first thing they did, was to go wait upon their friend, who had caused
them to come thither, and was arrived there before them. He received them with
all kindness and civilitie, and endeavored to favor and assist them in every
thing, and especially in recommending them to the acquaintance of an Eunuch his
friend. The Fathers had brought with them some curiosities of Europe, to make a
Present of them to the King, to wit, Two excellent Pictures Painted on Linen
cloth, the one of our Savior, the other of the B. Virgin; an Harpsicon, an
instrument which had never been heard; a striking Clock, a thing which had
never been seen there before; and some triangular glasses, with all which the
Eunuch was well pleased: but not finding that gain from the Fathers, which he
expected, and which was the only thing he looked after, he excused himself, that
he could not present them to the King, by reason of the troubles of the war,
which the Giapponeses made upon Corea, and which were every day expected in
China; saying; that it was not a fitting time to speak to the King about
strangers affairs. Of the same opinion also was that Mandarine their friend,
who being to return to Nankim, where he had a Government bestowed upon him,
would willingly have carried the Fathers back again with him. But it seemed
better to them, that the Hopes which they had conceived, should not be so soon
lost; nor so much labor and expense be cast away in vain: wherefore they
remained in Pekim above a month after the departure of the Mandarine, using
all endeavors, and seeking out all ways possible, to see if they could
compass their intention. But all their diligence was in vain; for the
Mandarine being once gone, all the rest withdraw themselves; so that there was
not one of the Mandarines of the Court, that would admit them so much as to a
Visit.

The difficulties then being so great, and they finding no way to overcome
them, the Fathers were forced to return into that Country, where they were
more known, and had been better received; and so they came back to Nankim, but
not with so much ease, as they thought they should have done. For the Winter
overtaking them in their voyage, and the River being frozen up, they were
forced to winter by the way.

But Father Matthaeus Riccius, being loath to lose any opportunity, left his
companions in the Barque, and took his way by land, avoiding by this means the
trouble and hinderance of the Wintering, but not the cold of the journey, which
was so excessive, that many times it hindered him from going forward. But at
length having overcome all difficulties, he arrived at the City of Sucheu,
which without all contradiction, is the most pleasant and delightful City of
all China; so that they have a proverb which says, That the City of Sucheu
and Hancheu, is that upon earth, which the habitation of the blessed, is in
heaven. It is situated in a pleasant River of fresh Water, just as Venice is
in the Sea: it has the greatest traffic of all the Kingdom; the Merchandise
from Macao being first brought thither, from whence they are afterward
dispersed to all other parts.

Here the Father found Quitaizo, his ancient friend, in the Province of Canton,
by whom he was received with all manner of kindness and friendship, and was
also by him introduced and brought into credit with the whole City. And being
the Son of a principal Mandarine, he* was a great help to him in gaining the
friendship of several Mandarines of great authority; for which and other good
turns he did us in Canton and other places, and especially in Nankim, he
deserves no small commendations and acknowledgment. The Father gave him a
triangular glass, which by his friend was taken for so precious a Jewel, that
he tipped both the ends of it with Gold, and made a Case of Silver to put it in;
and after sold it for above 500. Crowns. This honest man much desired, that
the Father would settle himself in that City, and found a House there, where
he might assist and promote him with more convenience; proposing many
difficulties which would hinder the residence of the Fathers at Nankim.
Nevertheless, having weighed things better, and taking that resolution, which
was most suitable to their occasions, they went both of them to Nankim, in the
year 1599. where they found the state of affairs much altered from what it was
the time before.

The City did now enjoy a profound peace and tranquillity, the Giapponeses
being beaten back into their own Country. The Mandarine their friend was very
glad of their coming, and did them many singular favors, as did also many
others, both Magistrates, and other grave men and persons of account in that
City* particularly a Coli, which is a kind of Censor or Syndic-royall, named
Choxelim: wherefore the Father, not only by their consent, but also by their
persuasion, resolved to settle a residence, and found a House in that Noble
City, which is the second of the whole Kingdom.

While the Father made his abode there, he gave great proof of himself and of
the Sciences of Europe; particularly of the Mathematiques. He made a new Map
of the World, with the explanation thereof in the Chinesse language and
characters; which gained great reputation, not only to the author, but also to
Europe; seeing there such a multitude of Noble Kingdoms and Cities: so that
the same Quitaizo, and others, with very Solemn Ceremonies, made themselves
Disciples to Father Riccius. Neither was the authority less which the Father
gained by the public Disputes, which he held concerning matters of Religion,
wherein, to the admiration of all the Councels, he ever had the Victory: so
that the Fathers came to such a height of reputation, that they were celebrated
by many Letterati in Epigrams and Elogies.

In the mean time the companions of Father Riccius arrived, after they had
wintered by the way, and endured many labors and hardships. But when they
found the Father, in that City, where a little before he was not only not
received, but also driven out with ignominy and shame, now to have such credit
and applause, and so many friends who favored him, they forgot all their
former sufferings, and gave most hearty thanks to the Lord our God for that
present prosperity. Not long after, they began to think of buying an House:
for, that wherein they lived, was only hired. Many were offered to them, but
such for the most part as were inconvenient for them; among which there was one
that was very large and capacious, but haunted with Devils and Phantasmes, so
that none durst dwell in it. This inconvenience uses commonly to be
advantageous to us; for we not fearing these spirits, which vanish at the
first on-sett, do commonly purchase such houses at a very low rate; and so it
happened to Father Riccius: wherefore after the bargain and sale was concluded,
the Fathers came over a while to dwell in that house, where they lived very
quietly without receiving any disturbance or inconvenience from those spirits.

As Soon as the Fathers had their House and Church, there were not wanting those
who did frequent it. The first who was baptized in this City, was an old man of
seventy years of age, he was a Noble man, and had the office of Chinoci,
whereof we spoke, when we treated of that Nobility, which descends by way of
blood. Presently his son followed him, who was already a Letterato; and was
afterward made a great Mandarine; and also his whole Family, his Grand-Sonnes
and Daughters etc. I knew them many years afterward, when they had made great
progress in Virtue and Christian Piety, and are therefore worthy of Eternal
memory, with many particular cases, whereof we shall make mention hereafter.
This Family was followed by others, the number of Christians still increasing,
as also their zeal to good works; especially after the persecution, whereof we
will speak anon. So that it may be said to be the best Christianity of China,
although the most persecuted and molested.

The affairs of Nankim succeeding thus prosperously, and these good beginnings
showing that that House would not only continue, but also be enlarged and
advanced, Father Riccius sent one of his companions, F. Lazarus Cataneus to
Macao, partly to give an account to the superiors of what had passed, partly
to get some curio^ities of Europe to make Presents of; and partly to seek out
some new companions to labor in that plentiful harvest.

The Father arrived at Macao with these glad tidings, which were received with
that joy which was fitting; and shortly after, having procured some Presents
for the King, and a fresh recruit of other Fathers, he returned to Nankim,
where Father Riccius stayed for him: who having his whole desires set upon
Pekim, after he had received the Presents, and a fresh supply of companions,
deferred no longer to begin his second voyage for Pekim; having not only the
opinions, but also the propitious assistance of some principal Mandarines, in
his favor.

It was the sixteenth day of May, in the year 1600. when the Fathers Matthaeus
Riccius, and Didacus Pantoia, and brother Sebastian Fernandes departed the
second time for the Court, in the same manner as before, by water, having
accommodation given them in a barque belonging to an Eunuch; who the more he
conversed with the Fathers, had still the more affection for them.

Having passed the Province of Nankim, and being come into that of Xantum, in
the City where the Viceroy of that Province does reside, Father Riccius was
received with extraordinary respect by that Viceroy. He was visited in the
barque, presented, and very much made off. The memorial, or petition, which he
intended to present to the King, was mended for him, and put into a better
form; and last of all, he had many letters of recommendation given him to the
Mandarines of Pekim. This Viceroy had had some knowledge of Father Riccius by
means of a son of his, who had very frequently and familiarly conversed with
the Father at Nenkim, and had heard from him many things concerning our
Religion.

Their voyage continued very prosperous, without any considerable obstruction,
until they came to a City, where there was an Eunuch named Mathan, who was
Collectour of the Kings customs and rights, and of many wrongs also, which he
did to most passengers, and was accounted a wicked cruel man. He was very
often visited by the Eunuch, in whose company the Fathers traveled, with his
hands laden with Presents, but could never be admitted, because his gifts were
not proportionable to the greediness of that Harpye. And because the time grew
near, wherein if he came not to Court, he should be in great danger, not only
of his goods, but of his life also; he resolved to betray the Fathers, to free
himself: And to that purpose informed the Eunuch, that those strangers carried
Presents for the King, which he had seen; adding withal, that they might
possibly have other things of greater price, out of which Mathan might make a
great advantage to himself. Upon this occasion the Fathers run a great
hazard, not only to lose what they had, but also to be killed, being left in
the hands of that covetous, cruel wretch. For the Eunuch Mathan, although at
the beginning he showed himself something courteous, yet it was not long, ere
it was manifest, what intentions he had toward them. First he desired only to
see the Presents which they car^ied, and accordingly the Fathers showed them
him with all courtesy and respect: after that, he would needs take the charge
upon him of presenting them to the King: Another time he carried them to his
Palace, after that the King had answered to his Memorial, that he should write
him word, what those things were which came to be presented to him. Last of
all, Mathan came with above 200 men armed, who were just so many thieves, and
he their Captain; and without any terms of respect, or courtesy, but with a
furious countenance, ransacked all their goods, and in a great rage laid by
whatsoever pleased him. When he saw any thing that had not been showen him
before, he would cry out, as if he had been robbed; but especially he made most
horrible exclamations, when he had found a Crucifix, saying, That they were to
make use of it in their enchantments and conjurations, wherewith they purposed
to kill the King. To which the Father answered with all modesty, declaring to
him the Sacred mystery, which was represented by that Image: But the Eunuch not
admitting of any reason at all, cried out, That such deceivers as they ought to
be severely punished. In conclusion, having taken whatsoever liked him, he made
an inventary of all, together with the Presents that were for the King, and
sent them all, along with the Fathers into the Fort, where they had a
continual guard upon them. The Fathers were much dejected by this accident,
fearing to lose in one moment all that they had thitherto gained with so much
sweat.

Yet did they not lose the confidence, which they had in Gods assistance,
whereof they had so frequent experience: and therefore seeing themselves
deprived of all humane help, they wholly cast themselves into the arms of the
divine providence, and with prayers and mortifications, did by a holy violence
wrestle with the divine mercy, that he would vouchafe to turn his eyes toward
the salvation of so many souls, that had been redeemed with the precious blood
of Christ, the which, as it seemed probable to them, wholly depended upon the
success of that expedition. They sent a servant to the City with letters to
another Eunuch, wherein they desired his favor to procure them leave to
present those things to the King, believing, that because it was a business,
wherein he might gain favor and esteem from the King, the Eunuch would very
willingly undertake it. But whether it were for fear of Mathan, or that he
were already pre-possessed by him, the answer was, to mis-use the servant both
with words, and with blows.

They sought yet another expedient to endeavor to get out of that misery. They
writ to a Mandarine, who had showed himself very friendly to them, before they
fell into this tribulation, and had really favored them upon several
occasions: But he also seeing the letter, was afraid to accept of it; neither
would he return any answer; nevertheless he told our servant, that the
Fathers were in as dangerous a condition as might be: for the Eunuch was
resolved to present a Memorial to the King against them, wherein he would
declare, that they did design to take away the Kings life by witchcraft, as
also many other things in their prejudice, to discredit them, and color his
own imposture; wherefore his opinion was, that they should endeavor by any
means possible, to make their escape, and to get back again to Canton; and
that they should esteem it a great gain to lose all they had, so they might
escape that death, which hung over them, while they were in the hands of that
cruel Eunuch. And if they were not either able, or willing, to put this in
execution, at least they should endeavor to get a Memorial presented to the
King, by the means of some Mandarine at Court, who was their friend.

You may well imagine, in what condition the Fathers were at this message, and
how apprehensive they were of the danger they were in: yet would they not
accept of the first counsel, lest, being innocent, they might make themselves
guilty by their flight; esteeming it a less misfortune, to suffer for
righteousness sake, than to give occasion to those who knew them not, to believe
those things probable, which the Eunuch laid to their charge. But the second
counsel seemed more reasonable unto them, and therefore they presently
dispatched toward the Court Brother Sebastian Fernandes with letters to their
friends, to give them an account of the condition they were in: But as in such
cases, there are few friends to be found, so there was none there, who would
give them any assistance, wherefore the brother returned without having done
any thing. Then did the Fathers well perceive, that there was now no longer any
remedy left them in their own industry, in their friends, and in humane
counsels; neither would they try any other means, but submitting themselves
wholly to the will of God, did cheerfully expect what issue the Lord would be
pleased to send them of their business.

Six months had the Fathers remained in that imprisonment, expecting the
assistance of the Lord, by whom only they could be succored. When beyond all
thought of theirs, and without their knowledge, there comes a decree from the
King, wherein they are called to Court, with their Present. They say, the King
himself one day, without being put in mind of it by any body, calling to his
remembrance the Eunuchs Memorial, asked where that Bell was, which range of it
self; and which, as they tell me, is brought me by a stranger? To which the
Eunuch, who always waits upon him, answered, That it was not yet come to
Court, because his Majesty had not given order for it to come. Whereupon the
King presently gave order for it, and Mathan was forced against his will to
send the Fathers with their Present, and the rest of their goods. They began
then to take heart again, and forgetting all their former troubles, they
immediately set out upon their journey; and because they could not do it by water
by reason the river was frozen up, they took their way by land, receiving from
the Mandarines, at the Kings expense, whatsoever they had need of, both for
their own persons, as also for the carriage of their goods.

CHAP. 4.
The Fathers enter into Pekim, and settle there.
THe Fathers entered into Pekim on the fourth day of January 1601. where they
were well received, and entertained in a Palace, which an Eunuch had lent them
for that purpose. They made ready their Present, and the day following with a
great train and Parade, the Eunuchs carried it into the Palace, and presented
it to the King; who made great account of every thing. He did highly prize the
pictures of our Savior and of the Blessed Virgin; he much admired the
Harpsicon; and presently gave order, that some of the Eunuchs should learn to
play upon it. When he came to the Clock, which was a piece of much skill and
workmanship, and an invention altogether unknown to the Chinesses, because he
knew it struck the hours of its own accord, and that at present it was not in
order, not so much as to be showed, he commanded that the Fathers should
presently come into the Palace, and set it a going. So they were called in
haste, and admitted within the second wall (for within the third and fourth,
none may enter, unless it be the Eunuchs, and the Soldiers of the
night-guard,) where by the Kings order given to one of the chief Eunuchs, the
Fathers were received and entertained with all magnificence and courtesy.

They stayed there three days, partly fitting the Clock to serve for the
present; (for afterward for the greater state there was a Tower of wood made
for it of much cost and workmanship,) partly in teaching four Eunuchs how to
set and order it; and partly in satisfying such demands, as were made them
concerning Europe, what kind of Country it was, what Kingdoms, what people,
what customs it had, and a thousand other particularities, which were all
afterward by the Eunuchs related to the King, who was much delighted
therewith, seeming to be very much satisfied with every thing: he much desired
to see the Fathers, but because he would not change the ancient style and
custom of the Kingdom, according to which the King is never to be seen by any
stranger, he caused their pictures to be drawn at length, contenting himself,
to see only the figures of those men, of whom he himself might not be seen.

All things succeeded prosperously, by reason of the great satisfaction, which
all they of the Palace received from the Fathers; and especially by reason of
the contentment the King took in every thing; and the delight with which he
received the Presents; so that now all seemed to be secure, and that there was
nothing more to fear. But there being no security, or calm, that is long
lasting in this world, the Fathers quickly found themselves in new troubles;
the occasion whereof was a Mandarine of the Tribunal Lipu, to whom it belonged
by virtue of his office, to have had the Present brought to him, and by his
means, to have had it presented to the King, he being to assist at all
Embassies, and Presents, that are offered to his Majesty. He therefore taking
it ill, that the Fathers, who knew nothing of this, had made use of the Eunuchs
to carry their Present to the King, contrary to the ordinary style of the
Court, and without making any mention of those Officers, presently fell upon
the weakest part, and commanded the Fathers to be apprehended, and put into the
House of strangers, in a more discourteous manner than was usual. The Officers
and Sergeants having used more insolence in the apprehending them, than perhaps
they were commanded to do. Upon this occasion they were brought before the
Tribunal, and examined in public, although by their answers their cause was
sufficiently justified, and the passion of the Judge something moderated.

They had not been above three days, when they were sent for thence to the
palace, to perform the ordinary Ceremonies in the Court of courtesies, whereof
we have spoken in the first part. The very same day they were again examined
by the public Notaries, by order of the same President concerning many other
things. The point they most insisted on, was; to what end they were come into
China: what their intentions were, and what they did pretend by the Present
which they had given the King? The Fathers judged it necessary to answer
clearly and in form; and therefore told them* That they came to preach the law
of the true God, who was sole Lord and Governor of heaven and earth. And that
they had brought that Present to the King, not that they did pretend any thing
by it, either office, dignity, or recompense, but as a Testimony of the
obedience they ought him, having been inhabitants, for so many years, of that
Kingdom; and that all they did desire, was to have leave to live and die in
that Court, or in any other part of the Kingdom, which the King should think
fit, as they had already lived there many years.

The Notaries having drawn up this answer, carried it to the President, who
having seen and considered it, drew up his Memorial thereupon to the King,
partly in favor of the Fathers, and partly against them. But the King being
well affected toward them, because there was something in it against the
Fathers, gave no answer to it; which is there the same thing as to reject it:
But the Fathers understood by the Eunuchs, that the King was much troubled,
when he knew, they were kept as prisoners in the House of Strangers.

The Mandarine seeing there was no answer given to his petition, presently
judged the King was inclined to favor the strangers, wherefore he thought it
fit to change his style toward them, using them with all courtesy and
kindenes, and commanded they should be better provided for in every thing, than
the rest of the strangers, who were kept there. And contrary to the law and
custom of that restraint, he gave them liberty to go into the City about
their affairs, and to visit their friends. But withal he presented a second
Memorial to the King concerning the Fathers, wherein he did not only say
nothing against them, but positively commended their persons, and their good
behavior, and manner of life: only there was this evil in it, that he
besought him to send them away from Pekim, because it was against his laws,
that strangers should inhabit in the Court. But because the Eunuchs, who had
care of the Clock, were afraid of the absence of the Fathers, because the
ordering of it depended on their directions, and the King also had a desire
they should stay, this second Memorial likewise received no answer.

In the mean while the Fathers, having liberty to go abroad when they
pleased, frequently Visited the Mandarines, made new friends, and treated with
those of the Council of Rites, called Lipu, before whom their business was,
that they would be pleased in their Memorialls, to signify that they thought
it fit that the Fathers should be permitted to reside in Pekim; telling them,
that they might plainly perceive, that the king refused to give an answer to
them, because he was willing they should stay there. But they still obstinately
opposed that point; and accordingly in their third, and many other Memorials,
which they presented concerning the Fathers, although in the whole or at least
the greater part they seemed to favor them; yet in that, which concerned their
stay at Court, they were always excluded; but in the like manner the kings
answer was always suspended, there never coming any decree from him, either
for or against them.

The Fathers perceiving this long delay, and whence it came, desired in the
mean time to be freed from that restraint, which is imposed upon all
strangers; wherefore they obtained by means of certain Mandarines, who were
their friends, the favor to be discharged from that place, until the King
should return his answer unto the foresaid Memorials, and to have leave to
hire a House for themselves. This was a new thing and wholly different from the
Style of China, and therefore so difficult that it was accounted impossible to
be done without a particular order from the King. But when God would have it
so, all things are easily brought about; and so this license was obtained,
rather as a thing granted from Heaven, than acquired by humane industry on
earth. The Fathers then had full leave to go out of that walled place: they
hired a House, and began to live in it, as if they had been natives of that
Country,

The Fathers then seeing themselves in that condition which was much better
than what they could hitherto obtain, presently endeavored with all their
might to get their settlement at the Court secured, that none might be able to
trouble them any more upon that account; understanding very well, how much the
security of their other houses depended upon their personal residence at that
Court. Nevertheless with all the diligence that they themselves, and several
Mandarines their friends, could use, they were never able to obtain a decree
for it: it is true, they were assured by the Eunuchs, that the King had said,
that they might dwell securely at the Court, and that they should by no means
think of returning to the Southern Provinces; for if they did, he should be
displeased at it.

This answer was very sufficient, and being authorized with the Kings name,
served instead of a decree absolutely to secure their habitation there: another
favor also being added to this, by which it was more confirmed, and that was
the appointing by the Kings own order, to have a competent pension allowed the
Fathers out of his exchequer, for the maintenance of themselves, and four
Servants, which allowance they were to receive quarterly. By these favors, and
the friendship of the Eunuchs of the Palace, and of some principal
Mandarines, their habitation was not only secured, but brought into such
credit, that their friends increased daily, and the people flocked continually
to our House, some to see strangers, some to hear something concerning our
Sciences, and some to understand the truth of our holy Law: and this was that
which was most pleasing to the Fathers, and most profitable to the Chinesses.

Among the Principal Mandarines, who at this beginning contracted friendship
with the Fathers, there was one, who was named Ligo Zun. He was a Native of the
City of Hamcheu, a man of great Talents and ingenuitie, and was known to be
such through the whole Kingdom; at the examinations for the degree of Doctor,
where in that degree is given to about 300, he obtained the fifth place, which
is a very great reputation among them. He was extremely curious, and being
assisted by his own natural ingenuitie, and the friendship of Father Matthaeus
Riccius, he learned many curiosities in the Mathematiques. He translated
several of the Fathers Books into the Chinesses language; and whilst he was
yet a Gentile he put our Catechism into an excellent Style. It is reported of
him, that when he was Composing of it, seeing the powerful reasons which were
brought in that Book to prove the Sanctity of our Religion, that although he
did not believe them to be true, he cried out, what an excellent piece is this
and how accurately Composed! But in time he began to penitrate better into
them, and at length acknowledging them to be true, he resolved to become a
Christian: but his desire not being capable to be put in effect at that time in
his own person, by reason of that inconvenience of his having many Wives (which
in China is the ordinary hindrance and obstruction in men of that Quality)
nevertheless he would have his whole Family Baptized; and he himself, after
he had settled and jousted his affairs, as was requisite for that purpose, was
Christened also, and named Leo; and is the same who is so frequently mentioned
in the yearly Letters, for his Piety and zeal, and for being one of the
Supporters and Pillars of that Christianity, carrying himself in such manner,
that by his example and persuasion he gained many persons of Quality to our
holy faith; among which number a grave person, named Michael, was one, who is
also often mentioned in the letters; and of whom we shall speak, when it
comes to his turn.

When he was now become a Christian; he governed in several places of the
Kingdom, but always with that observance, which was due to the Religion he
professed. Among other honorable employments, he had the Office of Tauli
(which is a place of great honor and profit) in the City of Caoye^ in the
Province of Nankim, he found in the Palace there, a Chapel full of Idols,
which the curiosity, or devotion of his predecessors, had preserved and
adorned with extraordinary care and and cost. The devout Leo judging it not
convenient to have such ill company in the House where he dwelt, commanded his
Servants, to throw down those Idols from the Alters where they stood, and to
hew them to pieces with Hatchets, and after that they were given to the Cook,
to consume them in the fire with all their Gold about them. The officers of his
Tribunal, as Secretaries, Sergeants, and others were astonished at it, and
looking one upon another, said, sure our Caoye, (for so they call their
Mandarine) is out of his wits; not understanding that indeed he had showed
this more in that particular, than in any other.

After he had served his King many years, he thought good to retire himself,
that he might more fervently and devoutly serve the King of heaven. He went
therefore to his house in the City of Hamcheu* where he dedicated himself with
his whole heart to the affairs of his salvation. He built a new Church and
House for the Fathers, which was very requisite in so vast and populous a City,
although we had then another there at the same time. This stood so near his
own House, that it gave him a continual occasion to converse very frequently
with the Fathers; which was his only delight. And that he might wholly employ
himself in the Service of that new Christianity, he gave himself to Translate
our Books; which is an excellent way to introduce the understanding of our
Sciences, and with them the knowledge of our holy Faith. To this end he
requested to have one of the Fathers always with him, who might give himself
wholly to that employment. There was assigned him accordingly, Father
Franciscus Furtado, by whose assistance he composed those books de Coelo, and
Printed them at his own charges, with the great applause of all China. He
undertook afterward to have set out a Logic, which he had finished and
reviewed, and was ready for the press, when the Lord was pleased to give him
the recompense of his pious zeal, by calling him to a better life, after he had
received the Sacrament, and testified much resentment of the Mercy of God, and
many hopeful signs of his own salvation.

Returning now to the Fathers, whom we left at Court; there, where their
Affairs prospered every day more and more, the Lord being pleased to comfort
them, by letting them see the fruit of their labors, by advancing the esteem
of our Holy Faith every day more than other among the Gentiles, many
continually turning Christians, and the reputation of the Idols growing every
day less and less, by reason of the many disputes, which the professors of
their Sects, held with the Fathers, wherein they were not only vanquished, but
even confounded by the Truth.

CHAP. 5.
Of the proceedings and ruin of our House at Xaocheu.
VVHilest our affairs at Court prospered, and the Fathers used their utmost
endeavors to settle their abode there, in the mean time the Fathers, who
resided in the houses of the other Provinces, omitted no opportunity to
promote the preaching of the holy Gospel, and had very good fruit of their
labor: neither did the enemy of mankind cease to show how much he resented, to
have so many souls taken out of his clutches; neither was he slow to invent
new disturbances and troubles.

The House which we had in the Province of Canton, in the City of Xaocheu,
increased every day in the number of new Christians, and in the remarkable
conversions of many considerable personages; among whom were three Mandarines,
in the manner of their behavior, with examples of virtue far surpassing the
carriage of Neophytes, or new Converts. In fine, there was a great Gate opened
to the Gospel, but in like manner to many adversaries also.

Father Nicolaus Longobardus was employed in this conversion; and when he
endeavored with the greatest fervor and zeal to drive all Idols out of the
Houses of the Gentiles, behold there comes one into his House, brought upon
men's Shoulders in a long procession; who, with a great deal of noise and
stir, demand Alms for the Fabrique of a Temple, that was to be built for it.
Every one sees the danger of that demand, but Christian valor exposing it
self to all events, did valiantly repulse that charge: and although the noise
was great, the demand importunate, and their outcries reaching even to heaven,
yet the Lord not permitting them to do any other violence, they went their
ways without getting any thing of him.

In the Villages, the Letteratie were stark mad against the Christians. In the
City the report was every where divulged, that in their journey to Pekim, the
Fathers, who went toward the Court, were apprehended and imprisoned by the
Eunuch Mathan, out of whose hands, if ever they went alive, it would be after a
very severe chastisement. And as the Devil makes his advantage of every thing,
there was added to this another worse report, by reason on the Scene was laid
nearer hand; which was, That our Fathers were banished out of the City of
Xaokim, and that all they who had turned Christians, were apprehended and
chastised. It is not to be believed how much this news disturbed the people,
and troubled the Fathers; and so much the more, by reason this prattle had some
foundation of truth. But as truth does still prevail in the end, so this
tribulation lasted not very long; but seemed rather to give place to new
troubles, which were prepared against us.

There happened to be a great drought that year, and the Gentiles had many
times offered Prayers and Sacrifices unto their Pagods, but all was to no
effect: and not knowing what to do more, they consulted with an old woman, who
was a Pythonisse, asking her the reason, why it did not rain, and why the
Pagods did not give an ear to their just prayers in that common necessity. She
answered, because there are many, who burn the Ribs of Con Him (which is the
name of a Female Idol,) meaning thereby, that they who turned Christians did
burn the Idols which formerly they worshipped in their Houses: with this answer
of the old woman, as if she had been an oracle, it is not to be believed, into
what fury and madness the Gentiles fell: so that if they did not set fire on
the Christians Houses, it was only for fear of the Mandarines, but they swore
to kill the Father, if ever he came again.

In the City the Bonzi not being able any longer to endure, nor dissemble the
rage which they had conceived against the Fathers, nor to see the smoke of the
Idols, which were burnt every day by those who were converted, conspiring with
many more of the people, resolved to put an end once for all to this business,
they framed a divellish Petition, wherein they touched such points, that were
able to put fear into any Magistrate whatsoever; and so much the more, because
some of those things, which they said there were true, at least in part, and
could not be denied; as that they were strangers; that they persuaded people to
live after their way, and to observe their law; that they assembled
congregations, which is a dangerous thing in China, for fear of Insurrections.
To these they added many other things, in confirmation of their opinion. The
Memorial was presented to the Officers, neither was it received with an ill
will. But the Lord, who always assisteth his servants, and with his divine
Providence helps them out of their greatest straits, kept a strong wind in
readiness to dissipate these clouds.

This was a grave Mandarine, who exercised the office of Tauli in that City,
who undertook our defense; and with a speech which he made to the Mandarines
and the people, concerning the probi^y and honesty of the Fathers, of their
good manner of life and conversation, and of the security which was in them,
quieted and appeased this tempest. Of so great power upon all occasions is the
authority of one who governs: and in this particularly, wherein, according to
their manner of Government, one would have thought, that this Tauli, should
have been our greatest adversary, it pleased the Lord by his means so far to
quiet all disturbances, that they made no small advantage, even of these
temptations.

Their affairs continued thus, between tempests and calmes; which latter
commonly were of the shorter continuance: and to conclude the History of this
House, I will only relate two notable passages concerning it.

About this time the Hollanders did infest India, and were come as far as
China with a design to gain a Port in that Kingdom, and particularly to take,
if they could, the City of Macao* as they did afterward attempt to do,
according as I have already related. Upon this occasion that City resolved to
fortify it self, as afterward it did, and although the design did not take
effect at that time, yet those beginnings and preparations of war were
sufficient to make the Chinesses, (who are timorous and suspicious even by
nature) to believe that the Portughesses had some design on foot against them.
This suspicion was increased by the coming of Father Lazarus Catanaeus out of
China to Macao at the same time. He was a man somewhat corpulent by nature, and
of a tall stature, and of a bold and lively mind or aspect, and was now become
more venerable by reason of his long beard; so that to any one who was not
acquainted with him, he seemed fitter to carry a Pike than a Breviary. The
Chinesses were persuaded that this Father had a design, to make himself
Master of their Kingdom, and that the Portughesses had chosen him for their
Captain in that enterprise; partly in consideration of his person, and partly
for the knowledge he had of the ways in that Country, by reason he had been in
both the Courts; adding with all, that there would arrive very shortly two
Armies to their assistance, one from India of Portughesses, the other from
Giappon of Giapponesses, who are their deadly enemies: and that the Fathers,
who were the companions of Father Lazarus, were gone before into the Kingdom,
partly as spies, and partly to stir up the people to take part with their
designs. A malicious but ridiculous invention of the Devil, as if 4 or 5 poor
religious men, with a handful of Christians, had been able to conquer so
powerful a Kingdom.

This rumor began by little and little, till at length, (as is usual in such
cases) it grew so strong in the belief of the Chinesses, that as many of them
as dwelt in Macao* either Merchants or Inhabitants, fled all away to Canton.
Whereupon they of the Province of Canton gave themselves for half lost, and
being filled with frights and terrors, they made no question but the business
was very certain. The news had already arrived to the Viceroys ears, who in
have made great levies both for sea and land. In the principal City of the
Province, all the Houses were caused to be pulled down, which were built along
the wall on the outside, which were very many, and the poor people received an
excessive loss by it. The gates which opened toward Macao were walled up with
lime and stone, and upon the walls were placed Sentinells to keep watch both
night and day. A proclamation was published, which under very great penalties
did prohibit all manner of commerce with Macao, and that no stranger
whatsoever should be admitted, and in particular not Father Catanaeus, who was
he, that was to make himself King. In this manner was the Metropolis inflamed
with a military heat, while the neighboring Cities were ready to die for fear.

Who would ever have doubted, that a fire so unfortunately begun, should not
have reached as far as our Residence of Xaocheu, a City of the same Province,
and not very far from the Metropolis, and should not there have burnt up
whatsoever it found in it, together with all our other Houses in that Kingdom?
They rushed suddenly into the House with such a fury as you may easily believe
them to be in upon such occasion: they made a very strickt search, and turned
every thing upside down, to see if they could find any arms, and having not
found what they sought for, having imagined to find a Magazine or Armory
there, the tumult began to cease, and the people went out of the House:
nevertheless they set guards upon us for their greater security; and from
this time that fire began to be extinguished.

The Viceroy had already given order to the Captain General of that Province,
whom they call Tum Pim, that with all the strength of the Country he should
fall upon Macao, and that he should sack and destroy it. But he, like a prudent
man, would not put himself upon an enterprise of so much hazard and danger
(for the Portughesses would not have suffered themselves to have been so easily
destroyed, as they showed afterward against the Hollanders, a people of
another manner of valor than the Chinesses) before he had received better and
more certain information. Therefore he sent spies to Macao, who went up and
down the City very freely; for by reason they had no suspicion of any thing,
all passages were free and open. When the spies had remained in all liberty in
Macao, as long as they though fit, they returned with certain intelligence,
that there was not any preparation for war in Macao, no levies of Soldiers,
nor any sign of that news, which had been spread abroad; but all was in peace
and quietness, save only that the City was divided into two factions, by
reason of some particular quarrels.

Upon this intelligence he did forbear to put the Viceroys orders in
execution, and in the mean time things began to be better cleared, and the
truth to appear. The Citizens of Canton did open their gates, and their fears
began to blow over and every thing to settle in a great deal of quietness,
which was much promoted by the coming of that Mandarine, of whom we have
formerly made mention, that he did appease another tumult against the Fathers
in the City of Xaocheu. He had been at the Court, and was returned from thence,
upon the occasion of his being promoted to an Office. He, upon the acquaintance
he had formerly had with the Fathers, and especially by reason of the new
friendship he had contracted with the Fathers at Pekim, with whom he had had a
very great familiarity, absolutely settled all those distempers there for that
time; for this Province is like a Turbulent sea, for there, storms are never
wanting, one still succeeding another, until they had utterly ruined our House
at Xaocheu.

It was the year of our Lord 1613, when the people of this City, after many
contrasts, (whether it were that their sins did render them unworthy of those
mercies the Lord would have conferred on them, or that the Lord was pleased by
this means to provide the Fathers a more quiet and secure abode) conspired in
that violent manner against the Fathers, that the Mandarines, (not being able
to resist the fury of the Litterati, the Bonzi, and the common people, who with
one accord cried our against the strangers,) did banish them by a public
sentence pronounced against them, which notwithstanding had thus much of good
in it to them, that the banishment was not out of the Kingdom, as they did very
much fear it would be, but seemed rather a confinement to detain them in the
Kingdom.

They pillaged our house, and committed other such insolences, as are usual
upon the like sentences, and with such persons. They placed over the door in
sign of their victory a stone with a long inscription on it against the
Fathers, and our holy faith. But when things began to close, the Christians
procured one night to have it peckt over with an iron tool, and so defaced it,
that it was never after to be read.

The Fathers departed from that City with great contentment of the Gentiles,
and a greater resentment of the Christians who wept all down right: and going
up the river toward the North, they arrived in a few days at Mount Muilin,
where the Source and Head of that river rises. At the foot thereof lies the
City of Namhium, which terminateth that Province. Here the Lord was pleased,
that their Barque should rest, like that of Noah on the Mountains of Armenia.
And without asking any leave, or desiring the favor of any Mandarines, only
putting their trust in the Lord, they hired a house in that City, (where it was
not hard for them to find one for their turn) without the molestation or
prohibition of any one whatsoever; for when the Lord will have a thing come to
pass, all is easy, even without pains and industry. There they lived with
that little which they had saved out of their shipwreck at Xaocheu, and dressed
up a Chapel in their house: and as the report of the arrival of these
strangers began to raise their curiosity, so the concourse of the people, and
their visits to them did open a door to the preaching of the Gospel.

So that Father Gasper Ferrera, who had been with them in the late troubles,
presently began to baptize some of them. And the year following, as I passed by
that place, to go to Nankim, there was, although not a numerous, yet a good and
well instructed Christianity, who enjoyed all peace and quietness, until the
year 1616, when the persecution at Nankim began.

CHAP. 6.
Of the progress of the Christian religion at the two residencies of Nancham
and Nankim, and of the death of Father Mattheus Riccius.
THe Fathers Emmanuel Dias, and Ioannes Soerius labored with very good fruit
in the residence of Nancham, which is the principal City of the Province of
Kiamsi: and although the greatest part of the Christians were but of the common
people, yet there were some also of the Nobility, and of the Kings kindred,
who were baptized, and carried themselves very exemplarily to the edification
of all the rest. I have since known some of them, who did very much benefit
that Christianity by the good pattern and example of their lives; and when I
departed from China, Don Pedro was then living, who is so often mentioned in
the yearly letters, for having carried himself like a good Christian upon all
occasions, and even in the torments which he sustained with great constancy;
his house many times affording a Sanctuary to the Fathers, and a Church to the
Christians, who went commonly thither during their troubles, and persecutions,
which were not wanting there; neither did they fail to produce that fruit,
which they are wont to do in new Christianities.

There dwell in this City many of the Kings kindred, who for the most part are
very insolent; partly by reason of the authority of their blood* and partly by
reason of the idle and easy life they lead. These did often give the fathers
much trouble, and one time were resolved to surprise the house, where they
lived, and to turn them out of the City, and had proceeded so far in it,
that there is no doubt, but that they had put their purpose in execution, had
not the Governor of the City been changed; who having ended his time resigned
his place to another, who although he was new in that Office, yet was not new
in the acquaintance of the Fathers.

The Litterati (who when they have only taken their first degree of Bachelour,
are another sort of troublesome people) had undertaken to oppose the Christian
religion, and to persecute the Preachers thereof; as accordingly they did many
times, but once in particular, many of them conspiring together to pluck up
this evil weed, as they called it, by the roots, framed a Memorial, wherein
they named some of the Fathers by their names, and affirmed that they were
Traitors to the King, and that upon this design they had dispersed themselves
into five several Provinces. that they kept a constant correspondence one with
another; that they went up and down the Rivers to rob and assassinate the
people; that they taught men not to reverence the Images of their ancestors,
and not to worship the Pagods, but brake and burned them; that they seduced the
ignorant people, and taught them to worship a Moor (for so in that Province
they call the Europaeans) saying, that he was the true God; that they made
assemblies and meetings, and hindered people from following their business;
that they had almost perverted the whole City; and though at the beginning
there were but a few of their Sect, yet now they were multiplied to 20000. In
fine, they said many other things, which sounded so ill, that there was none
who doubted but that they would be sufficient wholly to extirpate the Fathers;
beside their adversaries were many, united in one Body, and Litterati too, who
knew very well how to use their pen, and are commonly the better heard for that
reason.

They presented their Memorial to the Magistrates, who received it, and cited
the Fathers to their Tribunal; where they were examined about their life and
manners, and concerning the doctrine, which they preached. They gave an account
of themselves, and were also very well heard. They brought along with them the
Catechism which they taught, printed in the Chinesse Language, and presented it
to the Mandarines in stead of a Memorial. This was so well looked upon, that
they, not only admired therein the foundation and principle of all virtues, but
also greatly praised the precepts of the Ten Commandments. In fine, the
business went so well, and so contrary to what their adversaries did hope and
expect, and so much in favor of the Fathers, that the Law of God was publicly
commended and approved by the very Gentiles themselves; and the abode of the
Fathers in that City confirmed by a public sentence, and drawn up in writing,
which till that time could never be obtained; and the Cross of Christ
triumphed in spite of all the Devils in Hell; and from thence forward they that
were Christians already, enjoyed all the liberty they could desire, and they
that had a mind to turn Christians, could do it without any caution or
secrecy: and truly there were many of them that proved examples of great
edification; and though I do purposely forbear to mention them for brevities
sake, yet I will relate one belonging to the same residence, because it was
told me by the same Christian himself, a little before my departure for Europe.

I was standing one day, in the Church which we have in this City, when I saw a
man come in thither to say his prayers, and not knowing him, I stayed till he
came out, and then I asked him, who he was: He answered, Father, I am a
Christian, and was born in this City, but am by profession a Merchant in
Nankim, and at certain times I come hither to see my Parents, and then I come
to Church according to my duty. I asked him; who did Baptize him? He answered
me, Father John della Rocca: And it was, said he, in this manner; I had been
sickly many years, and had spent all my poor fortune upon the Physicians
without receiving any help from them, my friends used to visit me, and among
them two Christians, who one day being moved with compassion toward me, told
me that I should do well to turn Christian, and it might be, that the Lord
would grant me my health. I answered them, If your God would restore me my
health, I am content to turn Christian. They went presently to the Father to
ask him for a little Holy water, to give me to drink, hoping that it would have
a good effect. But the Father answered them, If he have a desire to turn
Christian, let him do it, and our Lord will send him health, if it be his
pleasure; and if he do not, yet at least let him take care of the health of his
Soul, which is more necessary than that of the body. As for miracles, the Lord
does them only when he pleases; and if upon this occasion he should not do a
Miracle, then would that Gentile despise and undervalue our religion. They
returned to me sufficiently disconsolate, but I was much more dejected when I
heard that answer. About two days after, the same two Christians being with me,
there came in another called Peter, with whom I was also acquainted; and he was
a very zealous and fervent Christian. They told him what had happened to them
with the Father; but he replied, What need have we of the Father for this
matter? I have holy water my self at home; let us give him some of it, and I
hope our Lord will grant him his health. He went presently home, and fetched a
little of it; they gave it me, and I drank it; and not long after I perfectly
recovered; and that which many medicines were not able to do in so many years,
the Holy water did in a very short time. I went presently to Church, to render
thanks to the Lord for that great mercy he had showed me; and after I had been
well Catechized and instructed in the principal matters of our Holy Faith, I
was Baptized.

I have made choice of this example in particular, because it was related to me
by the person himself, to whom it happened, although there never wanted many
others of the like kind, wherewith the Lord does favor that Church, strengthen
the Christians, and comfort the Preachers thereof.

The Residence of Nankim did this while enjoy a perfect peace and tranquillity;
and the Fathers gained a great deal of credit and reputation, and were much
esteemed by several of the Magistrates, who did greatly favor them. The
number and devotion of the Faithful increased every day; and for the greater
help thereof there was founded a congregation of the B. Virgin, with those
effects and fruits, which are usually obtained by her.

Diverse persons of very considerable quality did present themselves to
receive Holy Baptism, among whom Kui Tai Zo was one; who indeed was worthy of
all praise, for the great pains he took in this City to assist the Fathers,
and for the many advantages he gained them by his authority. This man,
notwithstanding that he was our intimate friend, did still persist in his
Heathenisme, and although he commended our Holy Law, and approved the Truth and
Certainty thereof, yet he thought it very troublesome to observe; a conceit
which does usually withold very many from the undertaking of it. But at
length having overcome himself and all other difficulties, he was Baptized, and
called Ignatius, making his confession and public profession so resolute and
devoutly, that he did much comfort the Fathers, and encourage the rest of the
Faithful: neither was he content only to recite it, but gave it in writing as
a pledge of his determinate resolution, the which for the public edification I
have thought fit to insert in this place, and it says thus.

Kui Ignatius born in the second Moon of the year called Ciea, (which was about
the month of March, in the year 1549) in the City of Ciancieu, of the Country
of Sucieu, in the Province of Nankim, in the Kingdom of Yamin (for so they call
the Kingdom of China) I being drawn by a profound consideration, and moved by
a most sencible sorrow for my sins, do desire to ask pardon of almighty God,
that he might give me the saving water of Baptism for to cancel them, and that
he would grant me sufficient grace to enter into his most Holy Law. I consider
with my self, that being now 57 years of age, I have had eyes all this while,
and yet have never looked into his Holy Law: I have had ears, and yet have
never heard of his Sacred Name; but on the contrary have followed the Sect of
Scechia (which is the name of a very famous Idol) and although I understood,
that it was repugnant both to truth and reason, I did very much enlarge and
spread abroad that superstition, the which I acknowledge to be my very great
fault, and almost Infinite sin, which without doubt did deserve no less than
the lowest depth of Hell. Of late years it was my good fortune to meet with the
Masters of the truth, who came from the great West, Mattheus Riccius and
Lazarus Catanaeus together with their Companion Sebastian Fernandes. These were
the first that did open unto me the Mysteries of Divine truth: and now again of
late, I met with John Della Rocca and his Companion Frances Martinez. These
did confirm me in the belief of those things I had already heard; by means of
these Masters I learned, that Heaven and Earth, Mankind and all other things
were made by God and that all things have their dedependance on him; and are
necessarily subject unto his commands: that no other Sect, or law, whatsoever
besides this, is conformable to truth; that sins are forgiven only by God by
the intermission of his Ministers; that by him only the joys of Heaven are
conferred upon such, who have a true and sincere sorrow for their sins: and
because I believe that by these means a man may obtain from God, Grace and
other benefits, I beseech his Divine Majesty, that he would so fill me with
his truth, that I may put it in execution by good works, and may be able with a
constant and firm resolution to worship the Heavenly Majesty and to conform
my self to his Holy precepts and ordinances. And from the day wherein I shall
receive Baptism, which cleanses and washes all filth and uncleanesse from
the Soul, I do promise by his Grace for the time to come, wholly to extirpate
out of my thoughts the Sect of the vain and false Gods; as also their
doctrines, which are repugnant to reason; and to take care, that my thoughts do
not in any wise run after the superfluous desire of riches, the vanity of
the world, or the false and foolish pleasures thereof. I will obey the
Sovereign Lord and Father of all things, and will follow the direct way of his
law; and by a constant watch upon my senses, I will endeavor, as much as is
possible for me, to reduce the light of that reason, which God has given me,
to its former Splendor, I will begin with my self, and afterward communicate
unto others, the benefit of those Graces I shall receive from his bountiful
hand.

For as much as appertains unto the Articles of our Faith, although I am not
able to comprehend the greatness of each Mystery, nevertheless I do from my
heart submit my self to them; and do firmly believe whatsoever is contained in
them; beseeching the Holy Ghost, that he would illuminate my understanding with
his light, that I might be the better able to comprehend them. Now therefore,
since I have begun again to feel the first impressions of faith, my heart is
like a tender ear of corn, which is not yet come to its maturity, wherefore I
beseech the Mother of God, that she will grant me strength and courage, by her
Intercession for me with God her Son, that this my firm purpose and constant
resolution might never be staggered or shaken: that he would open the powers of
my soul, and grant me a clean and pure heart: That he would open my mouth to
declare his Divine law through the whole Kingdom, to the end that none might be
ignorant of the law of the True God, or refuse to give obedience to it.

This was the profession in writing of Ignatius. There was also baptized in
this house by the hands of Father John della Rocca, who was superior thereof,
Doctor Paul, whose life we shall set down more at large toward the end of
this relation, and who may justly be called the pillar of the Christianity of
China, who was so much celebrated in the yearly letters, so eminent in dignity
and honor, having borne the highest office of the Kingdom, that is, of Colao;
so zealous in the Christian religion; so exact in the observance of it; so
humble; so virtuous and holy, that every great thing may worthily be said of
him.

This seed of the Holy Gospel was not contained within the walls of the City of
Nankim, but spread it self over the Province of the same name; for upon the
occasion of Dr. Paul's turning Christian, and of his Fathers death, at what time
he went to Scianhai to celebrate his funerals, Father Lazarus Catanaeus went
thither, partly to visit him, and partly to see how that Country was disposed
to receive the word of God. His journey had such good success, that presently
after one Mass, there were fifty Baptized, and in two years after the number
was increased to two hundred: the example of Dr. Paul being of great efficacy
to that purpose.

There happened also at that time several miracles; as, driving out of
Devils, healing of the sick, and such like, with which this new Christianity
was watered, and the earth disposed to bring forth more fruit, such as were
afterward, and are still gathered there at this day. There was also a house
founded in that Town; and it is now one of the best Christianities in all
China.

Whilst the Fathers of the three Southern Residencies, under went so much
pains and trouble, Father Mattheus Riccius was not idle at Pekim; but rather
was so busied, that he had scarce time to breath, partly for the visits of the
Chinesses, which he was also obliged to return them, nor could he have omitted
it without injury and discourtesie; and partly with the Christians and
Catechumeni; and partly in composing those books, which are so much esteemed
by the Chinesses. In the mean while the reputation and esteem of our religion
was every day advanced, and the number of Christians increased by rare and
miraculous events. One of the Neophites, or new Christians, being delivered
from death, which he was unjustly condemned to suffer, by the apparition of a
man, like unto the Image of our Savior, one night to that Judge, who was to
confirm the sentence, who commanded him to save the life of that Innocent: and
two others, whose recovery was despaired of by the Physicians, were cured by
the favor of the B. Virgin, who visibly appeared to them, spoke to them, and
conforted them.

Notwithstanding his great employments, Father Mattheus did not omit the other
functions of his charge in the House, he being superior and having the care of
the whole Mission, which he governed with great care, prudence, and charity: by
reason of these continual pains and care which he took, (or rather because
the Lord was pleased to deliver his servant out of the troubles of this life,
to give him the reward of his sufferings) he fell into a sickness, and
although all humane means were applied, and all possible care used to save his
life, yet all was to no purpose. He desired to receive the Sacraments, which
accordingly he received with very great resentment and devotion: The Fathers
desired his blessing before he dyed: about many questions which they asked him,
he gave particular answers to all: among the rest, to one who asked him, Why he
would leave them at a time, when they had so great need of his company? He
answered, I leave you the gate open to great victories, which notwithstanding
are not to be obtained without great pains and combats. And so entertaining
with discourse, sometimes the Fathers, sometimes the new Christians, and very
often raising up his heart and voice toward heaven, in amorous Colloquies,
lying in his bed, without any motion at all of his body, and closing his eyes,
as if he were entering into a sweet sleep, he gave up his soul into the hands
of his Maker, with the general grief and resentment, not only of those of the
house, and of the Christians, but also of the Gentiles, they all calling him, a
perfect Man, a Saint, an Apostle. I will forbear to speak any more of him for
brevities sake, by reason his life is already written in the History of Father
Trigaltius.

CHAP. 7.
Of the Burying place, which was bestowed upon us by the King, and of the
progress of the Christian religion, until the time of the persecution at
Nankim.
IT is a custom among the Chinesses, (as we have already related,) to have a
particular place appointed for the burial of their dead. The Fathers, who had
very hardly a place allowed them for to live in, were altogether destitute of a
place of Sepulture; wherefore they were in great doubt, where they should bury
the Father. But the Lord who is a guide unto his, and who had a particular
intention to honor his servant, put them upon a very difficult undertaking,
and as far as I am able to judge by the custom of China, without his
special assistance, altogether impossible. This was to Petition the King,
desiring his favor, to have a place assigned us for the burial of our dead.
And because it was the Lord, who had first set this business on foot, without
any consideration of the great difficulty, which they were like to find, they
presently framed a Memorial to be presented to the King, wherein they laid
down the reasons, which moved them to make this humble request.

The very passing of this Memorial, according to the Style which is requisite
upon that occasion, seemed so impossible a thing, that the Colao himself, who
desired to assist them as a friend, accounted it a very difficult enterprise.
Nevertheless after they had recommended their business to Almighty God, the
Memorial was presented to the Mandarine, to whose office it belonged first to
over look it, and the Lord was pleased to favor us so far, that it passed
the Chancery without any difficulty, which at first seemed to be the greatest.
When it was presented to the King, without doubt he that holds the hearts of
Kings in his hand, did dispose and incline him to favor us, and he remembering
the former Present, and the Clock which he had always by him, did refer it
to the Colao, together with many other petitions, according to the Style of
that Court, and he to the Council of Rites, because it was a business of
strangers, which did properly belong to them. But after they of that Council
had considered it, they judged it to be a special favor of the Kings, and
that it did therefore belong to the Council of the Kings Patrimony. Wherefore
they did remit our Memorial to them. As Soon as the Fathers understood this,
and knowing they had no friends in that Council, and that there was nothing to
be expected from them without favor, they made such means, by way of other
friends, that the Memorial was not only remanded again to the Council of
Rites, wherein the Fathers had several friends, but that they also did receive
it, and pass sentence in favor of them, as accordingly they did in this form.

Your Majesty has given command, that the Council to whom this business did
belong, should give their judgment concerning this petition. And it being come
into our hands, we have well considered the laws and constitutions of this
Kingdom, and we find one which says: That if any of those Strangers, which are
wont to come into this Kingdom, should chance to die by the way; if he were a
subject or Vassal, (for sometimes there come Kings and Princes thither) and
were not yet arrived at the Court, the Treasurer of the Province, where he
dies, shall assign him a place of burial, where there shall be set up an
inscription graven in stone, wherein shall be expressed the occasion of his
coming hither.

There is also another law which says, If a Stranger come into this Kingdom,
and die after he is arrived at the Court, if he have not received the Kings
gratuity, and reward, according to the usual custom, the Governor of the
City shall defray the costs of his funeral: But if he has received his
gratuity, it shall be done at his own expense.

In order to these two laws (from which I cannot well see how an argument
should be drawn to favor our cause, because the Fathers had already received
their gratuity) the Mandarine knew so well how to make up the business, and to
find out so many reasons and conveniences to obtain that favor, which Father
James Pantoia required of his Majesty, for the burial of his deceased
companion, that as soon as the Memorial came again into the Kings hands, he
presently referred it to the Colao, that he should give what answer to it he
thought fit. The Colao drew it up in this form, That it seemed very reasonable
unto him, the strangers should have that favor granted them, which they did
desire. And so it was again brought to the King, who signed it with his own
hand, and put to it his Fiat.

This expedition put an end to our troubles; and the Fathers ceased not to
render thanks to Almighty God for that favor, which they were so clearly to
own from his goodness, and which was of so great importance for the Fathers
residence in that Court, and in the rest of the Kingdom, that concession of the
King, serving not only for a Sepulture for their dead, but also for a license
for us to remain there during our lives. For he having granted us a place in
that Kingdom, to lie in after our death, it was manifest that he granted us
also a place of abode there during life: and the words of the Grant run thus,
To bury their Father Riccius and his companions. And accordingly they who die
in that Court at this day are buried in the same place.

Having overcome the first part of the business, (which was the most
difficult*) without any trouble, but rather with a great deal of ease and
facility, there remained still the second, which was the execution of it;
which could not want very much opposition: but by having many Mandarines to
their friends, and by procuring the good will of others, with some Sun-dialls
of Ivory, (which the Chinesses do highly esteem, and Father Pantoia had the
skill of making them very exactly) our poverty not being able to extend it
self to any great matter, at length they overcame the smaller difficulties,
and the execution of their desires became more easy for them; especially the
Fathers having the Colao, (who is able to do any thing,) for their friend: who
indeed was so well affected to the business, that Father Pantoia going a
second time to visit him, to refresh his memory, fearing lest the multitude of
business, which lay upon him might cause him to forget them, before the Father
could open his mouth, the Colao took him by the hand, telling him, that he did
not forget his business; but fearing least any delay might be prejudicial to
them, he had past it himself, and sent it to the Governor with particular
recommendations, although he thought it needless, because he knew him already
to be very well affected to the business, and that he had done the like to
several other officers, through whose hands the business was to pass: Upon
the recommendations of a person of so great quality, the business was not
only received, but very much favored. There was presently order given to the
inferior Officers, by whose hands it was immediately to be dispatched, that
they should find out a proper place for that purpose: who being always very
obedient to the commands of their superiors, and knowing what haste the
business did require, they went immediately about it; and having found out
four places, which to them seemed all very convenient, they came to the
Fathers, and desired them that they would be pleased to go and see them, and
make choice of that which liked them best, and then the King should be made
acquainted with it.

Among these four places, there was one very near the walls of the City, with
a very fair and stately house and garden, which had formerly belonged to one
of the chief Eunuchs of the palace; who for I know not what crime was
condemned to die; and was still kept a Prisoner. This man before he was
condemned, seeing he should certainly be ruined, and that his whole estate
would be confiscated to the King, had a design to save this Garden, by putting
it, as it were, into Sanctuary; wherefore he caused the Gate thereof to be
altered, turning it into an habitation of Bonzi, and consecrated the great Hall
for a Temple of Idols, setting over it this Magnificent Inscription, The Temple
of the Science of Goodness. This place was very commodious, and having but one
only Bonzo that lived in it, it seemed to be, as it were, abandoned, and that
there would be but little difficulty in obtaining it. That place then being
designed and chosen, there was not wanting a Mandarine, who hoping to draw
something out of the Fathers by it, was very earnest to have the place prized*
but there was another Mandarine, who presently took him up, and told him, that
the favors of Princes were above all price; and that they were not to be put
to an outcry. The Governor having notice that we had found out a place, and
who was the owner of it, presently drew up an Order in this form, The Temple of
the Science of goodness, for as much as it did belong unto an Eunuch, who was
condemned to death by the King, ought not to be bought with money. Let the
Bonzo, who dwells therein, be sent away, and the place presently consigned to
Father James Pentoia, and his companions.

This Order was executed in the form of a Sentence: and because the Fathers did
imagine, that the Bonzo would make some difficulty in being got out of the
place, after they had given thanks to the Governor, they desired he would be
pleased to send for the Bonzo to come before him, and to command him to leave
the Temple He dispatched presently two men for him, who brought him away in
much fear and doubt, what might befall him, by reason of the great danger that
men ordinarily run into by such visits. When he was come, the Governor
commanded him immediately without any reply, that he should quit that
habitation, and seek out another. He obeyed him very willingly, being very glad
the business was not so bad as he had feared: and the very same day the
Fathers, having some other Christians in their company, took possession of the
Temple, House and Garden, giving thanks to the Lord for their good success,
thinking the business to be now at an end; not fores^eing the great contrasts
and oppositions, which they were afterward to find.

The secrecy and expedition, with which this business was carried, gave no
time for news to come to the ears of the Eunuch in Prison, what became of the
Temple, which he still accounted to be his. But as soon as it was understood
abroad that it was granted to the strangers, it is not to be imagined what
complaints and murmures it occasioned in the Kindred, friends and disciples of
the Eunuch; and how all of them, some one way, and some another, undertook to
oppose it, and to use their utmost power to have it revoked by the King.

First, there went a company of inferior Eunuchs to the Temple, where at that
time they found only a Brother of the Society; after a long discourse they
told him, that there were there several goods and pieces of Household Stuff
not comprehended in the Kings grant to them. And at length before their
departure, they made several speeches to the Idol, some bidding him adieu for
ever; for now they never hoped to have liberty to come thither again: another
in great rage called him, Mass of dirt and dung, (although the Idol were made
of Chaulk, and gilt) telling him, that seeing he had not strength enough to
defend himself, he would not hope for any assistance from him; professing to
his face, that he was not worthy of any honor; and that from hence forward he
would not show any sign of gratitude or memory toward him: others said, This
statue had formerly the name of another Idol, which was afterward changed:
behold, what revenge he takes upon him that usurped it.

But the Eunuchs of greater authority left no way nor means un-attempted;
they made their application to the chief Eunuchs of the Palace, as also to the
Mandarines without, and other persons of great power, that they might carry on
their intent. And truly they prevailed so far, that they persuaded the Culikien
to interpose his authority; who is Secretary (as they call it) of the Purity,
chief of the Eunuchs, and who has the frequentest access to the Kings person.
But as soon as he understood, that it was done by the Kings Order, he would
meddle no more with the business.

There was not left any person of greater authority, but only the Kings
Mother, who was a very devout worshipper of Idols; by her means they did
endeavor to bring their design about; a certain Eunuch, who was much in favor
with her, being made the first mover of this revolution. He told her with great
lamentations, that a Temple of his Gods had been taken away from him; that it
was worth many thousands of Crowns; that it had been given to certain
strangers, who did not only render them no worship nor respect, but did also
destroy them; and that he was certain, they would break them in pieces and burn
them; wherefore he earnestly besought her Majesty, that she would vouchsafe to
speak a word concerning it to the King. But she would by no means allow of his
request: and it was known afterward, that she answered him in this manner,
What though the Temple be of that value you speak of? What is that in
comparison of the Kings Magnificence? the very mentioning of such a business
now the King has done them that favor, if the strangers should but make their
complaint, would be sufficient to take away the life of that Eunuch, who is in
Prison, and already condemned. To conclude, in spite of all the powerful
endeavors, in spite of all the craft and machinations which were used against
them, the determination of the business was in favor of the poor strangers,
who were protected by a Divine power; and so having overcome all difficulties
and obstructions, the Fathers went to the Palace, according to the usual
manner, to render Thanks to the King.

This place which was granted them, is distant from the gate of the City,
about a third part of a Mile; the building is very neat, and all of Brick; and
had not then been built above thirty years: it is reported to have cost 14000.
Crowns; which is an excessive sum in China. Toward Morning the Body of
Father Riccius was brought thither, having been already laid in a Coffin, which
was very well closed, and varnished over after the Chinesse Fashion. A great
number of new Christians did accompany it, with lighted Candles in their hands,
following the Cross which was carried before very richly adorned; and for the
present the Coffin was put in a room on one side of the Chapel, that there
might be a convenience to perform those ceremonies, which were requisite after
the manner of China; after that, it was transferred to the Dormitorie already
prepared for it. At the further end of the Garden there is a Chapel
consisting of six sides; it is made of brick, and vaulted. From the sides come
out two walls, built compassing in figure of a Semicircle. This place was
chosen by the Fathers for a Coemeterie, round about it there are four
Cypresses, which are also among the Chinesses accounted mournful and funeral
Trees: they seemed as if they had been planted there on purpose, to shade the
Tomb of Father Riccius, which was also built there of Brick; and the chief Idol
being beaten to pieces, served in stead of Lime, that the Father might even
after death, triumph in the destruction of Idols. They caused the Chapel of
Idols to be cleansed, and consecrated it to Christ our Savior. There was in
the Hal a very stately Altar, whereon was placed the principal Idol, all gilt
from head to foot, of a vast bigness, called by the Chinesses, Ticam; and
their conceit is, that he does preside over the earth, and all treasures; and
is the very same with Pluto, having a Scepter in his hand, and a Crown on his
head, just as we paint our Kings. On each side of him stood four Ministers, or
Servants, all made of the same matter; on each side of the Hall were placed Two
great Tables, upon each of which stood five inferior Kings of Hell; the same
Kings were also to be seen painted on the walls of each side, sitting on a
Tribunal, and condemning Sinners to the punishments and pains of Hell; there
were also to be seen Painted horrible Devils, carrying Instruments of torment
in their hands; and likewise several sorts of punishments which are inflicted
on the damned wretches, and their caverns full of flames, Serpents and terrible
fiends. There was also Painted a great Balance, and in one of the Scales was
to be seen a man laden with sins and wickedness, and in the other the book
of prayers belonging to that Sect, which did outweigh all the Sins, and
deliver him who does frequently rehearse them. There was also a River of fire,
which swallowed up very many men; over it there were two Bridges, one of Gold,
and the other of Silver; and over these did the Ministers of the Idols conduct
men to places of pleasure and delight. There were also to be seen some of the
Bonzi, who plucked their Fathers out of the flames and torments in despite of
the Devils, and other such things, by which those Ministers did gain a great
repute to themselves: and over every sort of torment there was this
inscription, Whosoever shall call a thousand times upon the name of such an
Idol, shall be delivered from this sort of punishment. All was thrown down and
destroyed by our Servants, who strove who should do it fastest; by reason that
the Chinesses do put into the bellies of their Idols, money, Medals, and also
Jewels. The walls were playstered over a new, and over a new Altar was erected
the Image of our B. Savior.

On the day of all Saints the first Mass was celebrated there, with all
possible Solemnity, and with sound of Organs and other instruments. All the
Christians were there present, and after a brief exhortation, the body of
Father Mattheus Riccius was carried to the place of Sepulture by the chiefest
of them, and followed by all the rest; particularly by Doctor Paul, who loved
him as a Father, and there, with the ceremones of the Church he was enterred,
there having been first placed in that Chapple another Image of our Savior.
The Fathers also built there another little Chapple to the B. Virgin in a place
convenient for that purpose; to which they had obliged themselves by a vow,
which they made when they first undertook this business.

Finally over the first Gate they placed in two Chinesses Characters this
Inscription, By the Kings liberality; which among them is counted a greater
honor than will here easily be believed. Curiosity brought many thither, to
see the accommodation they had made, which was commended and admired by all:
neither truly ought it to seem a small matter, that in the face of the King and
the Court, Alters should be overturned, and Idols beaten to pieces by a few
poor strangers, and that too, even with approbation of the greatest officers.
This extraordinary Grace conferred by the King upon us was shortly after
divulged in Pekim, which gave no small strength and vigor to our affairs
there. Their houses were more frequented, the Fathers better looked upon, and
the fruits of the Gospel daily increased.

They had only four Residencies at that time, which was in the year 1610, but
they were so disposed, that they did as it were comprehend the whole Kingdom
from South to North, upon the great road from Canton to Pekim, but the Fathers
desiring, after they had run in a manner from pole to pole, to follow also
the course of the Sun, and to exalt the light of the Gospel through the East
and Western parts, (where there are many famous Cities,) the occasion was
offered them by Doctor Leo; for his Father being dead, he was forced to leave
his government, and to return into his Country to bury him; and to observe that
Mourning, which is required by the custom of the Country, wherefore he took
along with him some of the Fathers, partly for his own particular consolation,
and to instruct the Christians in his Family, and to Baptize such as had not
yet been converted; and partly to endeavor to found a house in that his native
City of Hamcheu. The first happy encounter there, was that of Doctor Yam,
named afterward at his Baptism, Michael, who is much celebrated in our yearly
letters. He was a Mandarine, of great account, and a Kinsman of Doctor Leo,
and had been for seven years together Chancellor of the whole Province of
Nankim, which is an Office of very great importance, and was very rich, of a
great House, and allied to the principal Families of that City; and above
all, he was very devout toward the Pagods, in so much that he had built a
Temple for them within his own Palace, with a certain number of Bonzi to serve
them, whom he maintained at his own charges. But he did this more out of
ignorance than malice, and therefore the Lord showed mercy unto him. He was one
of the first that visited the Fathers, and being very much addicted to the
defense of his Religion, he began a very hot dispute with a more than ordinary
zeal for the upholding of his Sect; the which he continued likewise the day
following, and the next day, and so for nine days together, always producing
new arguments and proposing new difficulties; not that he had a design to
impugn^, but only to discover the truth. The ninth day he yielded himself,
crying out, A true God, A true Law, A true Doctrine. And after he had been very
diligently Catechized and instructed, he was Baptized, to the great consolation
of the Fathers, and also of Dr. Leo, (who did much rejoice at it; and to the
singular grief and shame of the Bonzi, who were presently discarded, and their
Temple converted into a Church dedicated to the Savior of the world.

Now did these two Heroes seem two firm and stable pillars, very proper to
sustain that infant Church, with a certain hope, that their example would draw
many others to the law of Christ, and that there would be a flourishing
Christianity founded in that so populous a Metropolis, which in my opinion is
the richest, the most delicious and magnificent in Temples and other structures
of any in that Kingdom. But for the generality the least disposed to receive
our Holy faith, whether it were then for this cause, or because their hour was
not yet come, which required a greater disposition: there was so little fruit
of the Gospel at that time, that the Fathers judged it better to give place to
time, and for the present to leave that abode, and to find out some other
place, better disposed to receive the seed of faith. They proceeded so far as
to propose their intention to Father Nicolaus Longobardus, superior of that
Mission, who would neither approve, nor reject their opinion, but remitted the
business to the judgment of the House at Nankim, where I was then at that
time, and by the grace of God, we were there in all, nine of the Society. The
matter was debated, and it was resolved by all of us, that according as
experience had taught us, they should proceed with patience and longanimitie,
greater difficulties having been overcome by those weapons. So without any more
thoughts of change, the Fathers remained laboring in that City, not knowing
the great good which the Lord had there prepared for them, and which, time
afterward discovered; not only by founding there, one of the most numerous and
best instructed Churches that is in China* but because that house was ever a
safe Port to us in all Tempests, and a secure refuge in all persecutions, as
shall be seen hereafter.

Christianity also was much increased in Xa^hoi, the Country of Dr. Paul; for
his Father and all his household had been Baptized, and many other people of
that place: and although we had there no settled house, there was nevertheless
a Church, and every year the Christians were visited, both to confirm the old
ones, and convert new ones.

In the four ancient houses, the Fathers said Mass, preached and exercised
the Mysteries and Ceremonies of our Holy Faith, very quietly and without any
disturbance at all. The Christians exercised their devotion, and many Gentiles
endeavored to find the way of their Salvation, the Christian Religion
flourished every day more and more, with an abundant number of new Converts,
and also of new Laborers, which were sent to us from Macao, where they were
first instructed in the language and custom of the Country. In the mean time
we were sent unto from many places and from several persons, to desire us to
come into their Country, and to preach the Gospel to them.

This City of Vamcheu, which is near unto Nankim, had so great a desire to be
made partakers of our doctrine, that the Litterati there wrote a letter to
Father Alphonsus Vagnone, in Nankim, where he was at that time superior, which
was subscribed by forty of them, wherein they did invite the Father to come to
them, with many prayers and entreaties, and very earnestly desired him, that he
would not defer his coming* and that good which they so much longed for.
They did also the like in many other places; whether the fame of our Holy Faith
was arrived* either by the books we had printed there, or by the relation of
the Gentiles; (for these do sometimes serve as a guide to the rest, and I had
once one of them, who did help me to Catechize) or else by their conversation
with Christians themselves. And this was done with so much fervor, that really
it seemed to us, the time was come, wherein, after all storms and tribulations
were blown over, the winter was passed away, and the spring time began to
appear, bringing forth flowers worthy the sight of that celestial Gardener;
or rather, that the crop was now ripe, and expected a happy harvest. The
Fathers, being animated with these successes, and well pleased with the many
occasions, which continually presented themselves, were not sparing to make
good use of them, hoping that they would have been daily increased. But who is
able to comprehend the judgments of the Lord? Or who has been his
Counselor? Whilst things stood in this prosperous condition, whether it were
for the sins of that Kingdom, or for ours in particular, or because the Lord
was pleased to prove and exercise his servants, there was raised in Nankim,
(where that house was founded with much quiet, and had continued in greater
tranquillity than the rest) the following persecution.

CHAP. 8.
A fierce persecution is raised against the Christians in Nankim.
THis Persecution, which was the most terrible of all we have yet suffered,
began in the year 1615 upon this occasion which I shall relate.

There was this year sent from Pekim to Nankim a Mandarine called Qui Xin, to
be an assistant of the third Tribunal named Lipu, which takes cognizance of
all Rites, Sects, Strangers and such like. This man, besides that he was
extremely averse both to our Holy Faith, and to the Fathers; and on the
contrary, very much addicted to the worship of Idols, he had been stirred up by
several occasions, to bear a particular hatred toward us; First by reason of
a book written against our religion by a Bonzo, an intimate friend of his,
which was so well confuted by Dr. Paul, that the Bonzo broke his heart with the
very grief and shame he conceived at it. Moreover the Bonzi of Nankim, had
given him a handsome bribe, reported to be 10000 crowns, to drive us away;
hoping thereby, that fire might be extinguished, which had been kindled against
their Gods. To these may be added the spleen he had against Dr. Paul and Dr.
Michael, who discoursing with him, the one in Pekim, and the other in Cechian,
did by such powerful arguments vi^fy those Idols, he did worship, that, having
nothing left to answer for himself, he converted his silence into rage, and
his shame into venom. But his spite and malice was much more increased, when
he understood, that two Memorialls had been presented to the King, by two
Mandarines of great quality, wherein they did earnestly move the King, that
the Fathers might be persuaded to translate the books of Europe into the
Chinesse language, and that they should be employed in the reformation of their
calendar; Xin not being able to digest, that strangers should be held in such
esteem, who were enemies to his sect, to the manifest danger and ruin of his
Idols: and last of all, that which did strongly animate him to that enterprise,
was the ambition he had to be Colao, hoping, that this his zeal for the
ancient Rites, and for the religion of his Fathers, would advance him to that
dignity; especially since it belonged to his office, to have a vigilent eye
over such matters.

Therefore besides other things, which belonged to his charge and office, he
caused a damnable Information to be drawn up against the Fathers, proving
therein by feigned and colorable reasons, that they ought to be banished the
Kingdom. He said they had intruded themselves into China without leave, making
use, for proof thereof, of a certain Memorial which we have formerly
mentioned to have been made by the students of Nankim, wherein they besought
the Mandarines to banish the Fathers out of the Kingdom, as persons who were
very pernicious to the Commonwealth, and had secret Machinations against the
King and Kingdom; for said they, if it be not for this reason, for what other
end and purpose are they come with so much eagerness and zeal into another
world, and had abandoned their own habitations and estates? The other
Testimonies which he brought, were other such like impostures, wherewith a
neighbor of ours in Nankim had furnished him; that many nights in the year,
under pretense of some solemnity concerning the divine worship, there were
many great assemblies held in our house consisting of thousands of men and
women (a most gross lie) and that before the break of day they all dispersed
themselves to their own houses; that every new Christian had given him five
false ducats, made by Alchimy, after he had been enrolled in a list, which
they kept of them, and that they had strange and barbarous names imposed upon
them at their admittance, and were taught to make the sign of the cross upon
their forehead, to serve them as a mark of distinction in the time of their
rebellion and insurrection. That they had their houses fu^l of Arms, and other
such like lies very well colored over.

Of all these arguments put together he framed a Memorial, which he presented
to the King in the Month of May 1616. The substance whereof was. Our entrance
by stealth into the Kingdom. The propagation of a Law contrary to that of the
Idols, which had been the religion of their Ancestors. The concurrance which
there was in high Titles between our God and their King, betwixt our West and
their East. Our subtletie and craft in gaining of friends. The destruction of
the Astrology of China as false and erroneous, occasioned by the reading of
that of Europe, and such like things. The conclusion of it was, That it was
necessary for the public good, that he should cause a general Massacre both
of the Fathers and the rest of the Christians, before their force and number
could prove dangerous to the Kingdom.

To this Memorial, which was presented to the King very secretly, there was no
answer returned within the usual time. Nevertheless, Dr. Michael had notice
of it by means of a Mandarine, who was a friend both to him, and to the said
Xin: he presently gave advise thereof to the Fathers, with directions what they
should do. He worte many letters to several Mandarines in our favor, and one
directed to Xin, wherein without discovering that he knew his intention, he
confuted all his arguments against the Fathers and their religion. Last of all,
he invited the Fathers to retire themselves to his house in the City of
Hamcheu, until the storm were over. In the mean time, we labored to obtain
the help and succor of Almighty God, by re-doubling our prayers and
mortifications; and withal, we went to Dr. Leo, who lived two days journey
off, and showed him the Apology written by Dr. Michael for our assistance and
counsel, to which he added a discourse in commendations of the Fathers, and of
their eligion; and by their hands he dispersed many advertisements necessary
for that time and occasion, throughout the whole City: neither were the Fathers
wanting with fervent exhortations to do the office of faithful Pastors,
animating and encouraging all to suffer for the defense of Gods honor, and his
Holy Religion. And the Christians, striving who should prepare himself best
against the storm, frequented our house and the Holy Sacraments, and took
counsel how to carry themselves in case of Persecution. There was among the
rest a prudent and learned person named John Vao, who had prepared four small
banners, wherein he wrote his name, Surname, and Country, and the
Christianity both of himself and of his family; which might serve him for
ensigns of his profession in time of Persecution; neither did he cease to
declare himself to be such, and to exhort others to a constant confession of
their faith.

Three Months after the first Memorial; Xin having received no answer from the
King, presented another to the same purpose by the hand of Xamxu, who was Lipu
of the third Tribunal in Pekim, having preswaded him also to frame another of
the same Tenor, and to present it along with his. The Mathematician, who had
persuaded the Fathers to correct and amend the Chinesse Calendar, discovered
their plot, and privately taking a copy of their petitions, he gave it to the
Fathers and to Dr. Paul, who in one night wrote an Apology for the Fathers to
present to the King, when there was occasion, and dispatched a Mandarine, his
disciple, a man very well versed in the manage of affairs at Court, to the
President of Lipu, that having sufficiently informed him of the truth, he might
persuade him not to favor the intentions of Xin. This President concealed the
venom he had in his heart under fair and specious promises; but in effect, he
gave in a most pernicious Memorial, wherein he affirmed, That the request of
Xin was so just and necessary for the preservation of the Kingdom, that for his
part he should have thought he had done well, if without expecting any other
leave from the King, but only by the duty of his place, he had dispatched
orders throughout all the Provinces for the extermination and banishment of all
the Fathers, excepting only those of Pekim, because he saw them well backed and
supported; taxing by these words both the King and the Mandarines who did
protect them. The Memorial was so handsomely woven, and the words placed so
equivocally, that he could have given them quite another interpretation, if
need had required.

These two Memorialls, the one of Xin, and the other of the President, were
presented on the fifteenth of August, and after that a third, that we could get
no intelligence of, till it was presented. On the twentieth of the same month
they were published, according to the Style of China, by express Curriers,
throughout all the Provinces of the Kingdom, together with a particular order
from the President, for the imprisonment of the Fathers. The people were amazed
to see three Mandarines conspire against those, whom the whole Kingdom had
admired, and whom almost all the Letterati had respected, visited, and
esteemed; but they well perceived, that these accusations were but forged
calumnies, which proceeded from a corrupt and malicious spirit.

On the thirtieth of the same month, about midnight, by means of a Currier
dispatched for that purpose, by the Quoi of Pekim, the news came to the Fathers
in Nankim of what had passed at Court. Immediately they ran to the Church, and
presented themselves as Victimes and Sacrifices unto the Lord; and afterward
packing up their Pictures, and the sacred Vessels that belonged to the Church,
they conveyed them thence into the House of a Christian; hoping by that
means to secure them. As Soon as it was day, the Fathers, Nicolaus Longobardus
superior of the Mission, and Julius Lenis, departed toward Pekim, to give
what assistance they were able to the rest. There remained in Nankim the
Fathers Alphonsus Vagnone and Alvarus Semedo (the Author of this Relation,)
who expected every moment, when they should be seized on by the Sergeants and
Executioners. Not long after, came three Mandarines to us from the President of
the Council of war, to give us notice, that that President and Xin were
deputed to put the Proclamation in execution, which had been lately issued for
our banishment out of that Kingdom; nevertheless, they seemed to condole with
us, because, as they said, they were very well satisfied, both of our innocence
and deserts; yet advised us to give place willingly to force, before we should
be necessitated to undergo the discourteous and barbarous usage of Xin: and
that the President would give order, that we might not receive any affront, nor
molestation in our journey; also one of the three did advise us as from
himself, that we should not make too much have, for that he hoped through our
Innocence, and the favor of the Fathers friends at Pekim, these troubles would
shortly be appeased.

Toward the evening, there was a company of Soldiers sent by Xin to beset the
House, and about the break of day, the first of September, there appeared three
Sergeants to apprehend the Fathers, and to search every hole and corner of the
house: and although they had a special order from Xin to abuse and evil
entreat the Fathers, nevertheless they carried themselves very courteously,
and sent in their message in writing to Father Vagnone; which is a great point
of Civilitie in China. They set a guard upon the doors, and made an inventary
of whatsoever they found in the House.

In the mean while Father Vagnone sent a Christian, called Donatus, under
pretense that he was our Caterer, to Father Longobardus, to tell him what had
happened, and to advise him to take heed, that he did not fall into the enemies
clutches. Donatus did his message, and returned with provision for our supper
in his hands, although he was jeared by the Soldiers, that he would return
into the cage of his own accord, yet he preferred that prison before the
liberty he might have enjoyed elsewhere. For at the very first rumor of the
persecution, He returned to the house purposely to serve us, being resolved
either to live or die with us for the defense of that faith, of which (though
he was of very young years) he was so zealous and observant; having converted
many; and in effect, God did give him the grace to suffer much for his
religion; both in imprisonment and stripes, he was our constant companion.

When the inventary was finished, to the great edification of the Sergeants,
who did not expect to find such poverty; and when they had sealed our chests
and whatsoever could be shut up, they carried away Father Vagnone in a sedan,
and brought him before Xin, leaving Father Semedo lying sick in a chamber,
which they had sealed up. As Soon as he was brought out, there was a great
noise and shouting made by the meaner sort of people, and so great a crowde,
that the Officers were forced to make their way by blows. After they had gone
two miles, they stayed according to the orders which Xin had given, at the
house of the Tauli, who was a Kinsman of Xins, spending at least two hours in
giving him an account of what had passed: during which time, Father Vagnone was
left in the open street exposed to the injuries, scoffs and abuses of the
insolent people. At length the Sergeants being returned, made their excuses to
the Father, for their long stay; and so carried him to prison, recommending him
to the Gaolers, as an innocent person.

A little after, the chief of the Sergeants sent him from his House a good
Supper and a bed; the other Sergeants did also the like in their turns, every
one taking his day. There were two of our domestique Servants who waited upon
Father Vagnone in the prison; one whereof was called Ciam Matthew, he was a
very zealous Christian, and for three years before, had retired himself to our
house, that he might with more liberty serve God, and wait upon the Fathers,
without expecting any other recompense, but that of the next life. This man,
as soon as the Sergeants were come into our house, presented himself first of
all to give them his name, that he might have the opportunity to be carried
along with the Fathers, as in effect he was, and gained a happy crown by this
Persecution.

At the news of the imprisonment of Father Vagnone, the Christians inflamed
with zeal, ran to our house, neither could the guards hinder some of them from
going in. The most zealous of all the rest was John Yao, who sticking in his
cap one of the above mentioned banners, and holding up in his right hand a
scrowl of paper, wherein were contained the chief heads of our religion, and
the necessity of them, being asked by the guard, what he meant by it, answered,
To die with the Fathers like a Christian for the faith of Christ. The Soldiers
were much astonished at that answer; yet they put a halter about his neck, and
lead him to the Mandarines, where being asked, what he was, answered boldly and
with a loud voice. That he was a Christian, and that he came to give an
account of the law of Christ, if they would be pleased to hearken to him. They
immediately caused the halter to be taken from about his neck, and gave him a
seat to rest himself on; much admiting his resolution and constancy, the like
whereof had not till that time been seen in China.

In the mean time, Xin understanding that the Sergeants had left one Father in
the house, and used the other civilly, was very angry, and reproved them
sharply for it, commanding them to go next morning to a garden, which we had
without the City for our recreation, telling them they should find there store
of arms concealed; and at their return to carry the other Father to prison.
They found nothing in the garden of what they looked for; but they carried
Father Semedo out of the house to prison, together with four servants, and
four other Christians, who had come into the house, as also brother Sebastian
Fernandes, and another student, who was a native of the City of Macao.

The Christians of Nankim wrote an account of what had happened, to Father
Longobardus, who was departed for Pekim. The messenger overtooke him in Cauxeu,
where he presently consulted with Dr. Leo, who was Governor at that time of
two territories; it was resolved, that the Father should go alone to Pekim,
that he might the more easily be suffered to pass, and that he should leave
his companion there. He furnished him with an hundred crowns to defray such
expenses as should be requisite for the making of their defense. He wrote also
to several Mandarines of Nankim; and to the Viceroy himself. He procured
many letters from his friends to others in the Court in favor of the
prisoners: he comforted them with letters, and money, and clothes against
winter, which began to grow very sharp; neither was his fortitude inferior to
his charity, resisting valiantly his kindred and friends, who did every day set
upon him to persuade him to leave that so open defense and protection of the
Fathers, which might prove so prejudicial and dangerous to him; but he gave
them so good reasons for what he did, that they were all silenced, and he and
his whole family persevered in the way they had begun.

Dr. Michael showed himself no less zealous, as soon as he understood the
news by the letters, which were sent him by the Christians of Nankim and
Nanham; for he advised the Father who was at Hamken, (for the other was gone to
visit the Christians thereabouts) that he should get him gone out of the City;
which accordingly he did with many tears of the Christians, and fervor and
zeal of the Catechameni, who accompanied him to the boot; as did Dr. Michael
likewise and his two sons, and a brother of his, who was a Gentile, and three
other Letterati, walking on foot a great way, that cold and wet season of the
year. He gave also a hundred crowns to that lay-brother, whom the Fathers sent
to Cauxen, to Father Longobardus, toward the expense of his voyage, the which
money Father Longobardus sent afterward by the same brother to Nankim, for the
relief of our prisoners.

When Longobardus was arrived at Pekim, he found the Fathers, Iacobus Pantoia,
and Sabbatinus D' Orsi, who negotiated our business, according to the
directions and instructions of Dr. Paul* It is hardly credible, what care and
pains he took in writing of letters and learned Apologies, and all other
imaginable diligences, both openly and underhand, for the defense of the
Christian Religion, which things I forbear to mention here, because they shall
be related in his life. Yet for all this, was he never able to get a Memorial
passed to the Kings hands, Xin having craftily shut up all entrance to him;
nevertheless those Apologies were dispersed through the whole Kingdom, and did
sufficiently manifest the malice of our adversaries, and the injustice of the
persecution.

While the Christians with one accord endeavored to make our innocence
appear, and defended it with all their might, Xin grew still the more
outrageous against the Christians, and particularly against the poor
prisoners. He suffered them not to be together above five days, but commanded
they should be separated and put into five several prisons, and very strictly
forbid they should be allowed any conversation or visits, strengthening their
guards, upon pretense, that those men could vanish out of sight when they
pleased. But he was extremely vexed, when he saw he could not so color his
cause, but that it appeared to most men to be unjust, and occasioned merely by
malice; as also observed, that the Mandarines showed us the same kindness and
respect, as they had done in the time of our prosperity: but that which
afflicted him most was the joy and cheerfulness, which all those prisoners
showed in their sufferings for the love of Christ, without ever giving any
sign of sadness, or discontent, in all their misery.

Xin not being able to shake the constancy of men, would needs try whether he
could overcome the courage of children, commanding that five boys, who were
left behind in our house by reason of their tender years, should be apprehended
by the officers and carried to prison: an act which was accounted barbarous,
even in the opinion of those that did not favor us. He deprived of his degree
of Bachelor Philippe Sin, who was Master of the Chinesse tongue to the
Fathers; who foreseeing the blow, kept himself retired for a while in his
house: But as soon as the occasion of his Degradation was published, which was
for having taught the language to the Fathers; then he went abroad, rejoicing
publicly, that he had had the honor to obtain a more noble degree, by
suffering for the faith of Jesus Christ.

After this, Xin did very much endeavor to find out some letter, written by
Dr. Leo, or Dr. Paul, or by the Fathers; that he might pick some occasion out
of it to raise a calumny upon them: but this attempt proving fruitless, he
betook himself to compass his desire by a slight, writing to Dr. Leo in the
name of Father Vagnone, on purpose to draw an answer from him, which he might
censure, and make his own comment upon; which in China is no hard thing to do,
by reason of the custom they have of writing and sealing letters with the hand
and seal of another: But neither did this invention take effect. For Dr. Leo
presently discovered the cheat by the style and manner of writing, and did but
laugh at him for his pains.

In the mean time there arrived at Nankim, that lay-brother, who was sent from
Father Longobardus to assist the prisoners and Christians there; where he found
Ignatius Hya, a learned man, a good Christian, and kinsman of Dr. Leo, who was
sent thither from Cauxeu, to cause an Apology, which the Dr. had written, to
be printed and dispersed in that Court. This lay-brother undertook the care of
the press, and having chosen out Six Christians of the Art, he carried on the
work in a private garden that belonged to one of them. The uncle of this
Christian to whom the garden belonged, wherein the press was, having
counseled them in vain to desist, by reason of the danger they put him in,
went and discovered it to Xin, who gave him a good gratuity for his news; and
that night sent Officers, who took them all and brought them before Xin, who
was very joyful to have found this new occasion of traversing the Fathers.
They were sent to prison, and shortly after carried before that Tauli, who was
a kinsman of Xin: who having read the Apology, and understood the cause,
finding nothing in it to lay hold upon, to free himself of the trouble, sent
them to another Tauli, who imitating the first, sent them before another great
Mandarine; who having heard the cause, said they were not guilty of any thing;
and to conclude the business, gave his sentence in writing, That those men
ought in justice to be set at liberty; but if they were to have any
chastisement, he thought fifteen Bastinadoes to the chief of them would be
sufficient; and that his opinion was they ought to be set at liberty, without
being ^ent any more to any other Tribunal: nevertheless, he remanded them
back to Xin out of the respect he bore to his great office, fully persuading
himself, that he would set them at liberty.

When Xin heard the sentence, he was ready to burst with rage and anger: but
not knowing how to help it for the present, he sent them to prison to Father
Vagnone, after he had caused fifteen Bastinadoes to be given the poor brother
in so cruel a manner, that he was in great pain and misery. I will not stand
now to recount the villainies and outrages which they suffered, whilst they
were remanded from one Tribunal to another; that tempest of Cuffes, Kicks,
Thrusts, boxes of the ear, spitting upon, dirt throwing in their faces,
pulling of the hair of their heads and beards, and other insolences, which
use to be done there to poor prisoners, when the money flows not largely to
the Officers; as it happened to these poor Christians; leaving all to the
consideration of the pious Reader.

After this, they were sent by Xin to the Mandarines of his Tribunal to be
examined; the examination lasted six hours upon these Articles: What law is
this law of yours? How came you into China? How do your professors live? How
do they maintain themselves? What Government have they? What commerce with
Macao, and the Fathers of that place? But at length the examination was ended
without torments, by means of a Mandarine, who was a Countriman of Dr. Paul,
and Dr. John, from whom he had received letters in favor of us. Xin was highly
enraged at this, and having sharply reproved the Mandarine, he removed the
cause from that Tribunal, and sent it to a higher Court, desiring the Tauli
thereof to put on rigor in such a cause as this was. They were examined by him
for a little while, and having pardoned the rest, he commanded twenty stripes
to be given to Vu Paul, who was owner of the Garden, and twenty more to the
Lay-brother, whose wounds were not yet healed which he had received by the
other fifteen stripes; and so sent them to Xin; who not contented with these
torments, sent them again to the Mandarines of his own Tribunal, where they
were examined a new; and for the Satisfaction of Xin, were racked (after that
manner which we have described, when we spoke of the torments among the
Chinesses) to make them confess that which they knew not, These valiant
Christians were very ill handled by these tormentours; not having any crime to
confess, they were accused to have persuaded several Women to turn
christians, assisting therein Father Vagnone; wherefore by a new Sentence they
were all Bastinadoed in the manner abovesaid, except a very old man, and two
of the Printers, who were Gentiles. But seeing the Lay-Brother and Vu Paul so
torn and wounded with the Stripes they had received, they gave over, and sent
them back to Prison.

They being cured and healed there by Father Vagnone, as well as he could
possible, in that misery and poverty he was in, fifteen days after they were
brought again before Xin, who examining them very particularly, said to the
Brother, What kind of Law is that of yours, which holds forth for a God, a
man who was executed for a Malefactor? Whereupon the Brother took occasion,
with a great deal of Spirit, to open the Mystery of the Incarnation to him.
The Tyrant would not endure that liberty of speech: but to take off his
promptness, commanded there should be twenty stripes given him; and as his
former wounds were not quite healed, he endured an incredible pain in having
them opened again with new blows; which were laid on so lustily, that the
blood spurted as far as where Xin sat; by which being, as it were, more
inflamed, he grew out-ragious against the young man, whom he believed to have
brought the Apology of Doctor Paul from Pekim; which although it were false,
yet that he might not discover the true bringer, he under-went willingly a
furious load of stripes, for the love of Christ, and for his Holy Faith. After
this, they were led through the City to the Prison, which was three miles off;
whither notwithstanding the Brother was carried upon a board, being of himself
not able to move.

The courage and desire of these Valiant Confessors grew still the stronger,
by how much these torments had weakened their Body. They had no other regret,
but that they had not lost their lives together with their blood; and so in the
healing of their wounds, which being almost frozen by reason of the
extraordinary cold, required new cuttings and incisions from the hands of those
unskilful Surgeons of the Prison, they rejoiced in those new torments which
they suffered in so glorious a cause. All the sorrow and trouble fell to the
lot of Xin, who still thirsting after Christian blood, remitted the cause of
these Prisoners to the judge criminal. But the success fell out contrary to
his expectation, for that Judge, after he had conferred with Xon Xu, the
President of his Tribunal, concerning the enditement of these Prisoners,
pronounced them innocent: but that nevertheless, they were to expect what the
Kings pleasure would be concerning them. In the mean time he gave them good
words, and sent them back to Prison; but after five days, he set them at
liberty, and sent them home to their Houses, under pretense of getting their
wounds healed.

CHAP. 9.
The Continuation of the Persecution, and the Banishment of the Fathers out of
China.
AS soon as Xin was acquainted with the Sentence which the Judge Criminal had
given, he began to contrive new Troubles for them, that he might not seem to
have persecuted Innocent Persons. First he writ and dispersed abroad libels
against those Christians, accusing them to have printed an Apology against
certain of the chiefest Mandarines, in favor of the Fathers, who were
Traitors and Disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom. After that, he privately
stirred up the Censors of the people who had recourse to him, as to their
Superior, to receive rules from him for the ordering of the lives and manners
of the people. The answer he gave them was, That they should take heed of Fa.
Vagnone and his companions, who were Seducers of the people, and disturbers of
the public peace, by teaching a law, which did infringe their fidelity to
their Prince, the reverence of their Ancestors, the worship of the Gods, and
the exercise of all other virtues, which have been from all times so highly
esteemed in China; and in the conclusion, much deplored the misery and
unhappiness of those times, wherein there were so may Persons, who suffered
themselves to be bewitched by such Deceivers.

Upon this, there was a Mandarine of the Tribunal of Xin, and two other
Doctors of small esteem and reputation, who began to write against the
Fathers, and one of them in particular, who had formerly been in the Philippine
Islands, wrote, That the Christians did worship a Crucified Man; That they
signed their Foreheads with the Cross; That they set it on the top of their
Houses and Steeples, and wore it about their necks as a Jewel; That under
pretense of Preaching their Law, they had made themselves Masters of the
Philippines, of Malacca, and of the Indies; That of late years they had slain
many Chinesses upon no occasion given them; That their Religious men did commit
horrible Sacrilege with the women, who frequented their Churches, drawing out
all their Secrets from them under a pretense of Piety; That the design of
their coming into China was to conquer the Kingdom, under color of such
deceits and impostures; and that therefore undoubtedly they ought to be droven
out thence, as the pest and plague of the Common Wealth. Besides these writings
published by Xin, and sent to the Court of Pekim, he labored so powerfully
with the Tribunals of Pekim, that he persuaded them to present a Memorial to
the King against the Fathers, and the law which they Preached; and procured
also to have it signed with the Seal of the Eunuch, who is there in stead of
Viceroy.

This Memorial was presented the last day of September; the day following they
gave in another, wherein they besought the King to give a dispatch to the
Memorials already presented. On the eighth of October* Xin presented a third;
on the thirteenth day he caused a fourth to be presented by the hand of a
Tauli; and afterward a fifth by means of a certain Coli of Nankim, who was one
of the Kings Remembrancers.

For all this the Kings answer did not yet appear; and in the mean while
Doctor Paul wrote his second Apology against all these calumnies and
Slanders, which being joined to his first, and to that which Doctor Machael
made, and other Memorials and Treatises, made a good large volume. Thus did
that primitive Church glory to defend the honor of their Holy Faith, both with
their blood and pens. The writings of our Doctors were Authorized by the
patience of our Prisoners, who cheerfully under went all the ill usage which
was shown them; partly for the satisfaction of Xin, and partly for want of
money; the Tyrant not suffering the least thing in the world to be brought to
us from our House. They lay three months hin the worst place of all the Prison,
with Manacles on their arms: their food was only a little Rice ill-boyled, and
a few herbs without any Seasoning; and this too always cold, they boiling
still as much at once as might serve them three or four days. If there were
any Alms sent them from the Christians, either all or part of it was stolen
from them by the Prisoners and guards, who always swarmed about them like
Waspes.

Father Semedo, and Brother Sebastian Fernandes were put together in one
Prison, where by way of an extraordinary favor they had allowed them half a
Duck Egg a piece, dried and salted in stead of herbs; and although two of
those Eggs at least be sold for a farthing, yet was one of them divided
between two men. Father Semedo lay continually sick nine months together, and
through the convenience of this worthy Infirmarie, and the charity of his
tenders, he was twice in great danger of death; although he was once pardoned
the Bastinadoes he should have received by reason they found him in so weak a
condition.

The other Christians fell sick likewise through their great sufferings and
durance; wherefore there were several times Memorials presented to Xin, to
desire liberty, according to the custom, for them to go to their own Houses to
recover themselves, having first given in good security for their return. But
there were only two or three who could obtain this leave, and that for four
days only: so that two happily ended their lives, only through the hardship
they endured. The one of them was called Peter Hya of Nankim, aged about 22
years: he had been five years a Christian, of a very exemplarie life, in which
time he vowed perpetual Chastity, and endeavored to preserve it by frequent
penances, and by keeping a strict watch upon his senses, not looking upon so
much as his nearest Kins-women, as also by frequent prayer day and night*
insomuch that his khees were become her^y and callotus. He came every day to
Mass, although he lived four miles off: he was very discreet in his ^peec^,
and of a sincere conscience, endeavoring to avoid every small imperfections,
and the least shadow of evil. What he got by the handy-craft trade he used, he
still gave part of it to his parents, and the poor Christians: he was very
patient of injuries, saying, He ought to be a lamb who would imitate Christ;
and such a one did he show himself to be, more than ever, in his last
sickness: for it being contrary to the laws of that Kingdom to suffer any
prisoner to die in prison, Xin sent to the Father of the said Peter, that he
should take him home till he were recovered; but the Father through mere
hatred to his son, because he was a Christian, would not receive him. Then
Xin sent him by the Sergeants to his Mother-in-law, who because she was an
Idolatresse, used him very wickedly, yet did he never show the least sign of
discontent, but always of modesty and admirable patience. At length, when he
was near death, he was fetched back into prison, from whence he flew into
eternal liberty. And this was the first layman who died there in prison for
his religion; his corpse was granted to his Father to bury it, but without any
Ceremony at all.

The second who dyed in prison was called Hierome Vem; he was taken in our
house coming thither to assist us: he also died of pure sufferance. His wife
presented many Memorialls to the Mandarines, that he might be brought home to
recover his health, but all was in vain. At length she had recourse to Xin,
who understanding that her husband was a Christian, gave her no other answer
but this, You see what good you get by the religion they profess; and with
this answer left her disconsolate and quite out of hope: not long after her
husband died with so much the more glory, by how much the less he had of
humane help, in that sickness he so patiently endured for the love of Jesus
Christ, and the maintenance of his religion.

The death of these men did stir up in the rest of the Christian prisoners a
holy envy, and a new fervor to suffer for Christ; neither were the Christians
without wanting to show themselves true followers of that persecuted religion.
They divided the prisons among them, so that every day the Christian prisoners
were visited, and succored as much as might be, and had also notice given them
of the designs and proceedings of Xin, and the other Mandarines: neither were
they content with this, but relieved also the wives and children of the
prisoners, pawning sometimes their household stuff, that they might not want
wherewithal to do it.

Captain Ignatius Cin, although he was but newly converted to the faith, yet
was as forward and eminent in this work of Charity, as could possibly be
desired; as also three other families, with the hazard of being made infamous
for ever; namely, that of Lucius Ciam, Captain of arms, that of Andrew Hiam a
smith; and that of Francis a guilder; where I cannot but admire, the great
charity of the said Andrew, who having received some crowns from Father
Vagnone for the relief of the prisoners, made no use of them, but by the daily
pains and labor of himself and his son, made provision every day for two
prisons, restoring afterward to the Father the money he had put in his hands.
There were also certain devout Christian women, who making a purse out of the
fruit of their labors, bestowed it in the prisons according to the necessities
of the prisoners: there was also one, who being himself a prisoner, spared
still something out of the penny, which was given him every day for his
maintenance: and when he had made up a small sum, he divided it among the
most necessitous of the prisoners, with so much the greater liberality, by how
much the industry of that Charity was more subtle.

At the beginning, when the Fathers were first apprehended, there were not
wanting certain wicked persons, who feigning themselves to be ministers of
justice, went from house to house to disturb the Christians, on purpose to
draw money from them; and if in searching every corner of the house, they
happened to find any Images, they threatened to accuse them to Xin. This lasted
till a Mandarine, who had notice of this roguery, apprehended many of them, and
caused them to be well Bastinadoed, and one of them for no other cause, but
that he had informed against a man to the Tauli, that he was a Christian.
Nevertheless, there were some accused before Xin, only for being Christians;
he accepted the accusation, and remitted it to the Court Criminal, whither the
highest offenders are sent. They were rigorously examined, and after that
declared innocent, with a foul stain upon Xin, both of injustice and
ignorance.

Neither was the infamy less which he received by the words of two great
Mandarines. The one of them (called Ho) in a great assembly of Letterati, asked
him, For what reason he had imprisoned the Fathers? and he answering; Because
they preached a law contrary to theirs; the other replied, Why do you not then
imprison so many others, who follow laws much more contrary to ours, than that
of the Fathers is? They have not, said Xin, any accusers. And these Fathers,
replied Ho, Who accuses them to your Lordship? He knew not what answer to make
him, but seeing himself thus confuted, lest there should be a laughter raised
at him, he withdrew himself out of the Assembly. The other, who was President
of the Tribunal of war, sharply reproved him, that without reason he had so
mis-used the Fathers, who had committed no fault, nor had ever offended him:
And although Xin did endeavor to justify himself, yet the President
threatened to accuse him to the King, for a disturber of the peace of the
Kingdom, and in effect he dispatched a Courrier to Pekim, with a stout
Memorial against him; which nevertheless he did afterward re-call, by reason
that many Mandarines did interpose themselves in the business; but he would
never after maintain any friendship with so unjust a person.

Very admirable at the same time was the Charity of a new Christian of Pekim,
who had taken the degree of Bachelor; who having understood of the Fathers
imprisonment, ran to Nankim; and although he had never seen them, he went to
visit them, and much assisted them in their necessities: and not only invited,
but also persuaded several of his friends to do the like; who extended also
their Charity to the other Christian prisoners: And for this cause only he
remained there many months; he accompanied the Christians to the Tribunalls,
healed their stripes, encouraged and comforted them all; to which the quality
and reputation of so grave and learned a person did very much conduce. He
undertook also to dispute with a Mandarine, who had written a declaration
against the Fathers in favor of Xin, and used such powerful persuasions to
him, that he changed his resolution, and brought him to favor the Fathers so
far, that he did publicly praise and extol them.

In the mean while, our adversary seeing that the Kings answer was delayed,
used his utmost endeavor to gain the Colao to his party, who was (otherwise)
not much averse to us; and at length persuaded him to present a Memorial to
the King, by the hands of an Eunuch, whom he had already prepared for the
business with a very great bribe, to procure the Kings order upon it. The
Eunuchs passed this pitition so secretly among themselves, that without showing
it to the King, they brought it again to the Colao, requiring him in the Kings
name to draw up an order for our banishment; the which he did in this manner.

For as much as we are informed by the Collateral Lypu of the third Tribunal
of Pekim, that there remain in this our Court certain strangers, who do expect
our good leave and dispatch; and the said Tribunal has besought us, that we
would send our orders to the Provinces, that they should send them away to
their own Countries, Alphonsus Vagnone and Jacobus Pantoia with their
companions, who under pretense of preaching a certain law, do much disturb the
people, and also secretly endeavor to make an insurrection in the Kingdom: We
do therefore ordain, that notice be given to the Lypu of Nankim, to give order
to the Mandarines of the respective Provinces, wherein any of these men shall
be found, that they send them with a guard of Soldiers to the Province and
City of Canton, to the end they may return from thence to their own
Countries, leaving China in peace and quietness. And because the last year we
were given to under stand by several persons, that Jacobus Pantoia and his
companions, who came into this Kingdom to enjoy the delights and pleasures
thereof, were very fit to be employed in the emendation of our Calender,
whereupon they were aggregated to the number of the Mandarines; yet
notwithstanding the said aggregation, we will and command, that they be
forthwith dismissed, and sent away to their own Countries. Let this sentence
be given to the Lypu and to the Ciayan the twenty eighth of the twelfth Moon.

As Soon as this Order was drawn up, at the foot of the Memorial, the Colao
sent it back into the Palace to be signed by the King according to the custom.
Presently the Eunuchs being all gained by the Presents of Xin, fraudulently
contrived a way to get it subscribed; or, as some say, they put it among a
great heap of petitions, so that the King signed it without taking notice what
it was; or as others say, they persuaded the Queen to subscribe it, to whom the
King does often remit the signing of Memorialls. And truly it is not very
probable, that the King who had lent but a deaf ear to so many former
Memorialls, should be so soon persuaded to it; besides that, it is more
conformable to the style of that Court to have sent them rather to some
Province lying in the middle of the Kingdom, than to send them away after they
had gained so perfect a knowledge and full information of the affairs of
China. However it was, the sentence was published the fourteenth of February,
which is the solemn beginning of their new year.

The news was blown of a sudden through the whole Kingdom: The Mandarines of
Nanchium in the Province of Canton, where Father G^spar Ferrera was, did in a
very quiet and civil manner give him notice of the order, allowing him with
all liberty to stay till his companions came. Notwithstanding, the Father
thought it more fit to sell the House, and to retire himself to another
Mission, according to the instructions he had received from Father Longobardus.
In Hamlu there were two Fathers, who were brought thither by Doctor Michaels
means; but they had no notice given them of the Order, the Mandarines
forbearing, as it seems, to do it, out of respect to their Protector, who
writ to the Father superior to send him two more, which accordingly he did
with very good success. Father John Rocca with two others of Nanchiam, where
he left Brother Pasquel Mendez for the consolation of those Christians, came to
Chien Chiam in the Province of Chiamsi, where he kept himself private in the
Houses of the Christians, until the Lord sent better times.

In Pekim the Colao made excuses to the Fathers, in that he was obliged by his
place to give them notice of the Kings Order, promising them also his
Assistance to hinder their going, in case they should think good to present a
Memorial to the King to that effect. But all passages were so shut up, that it
was impossible for them ever to present one: wherefore giving place to time and
necessity, having encouraged the Christians, after the distribution of Palms,
that very Sunday they departed for Canton, the Mandarines having strictly
forbid the people to offer them any injuries by the way: and left the House
which the King had granted them in the custody of a good Christian, having
obtained a license of the Mandarines to that effect.

The greatest stir was in Nankim, where as soon as the Courier was arrived, he
would needs give notice himself to the Fathers of their banishment, thinking
it a high favor, that they were not cut in pieces. As Soon as it was known
abroad, the Mandarines came to visit them with much honor and congratulations.
On the sixth day of March, the Fathers were brought first before a Tribunal of
six Mandarines; and after that, before Xin to be examined, with a halter about
their necks; and Father Semedo was brought upon a board, not being able through
weakness to stand upon his legs. Xin after another examination, declared,
That although they had deserved death for preaching a new law in China, yet
their life was granted them by the Kings clemency; notwithstanding, he
condemned them to receive ten Bastinadoes apiece, and so to be sent away to
their own Country. Father Semedo was excused by reason of his sickness, But Fa
Vagnone received them in so cruel a manner, that he lay very ill upon it, and
it was above a month before his wounds were closed. In conclusion, their house
and goods were confiscated; and many books were published against them, which
declared them to be unworthy the name of Letterati. They themselves were put
into very narrow Cages of wood, (such as are used in that Country to transport
persons condemned to death, from one place to another) with Iron Chains about
their necks, and Manacles on their Wrists, with their hair hanging down long,
and their Gowns accoutred in an odd fashion, as sign of a strange and
Barbarous people. The thirtieth of April, they were brought out of Prison to a
Tribunal, where they were shut up in those straight Frames, and sealed with
the Kings Seal; and order was given to the Mandarines of the Guard, to tale
them out at such times, as were allowed them to eat and sleep in. In this
manner were the Fathers carried with an inexpressible noise, which the
Ministers made with their rattling of Fetters and Chains. Before them were
carried three Tablets, written on with great letters declaring the Kings
Sentence, and forbidding all men to have any commerce or conversation with them.

In this equipage they went out of Nankim, and were carried in these Cages for
thirty days together, until they came to the first City of the Province of
Canton, where they were presented to the Tutan; who having sharply reproved
them for preaching a new law in China, caused them to be consigned to the
Mandarines: whence they were carried in that manner throughout all the
Tribunals with all the people running after them. In conclusion, they were
taken out, and after a few days were sent away to Macao along with the Fathers
which came from Pekim.

The Christians which remained in Prison, after many sufferings and misusages,
were in conclusion, by the power and solicitation of their adversary Xin,
condemned to receive 70 Bastinadoes apiece. The two Lay-Brothers, because they
were Chinesses, after several outrages and Bastinadoes, were condemned, one
of them to serve at the Tartars wall, the other to tow the Kings barques, as
Oxen do in our Country. Nevertheless, there was seen in all the Christians a
wonderful constancy and joy to suffer for Christ, who showed so much
cheerfulness outwardly, that the Gentiles did much admire at it. There was a
Woman, who having heard that our Brother Sebastian Farnandes had been Tortured
at an examination by the squeezing and pinching of his hands and fingers,
desired that savor of the Lord, that she her self might likewise undergo it,
and her prayer was granted her in part; for being one day in prayer, she saw in
a Vision Xin sitting on his Tribunal, who commanded her to renounce the Faith
of Christ, which she not consenting to, he caused the same Torture to be given
to her. When the Vision was ended, the Marks were to be seen for some time on
her hands, and the black and blue strips on her body; which was a very great
comfort and contentment to her.

CHAP. 10.
How things began to be calmed again after the Persecution; and of the
Foundation of several Residencies.
ALl the other persecutions, which happened before this of Nankim, were
particular, and commonly the fire went not far. For the cause belonging to
the Magistrates of that Province, the sentence was always given there, without
extending it self to the Residencies of other remote Provinces. But in this
Persecution the Tyrant accounted it too mean an enterprise to discharge his
choler on the Christians of Nankim only. And therefore he would strike at the
Christianity of the whole Kingdom, to root it out at one blow. He presented
the cause to the King, that his sentence might include all, with the greater
rigor and authority. But this Tragedy being ended, the Fathers being
banished from their Residencies, their Houses confiscated and sold, the
Churches ruined, and that of Nankim thrown to the ground by the fury of Xin,
their goods lost; and finally, the Fathers of Nankim sent away from that Court
with so much hubbub and noise, that it seemed to be the day of Judgment; it is
hardly to be believed, how much mischief followed upon it, how much good was
hindered by it, and how every thing was changed. The Fathers lay hid, the
Christians were in continual fear, the Gentiles encouraged, the Tyrant
Victorious, and his followers so free and insolent, that every one was ready to
trouble the Christans, and to accuse them, especially in the City of Nankim.

Nevertheless, Quia dominus judicavit melius de malis been facere quam mala
nulla esse permittere, according to his Divine dispensation he drew much good
even from these evils. For although the liberty and facility of making new
Christians was impeded at that time; yet it manifested the constancy and
valor of those that were already such; all of them showing how highly they did
esteem the being followers of the Law of God, and how much they did desire to
keep the Fathers in their Kingdom, that they might be still instructed in the
Doctrine which they had already received: and so, many of them, which live in
other Cities, either sent, or came in person, to receive the Fathers, and carry
them to their Houses. Which was the reason, that, except in the two Courts, we
found good shelter in other places, whereby the Christians were comforted in
their sufferings, and confirmed in their Faith, and the Churches (I speak not
of material ones) maintained and upheld, as also many new ones set up, as we
shall show hereafter.

At the Court of Pekim there remained two of our Brothers, in the place of
Sepulture given us by the King: for, being Chinesses they were not comprehended
in the Sentence of banishmnt, wherefore under pretense of Piety and Devotion,
whereof the Chinesses make great esteem, they remained there to keep it,
although with much trouble and many contrasts which they had with the Eunuchs:
for they, as soon as they saw the Fathers out of the Court, thought the House
had been without a head, and that the brothers alone would never have had
strength enough to resist their batteries: and therefore it is almost
incredible, what attempts they made every way to arrive at their design, and
how many times they brought the brothers into the Tribunalls, accusing and
troubling them, but always to no effect. For the Lord, who had granted that
place to the Fathers, that they might be buried there after their death, would
keep it for them, to serve them as a retreat and hiding place, even in their
life time, disposing it so by his providence, that Doctor Paul should reside
in the Court at that time; and that by his authority he should overthrow all
the plots of our enemies.

Once especially the Eunuchs had put their business in such a form, that it
it seemed impossible for them not to carry their design; partly because they
had (as they said) corrupted some of the Magistrates with bribes; and partly
(which was more considerable) because they had the Chi Fu, or Governor of the
City on their side, to whom they had spoken very effectually concerning the
business, and he had promised them his favor in it. The worst was, they gave
the Brothers such short warning to appear, that they had hardly time to give
Doctor Paul notice of it, and he to write a letter to the Governor of the
City, giving Order to the Servant which carried it, that he should give it him,
in what place soever he met him, although it were in the street: and so he did,
finding him almost entering into the Tribunal; (for in Pekim they are without
the Houses where they dwell) where there was gathered together a great company
of Eunuchs, who did already assure themselves of good success, by reason of
the care and diligence they had used in the business. The Governor after he
had read the letter, called the cause: and the Eunuchs, with greater store of
words than reasons began to plead for themselves. The Brother being called, did
no more but show his Patent, wherein was contained how the Officer, and former
Governor, by Order from the King, had granted that House, and the Gardens
thereunto adjoining, for the Sepulture of Father Matthaseus Riccius and his
companions. The Governor took it and read it, and in stead of the favor he
was to do the Eunuchs, did strengthen it with one Seal more, putting to it the
Seal of his Office, and telling the Eunuchs, That which is once well done,
ought not to be undone. So the suit was ended for the Fathers advantage, not
only this, but also many other times; whilst the near Kindred of the
imprisoned Eunuch lived, they never gave over their endeavors to re-gain it;
whereby they got often some small sums of money, which were given them on
purpose to avoid suits and contrasts.

The Brothers, who kept the House, making use of this opportunity, went
sometimes one, sometimes another to visit the Christians of that City: and
after the persecution began to be over, and the fury of the tempest was
allayed, one of the Fathers was sent thither in diguise; who although he was
glad to lie hid there, yet did he much assist the Christians, and under the
protection of the old ones, converted many new ones also.

The House which we had in Canton, the most Southerly Province of China, was
totally ruined; for, although at the beginning there was another small House
taken, where some of the Lay-Brothers should have resided for the reception of
the Fathers in their passage to the City of Nanhium, yet upon better
consideration it seemed good to them to take it wholly away, because the place
was very subject to tempests and troubles. The Father who had his Residence
there, as I have already said, went up farther into the Country, as did also
the Lay-Brother, with a promise nevertheless, and obligation upon him, to come
and visit the Christians of that Country every year.

Father Rocca, with other two Fathers, who, (as we have said,) departed from
Nankiam, a City in the Province of Kiamsi, retired to the City of Kiencham, in
the same Province; where they were visited by a Christian, Stephen, of a Noble
Family, and one of the chiefest of that place, being also the Son of a
Mandarine, who was afterward himself converted to the Christian Religion. The
Fathers at their arrival there, were received with all manner of Christian
love and charity, and were lodged in a house neerto the walls of the City,
such a one as they call a House of Studies, where they had an appartiment
provided for them, consisting of four chambers, with the Offices belonging to
them, and a fair Hall, which served them for a Chapel. At the beginning there
came thither only those of the household of their Host, who were all Christians.
Afterward, their Kindred who were Gentiles, and their most Familiar
acquaintance; and by occasion of these Visits, there was always some one or
other gained to the Faith; and these likewise brought in others; and so by
little and little this Christianity increased so, that when I came thither
about two years after, they said Mass on Holy days, with Musical
Instruments, and with the concourse of a good number of Christians. They who
played on the Instruments, were the Sons of Christians; and among them the
Letterati, and those of the best quality served at the Mass in their coats
four at a time, as I saw at my being there. At this day there is a good
Residence, with a copious and well instructed Christianity, which has annexed
to it two Churches in the Province of Chincheo, which bordereth upon it, and
are visited every year by the Father of this House.

The Residence of Hamcheu does flourish most of all under the Protection of Dr.
Michael. For though the Fathers went out from thence publicly at noone day,
that the world might take notice of their obedience to the Kings proclamation,
accompanied by the said Dr. and the Christians of the best quality; yet Dr.
Michael having prepared a fair appartiment in his Palace, provided with
Chambers, Offices, Chapel, Hall, etc. did build also a new range of Chambers,
furnishing them all after our fashion, that there might be room enough for all
of us, if there should be occasion; and when he had fitted every thing, he sent
for the Fathers, who came thither very secretly, although he was not very
sollicitous to conceal them: But three years after told Xin, who being a
native of that City, was now come to live at his own Palace, That he had the
Fathers with him in his house, and persuaded him to come and visit them, and
discourse with them; Telling him, he should find them other manner of men than
he took them for.

This house was in those troublesome times the most secure, commodious, and
easy refuge, which the Fathers had. Here lived the Superior, hither came all
business, and upon any strait, the greatest part of the Fathers, who
sometimes made a considerable number: and although there was care taken, that
no Gentile should come in amongst them, unless he were very well known,
nevertheless, there was Mass said, and a sermon every Holy day, with a great
concourse of Christians, and a good number of new ones converted to the faith.

The greatest tempest fell upon the Church at Nankim: for as the Fathers were
prisoners a long time there, and after they had received their sentence, were
sent out in cages, being carried through the whole City with a great noise and
shouting of the guard, and an infinite concourse of people, their case was more
notorious and ignominious, and the Gentiles were more alienated from the
Christians, accusing them upon every occasion to the Magistrate. Wherefore for
diverse years after there was almost every year some particular vexation, and
the Christians were brought before the Tribunalls, and troubled, and many times
were Bastinadoed; all which they suffered with great constancy and
cheerfulness, gaudentes a conspectu Concilij, quoniam digni habiti sunt pro
nomine Jesus contumelium pati. Neither truly is there any doubt, but as the Lord
did exercise this Church of Nankim with particular tribulations, so he did also
endowe it more particularly with the virtue of Patience, as was seen upon all
occasions.

In this manner were our ancient houses demolished, although the Christians
belonging to them, were preserved, who divided themselves into companies,
making by that means several Co-fraternities: the most ancient and pious among
them did visit and comfort the rest: the Fathers also at certain times came to
confess and communicate them, and stayed amongst them as long as they could:
But as they durst not stay long, at least in some places, they were forced to
find out other places of abode, which was an occasion of laying the foundation
of new Residencies, which were afterward brought to perfection, and became
well ordered Houses and Churches, as they are to be seen at this present time.

The first Residence, which was begun in the time of our troubles and
Banishment, was in the Province of Kiamsi, in the City of Kiencham, whereof I
have formerly spoken.

The second was the Province of Nankim in the City of Kiatim, where Dr.
Ignatius dwelt, a Christian of great power and authority, who was afterward
Viceroy of the Province of Xantum: he, as soon as he had notice of the
sentence pronounced against the Fathers, immediately dispatched one of his
Sons to Father Lazarus Catanaeus, who lived in Hamcheu, with a letter,
wherein after the usual complements, he wrote him only these words, There is a
business of importance, which I must necessarily treat of with your Reverence
before you leave this Kingdom. When this letter was brought to the Fathers,
they were putting themselves in are dinesse to depart out of that City, as
accordingly they did, with a design to go to Xanhai, which was Dr. Paul's
Country: but having received this invitation, that they might give satisfaction
to both parties, the Fathers divided themselves, and Father Francis Sanbiasi,
went to the City of Kiatim to Dr. Ignatius, who, by that time the Father
arrived there, had got ready the lodgings near his house, which served him for
a place of study, and stood within the walls of his Palace, being very
convenient for his occasions, having several Chambers and a Chapel to say
Mass in, and being provided with all necessary furniture: and although that
Chapel was big enough for the reception of the Christians of his own
household; yet nevertheless, he did afterward build in the same place a fair
Church, which though it was not very great, yet was of perfect good
Architecture. The Fathers did afterward draw many people to them by their
preaching and discourses; so that when I was there about four years after, I
found a well formed Christianity, very devout, and both men, women and
children, very diligent in hearing of Mass and sermons, as also in confessing
themselves, with such an affection to the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, that
they seemed even Christians brought up in Europe. I forbear to mention many
examples of much edification, referring my Reader to the the yearly letters.

This House also served for an Academie to our people that came newly over: for
the City being very private, and having but little trade, and the Houses being
spacious and convenient, they who were to study the Chinesse language and
letters, did constantly come thither: so that the number of Fathers and
Students (who were Chinesses of Macao, whom we bred up and instructed in virtue
and the learning of China, that they might afterward be helpful to us in
propagating the Gospel) was about eleven or twelve, which considering the time,
was a great number.

Father Catanaeus went to Xanbai, where he labored in the same manner,
confirming the old Christians, and adding new ones continually to the Church.
In the mean time Dr. Paul came from Court to his own house, and by his
presence gave a greater liberty, with less danger to preach and reduce that
people: So that the Baptismes grew to such a number, that the Father was forced
to write for assistance, and to call a companion to him, and sometimes they
were three; and Dr. Paul, to enlarge that Church, did in a manner pull it all
down, and build it a new; and so it continues to this day with a very
numerous Christianity belonging to it.

At the same time began the Residence of Xamsi, which has at this day
belonging to it, one of the most flourishing Christianities of all China. It
had its beginning by occasion of a Christian named Peter; who went to be
Mandarine in that Province, and carried with him Father Julius Alexis, that he
might be there in safety under his protection, and that he might also prove
the disposition of that people, whether they would be apt to entertain the
preaching of the Gospel in a place where the Fathers had never yet come; and
although the House was not perfected at that time, yet things were put in such
order, that it was brought afterward to perfection with much facility, as we
shall show anon.

In Macao they were more particularly sensible of the success of the
Persecution and troubles; by which, four Fathers of the two Courts were
brought prisoners to that College, Nevertheless, by the resentment of those
troubles, their desires were more inflamed to enter afresh upon the work, and
to assist their brethren, who remained behind, exposed to all dangers and
sufferings, laboring under the heavy burden of the Propagation of the
Gospel. All the difficulty was, how to get the four Fathers back again, by
reason they were so well known there, and were particularly named in the
proclamation for their Banishment: it was judged therefore more fit for them to
delay their return for a while, during which time the Lord was pleased to take
to himself the Fathers of Pekim, namely, Father Iacobus Pantoia, and Father
Sabatinus de Ursis: who having been the ancientest laborers in that vineyard,
were called first of all to receive their reward. It was more dangerous for the
other two Fathers of Nankim to return back again, by reason their banishment
was more public; they having been carried before many Tribunalls, and through
several Provinces, during that Persecution. Nevertheless, Father Alvarus
Semedo, who had lived there a lesser time, and consequently was less known,
returned back about three years after, having changed the name and Surname,
which he used in that Country; and about two years after that, Father Vagnone
did the like; who is there living at this day in the Court of Xansi; where,
although he be grown very old, yet is he as painful and diligent, as any
young man whatsoever.

In this condition stood the state of Christian affairs, which still prospered
and increased in every place, by the great industry and caution which was
used; as also by the protection of some Christians of quality, as likewise of
some Gentiles that were our friends; and by this means the ancient Churches
were confirmed, and some new ones set up; when the second tempest began in
Nankim; which although it were not so great as the first, because it came not
to the Kings ears, ye was it fuller of trouble and vexation to us.

CHAP. 11.
Of the second persecution of Nankim, and of the Martyrdom of a Christian,
named Andrew.
THe affairs of Christianity in China seemed to be in a calm and prosperous
condition, and we had almost as much liberty, and as much fruit of our
endeavors as we could reasonably have expected. Only in the City of Nankim,
which was much distempered by reason of the former Persecution, there were
always some troubles more or less, according as the occasion happened; but
the best was, that they were never so great, that many persons were engaged in
them. In the year 1622. in the Province of Xantum, there happened a rebellion
by a certain people of a sect which they call Palien Kiao, whereof we have
formerly spoken in its proper place. These assaulted and took the barques
laden with victuals, which passed through that Province to Pekim; and after
that, certain Towns; and last of all, they took a City, where they put very
many to the sword. This news presently alarmed the neighboring Provinces, and
especially the Court; whence the Mandarines immediately dispatched orders
through the whole Kingdom for the apprehending and chastising all people of
this Sect. In the more remote Provinces, there was no great heed taken to this
Proclamation; but in the Province of Nankim, which bordereth upon that of
Xantum, there were great rewards proposed to him that should discover any of
that Sect.

It happened a^out that time, that certain Sergeants did molest and trouble a
neighbor of a certain Christian, who going out to help him, because he saw him
much injured without any pretense of reason for it, drew them all upon
himself, who following of him into his house with much rage and passion, and
finding there a Cross and an Image of our Savior, they took them and carried
them to the Mandarine, accusing that Christian to be a follower of the Law of
the Lord of Heaven; which was all one with that of the Palien Kiao. The
Mandarine sent to apprehend him, and giving him the rack, he questioned him;
who were the other followers of his Sect: He named only the Paynter, who had
painted the Image, and was also a Christian. He being apprehended and tormented
in the same manner, (whether it were through ignorance, or that it seemed to
him, that he did by that means give a greater authority to the law he
followed,) impeached many of his companions; naming at least forty, and among
them those who were left as heads and overseers of the rest; and in absence of
the Fathers did assemble the rest in the Chapels and Oratories, where they
used to exhort them to virtue and piety.

Upon this, rather simple confession, than malicious accusation, the Mandarine
sent presently to apprehend those persons who had been named to him, so that it
seemed as if the furies of hell had been turned loofe that day into Nankim.
There was no other noise hear^^^n the streets, but rattling of chains, the
voices and exclamations of the Sergeants, who asked, Where is the house?
Whither is he gone? Where shall I find him? When will he come? Being so much
the more eager in their pursuit of the Christians, by how much the more they
saw the Mandarines bent to ruin them. When they found out any one of them,
they presently rushed into the house, and seized upon their Beads, Crosses,
Images, Books, Catechismes, for commonly all of them used to have them in their
houses. Then they feized on their persons, dragging them through the streets
with a chain fastened about their necks, and manacles about their wrists,
carrying before them the ensigns of their faith which they had taken, with a
great noise, and outcry of the people, that they were of the Sect of Palien
Kiao. The number of those who were taken was thirty four, beside the two
first, and they were all presently put to the torment of pressing their hands
and feet, to make them discover others. But they taking warning by the
ignorance of the two first, said only that they were Christians, they and their
wives and children; that they followed the Law of the true God, who alone can
punish and reward both in this life and the next; and that their law was not
the law of Palien Kiao, neither had it any resemblance to it: and more than
this they said not any thing.

Among the prisoners there was a certain Christian named John Yao. This man had
been formerly imprisoned (as we have already related) with the Fathers in the
other persecution by Xin, and had been sometimes Bastinadoed before the
Tribunals, and was at last condemned to be the Kings slave for certain years
(which is much like putting into the Galleys with us:) but was now returned
from his slavery, and began again to edify the brethren by the example of his
holy life, in the same manner as he had formerly done in that City. This man
hearing that some Christians were apprehended, and that they sought for him,
never staid till he was discovered, but went of his own accord and presented
himself to the Mandarine, and kneeling in the sight of the Christians that
were tormented, told him, that he was a Christian, and that the Law of Christ
was the true law, and other such like things which the Lord put in his heart.
When the Mandarine heard him, he told him (with what intention is not known)
that he did not see in him any garb or appearance of a preacher of the law,
and therefore charged him to be gone, and never to appear before him again.
Whereupon John rose up and went his way, leaving an eminent Testimony of the
Divine Law, and the Chinesses astonished at so great a courage.

Such another thing was done by the same Mandarine, although the end and reason
which moved him to do it, were not known. Of the six and thirty which he had
apprehended and tormented, he set four and twenty of them at liberty; and the
others who did use to assemble the Christians, and preach to them, he sent
before the six chief Tribunals; where they were all Bastinadoed, some at one,
and some at another; the worst Tribunal of all being that of an Eunuch, who
having nothing of Humanity in him but his outward shape, not considering they
had bin already tormented and Bastinadoed by the other Mandarines, commanded
twenty blows apiece to be giving to each of them; by which the good Christians
were so weakened, that the^ were feign to be laid upon boards, and to be carried
back upon men's shouldiers into Prison.

But they were not used so by the Quecum (who is equal to one of our Dukes)
before whom they were brought: for seeing them in so miserable a condition by
reason of the torments and stripes they had received, he did not only not cause
them to be beaten, but complaining of their ill usage, said publicly, That he
was well informed concerning the Religion they professed; and that it was a
good and true Law, and so sent them away with good words; that Gentile giving a
clear Testimony to our Holy Faith, to which those Christians had born witness
with their blood.

While these things were doing, the chief Mandarine of the six before whom they
were presented, drew up the Sentence against them; which being faithfully
translated out of the Chinesse language, runs thus: The Law of the Lord of
heaven is false, it blinds the understanding of men, and causes dangerous
assemblies. Of late years there was a Memorial presented against it to the
King, who did very severely prohibit it. And now they who follow that Law, are
convinced not to have obeyed his commands. Wherefore according to the Laws of
the Kingdom there ought to be an inquisition made against them, and they to be
rigorously punished. But considering they are men of little knowledge, or
understanding, we do order, that the strangers of other Countries be sent home
with a Guard to convoy them; and that they shall all have the charges of their
journey defrayed out of the Kings exchequer: but for the Natives of this Court,
we condemn them to carry a board about their necks for a month (which is a
kind of punishment we have formerly given an account of) and when that time is
expired, they shall be carried before the Tribunal, where they were examined,
and there they shall be admonished to observe the Kings orders, and not to
follow this Law any longer. The Books, Images, and such like things, which were
found with the Christians, shall be kept in the Kings Treasury. Thus far the
sentence of their condemnation.

The Fathers had heard nothing of these proceedings at Nankim, when there
arrived at Hamche^, which is distant from that Court about six days journey by
land, a Christian sent on purpose to give them notice of the dangerous estate
and condition of the Christians at Nankim. Father Roc^a superior of the
Mission chanced to be at that time in Hamcheu, who presently endeavored to
find some remedy for it, by speaking with Doctor Michael, and writing to
Doctor Paul, that by their le^ters they would persuade the Mandrines of Nankim
to show some favor to the Christians; which accordingly they did, with much
zeal and efficacy, especially Docto^r Paul, who observed to them in his
writings fourteen principal points, wherein our Holy Law did differ from the
Sect of Palien Kiao. The letters had not that effect that was hoped of them,
some of the Mandarines being rendered very averse to them by the power and
persuasion of Xin, who actually enjoying at that time the dignity of Colao,
every one endeavored to gain his favor by following his inclinations. And
that was plainly seen by their answers, which are not wont to be in such
terms to Mandarines of so considerable Quality as those Christians were. The
answer to Doctor Paul was, that the Law, which his Lordship said was different
from that Sect of Palien Kiao, was not so, but the very same, both of them
professing not to obey the King nor his Ministers; as was plainly to be seen by
the Fathers, who being banished out of the Kingdom by the Kings order, yet were
so audacious, that they still remained there, and other things of the same
strain; which evidently showed, that they who gave such answers, were changed,
as also for whose sake they gave them.

This unpleasing answer was followed by a thing of greater danger; (for in
China, even in the quietest times, it is necessary to live very retired and
reservedly) which was the Intelligence, that Doctor Paul had received, how
that, not many days before, two Mandarines of the same City of Nankim had
presented a Memorial to the King against the Law of Christ; both against the
Chinesses who were followers of it, as also the Fathers, that did preach and
propagate it, accusing Doctor Michael by name for being a Christian, and for
keeping the Fathers in his House; they did also accuse several others for
keeping of them; and although they did not name Doctor Paul, yet it might be
easily understood, that they meant him for one.

This news did require their most serious deliberation; for when a business is
brought before the King, it is always of dangerous consequence, and does ever
shave or flea.

Doctor Paul immediately wrote to the Fathers, that in what place soever they
were, they should without any farther delay resolve to retire themselves, and
to break off all commerce with all manner of persons whatsoever, although they
thought them never so safe or trusty, giving way to the necessity of the times,
as at that present was very convenient for them. Doctor Michael was of the
contrary opinion; at least he would not suffer those which lived in his own
House to hide themselves. Doctor Ignatius his Son also, who dwelt in the
City of Kiati^, was of opinion, that the Fathers should keep themselves private
and concealed; for if any thing should be decreed to their disadvantage, it
could not be executed so suddenly, but that there would be time enough for them
to make their escape, especially since the Mandarines of the City were their
friends.

Although this were a very young man, yet his Father, who lived then at the
Court, was much satisfied with his opinion in that case. Nevertheless, it was
judged more expedient, that we should withdraw our selves, before the storm
appeared, and that afterward those, who could not hide themselves, should fly,
before they were apprehended by justice. But the difficulty was, where to find
another secret place beside that where we were, which was in a very populous
City, and among many of our trusty and faithful friends: and because it was so
difficult to lie hid in that place, we did think of searching out some desert;
but by reason that China is so populous, that was no easy thing to be done: At
length it was resolved, that we should all quit the habitations we were in,
some going to the Country Houses of the same Christians, some to the sepulchers
of others, with a caution, that if there did not come a favorable answer from
the King, there should be boats provided in a readiness for to carry them up
and down the Rivers, where the not remaining long in any certain place, would
be a good way to secure them, till the Lord should direct them to a better.

During this time, Doctor Paul kept a man on purpose in the City of Sucheu
(where the Viceroy of the Province has his Residence; for he may not dwell in
the City of Nankim, because it is the Kings Court, as well as Pekim) that
as soon as the Kings answer came, he might presently bring him word of it: and
according to the style of that Country, it was conceived, that it might be
delayed yet many days. The Fathers expected ten weeks to their great
discommodation and inconvenience, because those things which might easily have
been had in the Towns and Cities, could not be come by but with a great deal
of trouble, as they lay thus hid; neither did any answer come in all this time:
for which there were several reasons given, but the best seemed to be, that
these Memorials against our Holy Faith were sent with an Order, that they
should first be registered by Xin, for whose sake they were presented, who at
the same time was put out of his Office. So that when the Memorials came, he
had now no power nor authority to prefer them; and so they were not presented
at all; for if they had been presented, whether the King had answered them or
no, we should have been sure to have had notice of it. Thus the storm ended,
which seemed to threaten us with a greater danger; and the effect of it was
turned upon Xin, although upon another occasion: for it is most certain, that
at the same time, when the Petitions against the Law of Christ were sent from
the Southern to the Northern Court, the King took away his Office of Colao, by
reason the Mandarines of Pekim had petitioned against him; and although they
had endeavored his disgrace for 16 months before, yet they could never bring
it about till then. So that it seems, the Lord did reserve the fall of this
Tyrant, for that time wherein he might have done the greatest mischief, and
would show us, what trust and confidence we ought to have in him upon the like
occasions.

Our Doctors being of the opinion, that the Memorials, neither were, nor would
be presented, the Fathers returned all to their Ancient Residencies; although
they were obliged to use more caution, and to make fewer assemblies; and this
the rather, because they did not yet receive good news from Nankim, where there
were new edicts published against the Christian Religion: which news, although
on the one side it occasioned much grief to the Fathers, yet on the other side
it gave them much comfort by the relation of the Martyrdom of a certain
Christian, called Andrew, concerning whose life and actions very much might be
said, and especially of that courage and constancy which he showed in all the
torments they gave him: which is so much the more admirable in a Chinesse;
because that Nation is by nature very cowardly and timorous: yet we have had
certain experience, that even to this day the Christian Chinesses, in all
occasions of Persecutions and Troubles that have happened to them, have ever
continued firm in the Faith: (so that by the grace of God they have not been
wanting to Martyrdom, but Martyrdom has been wanting to them,) as was seen
in those of Nankim, and was proved in this good Christian Andrew.

This Andrew was borne in the Province of Kia^si, where after he had lived many
years, he removed from thence into the Province of Nankim, where having had
some information concerning our religion, he came up the Fathers; and after he
had been well instructed by them in the principal points of our Faith, he
received Baptism from them, together with the name of Andrew. Some few days
after his whole family was Baptized by the hand of Father Rocca, who was
Superior there at that time. After his Baptism, Andrew became a pattern and
example to the rest of the Christians, by endeavoring to communicate to others
the good which he had received, and to draw others to Christ, which succeeded
very happily, very many being Baptized by his persuasions. He had a great
devotion to the B. Virgin, and was the most zealous man of a whole fraternity,
which before the Persecution of Nankim was dedicated to her in our Church
there: and after that, when the Fathers were banished, he built an oratory in
his own house to the honor of that Holy Mother; whither he used to assemble
the Christians, and to exhort them to devotion and observance of our Holy Law.
At the time the Fathers were imprisoned there, and the other Christians were
divided into five prisons, he without any fear of that danger to which he did
expose himself, took upon him to serve them, to visit, comfort and assist
them, especially the Fathers, with many alms at his own expense; not being
content to perform these offices of Charity in his own person only, he
employed in them also a little boy that was his son, whom he sent to the
Fathers, that they might make use of him to send him of errants, and other
little occasions. Likewise at our return thither, he lent us his house for our
habitation when we went to visit the Christians of that place, and for an
Infirmary, or Hospital, when any were sick, whom he served and took care of
with great charity and affection. These and other good works did the Lord pay
him by crowning him with Martyrdom, and making him to suffer death for his
sake. The good old man patiently suffered the torments and Bastinadoes
abovementioned; and when as the last which he received, beside that they were
very cruel ones, were also laid on upon the wounds and stripes, but lately
inflicted on him before other Tribunalls, it is no wonder, that an old man, who
though he were strong in courage, yet was but weak in body, should render his
life to the violence of those torments; since the youngest of those Christians,
and those of the most robust complexion did hardly escape with life. Thus he
dyed, leaving that Church much edified by his good example, and much afflicted
for the loss of him. For he was, as it were a Father to them all, and in the
absence of the Fathers, a Master. He was buried decently in a particular
Sepulcher by himself, to the end that one day he may have those honors, which
are due to him, performed with greater solemnity.

CHAP. 12.
How things began to be quiet and settled, and how the Fathers were sent for to
Court by order of the Mandarines.
IN the mean time there came better news from Nankim, whither the Fathers had
sent a man on purpose, with letters from themselves, as also from our Doctors,
to comfort and strengthen the Christians there in their afflictions and
troubles; although the Lord had so filled their hearts with courage and
contentment, that they had little need of any humane consolation. This man
returned with a confirmation of the news, which was already spread abroad,
assuring them that all things were quiet: the same also was written by the
Christians in their letters. For the Mandarines, seeing that the plot did not
take, and that the Memorialls were not presented at Pekim, and on the other
side, that Xin was turned out of his Office, they presently changed their style
and opinion; they set the Christians at liberty, and also moderated the
punishment that had been imposed upon them. Only there remained in prison three
Christians of Chincheo, who expected every day to be sent into their own
Province, as it afterward fell out. From Pekim also the Father, who lay hid
there, wrote, that all the hopes of our enemies of Nankim were quite overthrown
at that Court; and that the face of things was so changed, since the departure
of Xin, that our friends did counsel him to treat with the Christian
Mandarines, and such other of them, as (although they were Gentiles, yet) had a
good affection for us, to find out some way for him to go publicly abroad,
and for us to be introduced thither again.

By this time there had six or seven years passed, since the first Persecution
of Nankim; and the Tartars made a cruel war upon the Chinesses, and had
already not only defeated several of their armies, but also gained diverse
places from them in the Province of Leaotum; neither did they well know which
way to put a stop to the advance of their army. Nevertheless, the Fathers did
endeavor to find some way to manifest themselves to the Kingdom, and to
appear in public, according to the tenor of what had been written them from
Pekim: But because their banishment was decreed by the King, they found no
small difficulty in the business. Notwithstanding, the Christians, and the
Doctors that were our friends resolved to frame a Memorial; taking the
occasion from the war with the Tartars, and the extremities to which the
Chinesses were reduced, and to present it to the King; setting forth in the
first place the misfortunes of the war, the mortality and damages which they
had received; the loss of their Towns and Cities, without having been able
for the space of so many years, after such infinite expense of treasure and
loss of men, either to divert or stop the course of that calamity. In the
second place they did remonstrate the error, which was committed in banishing
the Europaean Fathers, who, beside that they were virtuous, learned, and men
capable of the management of great affairs, they were also very great
Mathematicians, who without doubt had particular secrets, and extraordinary
inventions, which might be made use of to their extraordinary advantage in that
great strait wherein the Kingdom was at present: and that if they were in the
Court, as they had formerly been, that they would be able to reduce the
affairs of state into a better condition. Last of all they added, that it was
probable, that they were not all yet departed, and that it was not possible,
that so many men should be able to pass through so great a Kingdom, through so
many strait and uncouth ways; That his Majesty should do well to give order
for diligent search to be made through the whole Kingdom, to see if any of them
were still to be found there, and to send for them to Court, that they might be
serviceable to him in this present conjuncture of the war.

The Fathers made great opposition against this particular means which was
taken for their re-establishment; by reason they were altogether ignorant in
matters of war and arms, and all things belonging to that profession: and
therefore they did not think it convenient, that they should be petitioned for
under that pretense. To this, as I understand, Dr. Leo who was one of the
chief Actours in this Tragedy, presently made answer, Fathers, let not this
trouble you, for this pretense of arms shall stand us in no more stead, then
the needle does a Taylour, who when he has drawn through the thread he sows
with, and the garment is finished, presently takes the needle away; let your
Reverences once get in by the Kings order, and the arms to fight with, shall
be turned into pens to write. In conclusion, the Memorial was drawn up very
well; they having excellent skill to frame a petition after their manner; it
was presented in the Chancery of Petitions, and they took such pains in
soliciting their friends, that they got it passed, and presented to the Kings
hands, with such good success, that immediately he made a favorable reference
of it to the Council of war; who did not only favor the disigne, but added
also, that they did verily believe, that the Fathers by their skill in the
Mathematics would be able so to enchant the Tartars, that they should not be
able to manage their arms against them. They therefore immediately gave order,
that they should be sought out with all possible diligence: But there was no
need to take much pains to find them out, for he that was to seek them, knew
well enough where to have them.

Father Rocca, our Superior, who resided at that time in the Southern parts,
had presently news of the Kings order; and that he was to send two Fathers to
that Court. It is almost incredible what joy there was both among the Fathers
and the rest of the Christians; they knowing, that this was the most certain
way, for the Fathers to return publicly into the Kingdom, and for the
propagation of the Gospel, with the same liberty they formerly enjoyed.

Father Nicolas Longobardus and Father Emanuel Dias were named for this
expedition; who as soon as they had fitted themselves for their journey,
departed for Pekim; where they made their entrance publicly. And because some
years had now passed, since beards of the Europaean fashion had been seen in
that City, there was so great a concourse of people to see them, that they
could hardly make their way through them. The first thing they did, was to
present themselves to the Tribunal of war, (the care of seeking them out
having been recommended to the Mandarines of that Tribunal) who received them
with all manner of courtesy and civility, and proffered to take the care
themselves of their lodging and accommodation, which the Fathers would by no
means accept, excusing themselves, that they had not yet merit enough to accept
of their offer: but gave them very great thanks, and promised to receive their
kindness, when they should see a fit time for it. But the true reason was,
partly that they might not be burdensome to them, and partly that they might
remain the freer by having the less obligation to be employed in their
affairs of war; under which title they had been brought in thither. As for a
House, it seemed good to the Christians, that they should return to that,
where they had formerly made their abode for so many years, and where they were
yet well known and beloved of the neighborhood: Besides that, by that means
the world would more clearly understand, upon how little reason they were
banished; and moreover, they should save building of a new Church, the old one
having been bought on purpose by a Christian: only there was great need of
repayring; for the buildings of China, consisting principally of wood, are not
so strong and lasting as ours: But Dr. Ignatius, who resided at that time in
the Court, took upon him to repair all at his own charges, and did
accommodate them very excellently, especially the Church; and when every thing
was ready, the Fathers went thither to dwell; where they do yet inhabit to this
very day, meddling only with such things as belong to their profession, without
being ever spoken to concerning war, Tartars or Arms.

The affairs of the Court being thus happily accomplished, and the Fathers
dwelling freely and openly in their ancient House, they began to set on foot
their former exercises. They did cultivate and perfect the knowledge of the
Christians; they preached to the Gentiles; they received the visits, which the
Mandarines and their friends did pay them, with the same familiarity as
formerly, and without any other cautions, but such as are at all times
necessary in China. This security and liberty in the Court by public
approbation, was in a little while after communicated to the other Houses,
where the rest of the Fathers did reside. So that by little and little,
preaching and other exercises of religion were so happily increased and
enlarged, that in the year 1628, and 29. whilst we lived peaceably in the
places of our abode, a door was opened to the Gospel, and the way cleared to
the conversion of the Gentiles, without finding any opposition, or resistance,
to the designs which God had encouraged us to undertake; although it was
always necessary to make some Magistrate our friend in the place of our
employment.

In the same measure that our liberty increased, the Gospel was likewise
divulged in several parts; new Residencies were set up, with Houses and
Churches belonging to them, and Fathers were sent to make their abode at them.
Two, beside Oratories, were instituted in the Province of Fokien, both of them
very numerous in Christians. In the Province of Xansi, there was one set up,
and in that of Xunsi, another, as also another in the Province of Honan, all
which do flourish at this day in a copious Christianity. At my departure
thence, there was another beginning, which is now finished, having a Church and
some store of Christians, and they did resolve to send some Fathers to reside
there. But because hereafter there will be an account given of them all in
particular, I will stay no longer upon this subject.

The Fathers returned to their ancient Houses, (which were five in all before
the persecution) after they had repaired and put them in some handsome
condition. That of Pekim, (with the accommodation of the House and Church, as
is abovesaid,) had three Fathers, and one Lay-Brother, who labored very
successefully in increasing the number of Christians. That of Hamcheu had a new
House and Church, and more capacious than the former; which was indeed very
necessary, by reason of the great number of Christians, both Old and new ones,
of which there are some made every day. That of Kiamsi had likewise a new Church
and House situated in the most public Street of that City. That of Canton
was let alone, not only because (before) it could not be continued as the rest
were; but also out of consideration that it was better to leave a place so
subject to storms and troubles, and in stead thereof to take another, where we
might find more profit and security. Nevertheless, the Christians there are
very carefully visited every year,

At the House of Nankim we had enough to do; for the Christians of that Church
could not endure, that they having been the first in persecutions and troubles,
and the most exercised in them, should be the last in spiritual favors; and
not only the last; but even when other Houses were well provided with Fathers,
their Church only should want them. The Fathers also did much desire a
Residency there, and did therefore very frequently visit them. But to set up a
public and open House, was very difficult, by reason of the persecutions that
had happened there. But at length, all difficulties were overcome; and a
Residencie was instituted there, although it were late first; which, next under
God, we owe to Dr. Paul, who that he might always do good, did this even after
his death, in this manner.

The Fathers had no other hope of this business, but the opportunity of some
Christian Mandarine or friend, who should come to govern that City; that under
his protection they might be introduced with greater facility and security. It
happened about that time, that a Disciple of Doctor Paul's was sent thither to
be President of the Council of War; and as the Doctor was very vigilant in
this matter, he presently helped the Fathers to that which they desired; that
Mandarine being of great authority, and being his Disciple, he would do
whatsoever he should require of him. This overture pleased the Fathers very
well: and because they would send thither an experienced person, the place
being of such great danger and such great importance, they did for some time
retard the execution of it, because they were to take a Father away from some
other Place, which so was to remain unprovided. In the mean while Doctor
Paul fell sick, who was at that time actually Colao in the Court; yet did not
his sickness hinder him from writing and sending a letter to the Mandarine in
favor of us. But his sickness increasing, by that time the letter arried at
Nankim, the good Doctor Paul was gone to a better life. But the Mandarine
received the letter, (which the Father gave him with some hesitation) not as
from a dead friend, but from a living Master: he received also the Father with
all demonstrations of courtesy and good will. By his favor and order a House
was taken; and the other Mandarines seeing how he used the Father, to please
him (for all desire to second the great ones) they did likewise show him many
favors, not only with their authority and frequent visits, but also by giving
him money toward the buying of the Houses. In this manner was that Church well
provided for, and the Christians comforted, who have been since very much
increased.

About that time, which was in the year 1632 the affairs of that Church did
proceed in a much different manner, from what they had done formerly; so that
it seemed that those storms had only raised the little barque of that Church
to a greater height; not only in the number of the Baptized, which without
comparison every year increased, but also the peace and quiet they enjoyed, and
the liberty they had to preach: so that there was a general knowledge of our
Holy belief dispersed over the whole Kingdom; insomuch that there is hardly a
place in it, whither, either by books written upon that subject, or by the
acquaintance of Christians, or by the report of Gentiles themselves, it is not
arrived; and this not only in the innermost parts of the Kingdom; where for
the most part the Fathers are employed, but also in the skirts and extremities
thereof. I will bring some examples, which will clearly demonstrate it.

There came sometimes to the City of Macao (which is inhabited by Portugheses,
and is situated on the Confines of China) some Christian Mandarines about
state affairs; who have not only publicly declared themselves to be
Christians, but have also made it appear that they were well instructed in the
principles of our faith; and have carried themselves with so much edification;
and sanctity of life in the exercise of all Christian virtues, that they have
much edified that people, and may be examples to Christians of much greater
antiquity.

In the year 1631 the Portughesse ships setting sail from Macao toward Giappon
(as usually they do every year) about the height of Fokien a Province of China,
one of the ships was cast away; and all the men drowned, except only 12
persons, who saved themselves in the long boat almost by miracle, by reason it
happened in the night, and the wind blew very strong, and the seas ran
exceeding high: yet at length with much ado; although they had neither needle
nor compass, they came a shore, and landed in the said Province of Fokien.
Presently the people flocked about the poor shipwrackt men who had more need of
food and clothing than of being examined who they were; but because the
Hollanders (of whom the Chinesses have a very ill conceit) did use about that
time to exercise much piracy and robbery upon those coasts, they put them in
prison, where by reason they were not only strangers, but were also accounted
enemies, they endured extraordinary want and misery. Many people went to see
them out of curiosity, because they were strangers, who as they are seldom
admitted into that Country, are thought a rare spectacle. Among the rest, there
were some Christians (which is that I would show) who were led to see them out
of the same curiosity that others had: and taking notice that they carried
beads, and crosses about them, and that they used to say over their beads, they
judged them to be of the same profession as themselves were: therefore they
made diligent inquiry about it; and being assured that they were Christians,
although they were strictly forbid to show them any kindness, yet Charity,
which is always ingenious, found a way for them to help them, and to provide
them with what they were able. To cloth them they used this pious shift: they
would go into the prison (for as I have fomerly said, he that visits a
prisoner must of necessity go into the prison) having a double suit of clothes
one over the other: and as soon as they were got in, they would very
dexterously slip off their under garments, and give them to those poor men, and
go out again only with their own clothes, without any discovery of so
seasonable a charity, for the relief of those unfortunate wretches.

Whilst I lived in the Province of Kiamsi at Nancham, the capital City thereof;
where we have a Church and House, there came thither a Christian of another
City, on purpose to confer with me concerning his consciennce, and other
spiritual matters: and because the place where he lived was far distant from
us, and he could not often make that journey; his custom was to make a pretty
long stay when he did come, and then, after his general confession and
penance was ended, to return home again. One time at his departure I desired
him to use his best endeavors to persuade his kindred, friends, neighbors and
other persons, to embrace our Holy Faith, and that if he found any disposition
or inclination in them to it, he should presently give me notice of it. He did
so, and about a month after, he sent me an invitation to come thither, for that
there was an opportunity of casting my nets: I went thither, and because he had
not a House big enough to receive the company that would come to treat with
me, I did accommodate my self in one of those Houses, which the Chinesses call
Zutham, and do belong to a whole Family in common, where at set times of the
year the whole Family do assemble themselves to treat of the affairs of that
Family, and of the behavior and manner of living of some of that Kindred; and
there they reprove, chastise, give orders, etc. these Houses for the most part
stand empty, only there is some one or other, who keeps and takes care of
them. Near unto that dwelt a Mandarine; who having heard of my arrival, and
that I was a stranger, drawn as I believe by his curiosity, came presently to
visit me. But as we do not use in these visits to let slip any opportunity of
advancing the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I entered into discourse with him
concerning that matter. He asked me thereupon many extravagant questions; and
not being, as it seemed, much pleased with my answers, he took his leave of me
with a great deal of civility; and, when he had done, he went and accused me
to the second Governor of the City; telling him, that there dwelt a stranger;
that the times were dangerous; and moreover, that I taught a new law, which was
contrary to theirs, and prejudicial to the State; that therefore it did behoove
his Lordship to use all care and diligence to prevent the mischief that might
ensue upon it. Less than this would have been sufficient to have caused me to
be apprehended, if the Mandarine had not been a cautious and discreet person.
Nevertheless, he sent some of his Officers for me: there came into the House
where I was about thirty or forty men, some of them being sent, and others
only out of curiosity to see me; as also the Tifam of that street, (who is
obliged to give account of what ever passes there) and brought an order for me
to appear before the Governor. Just in that instant in came the Christian who
had sent for me, who was a Litterato, and well esteemed in that City; and
taking me by the hand, would needs go along to give an account of me to the
Governor; where he found also the Mandarine that had accused me.

The Christian told the Mandarine, that I lived in the Metropolis of the
Province, and that I had a friendship with the Viceroy and other Mandarines of
Quality (which was very true:) and that for the Law which I taught, it was no
secret, but that I did preach it openly at the Court; and that my companions
did the same every where publicly; as the Mandarines of the Metropolis knew
very well. The Governor having heard these words, from a person of that merit,
would make no further inquiry into the cause, but remitted it to the first
Governor, whom we found on his Tribunal. The Tifam began to give him an
account of the business, but he being not well instructed in it, could not
make him understand it. Then the Christian began to speak, and to give an
account of what had happened, in the presence of almost an infinite multitude
of people; of which number there being two, who, hearing him talk of the Law of
God, signed themselves with the Sign of the Cross in the sight of a young man
who stood near them: The young man asked them, If they were Christians: They
answered, No, but that they had a friend who was a Christian, and that he had
taught them to make the sign of the Cross, and to rehearse several prayers.
The Governor, as soon as he heard of Thien Chu Kiao, that is, The Law of the
Lord of heaven; he said: this law has many followers in my Country, and is a
very good Law: what would the Father have else? The Christian answered:
nothing, my Lord, but only to give an account of himself in answer to what he
is accused of by Hioquon (for that was the name of the Mandarine that had
complained of me) near unto whom he dwells. Then the Governor replied, Tell
the Father he lives in no good neighborhood; and wish him to find a better.
The Christian answered, since your Lordship would have him change his
habitation, be pleased to command he should have a House allowed him during the
short time he is to make his abode in this City. The advice pleased him, and
presently he gave order, there should be some Chambers provided for me in a
certain Palace, and in them I lived during the whole time that I spent there:
so that by the occasion of the others turning me out of the House, I came to
get one that was far better.

As a Portughese Carrack was on her way from Macao toward Manila, she struck
unfortunately upon the sands of Pulosisi, and was cast away; there being hardly
forty persons saved in the long boat; who steering as well as they could
toward the next land, after some days, arrived at the Island of Hainan, which
is but a little way distant from the Western part of the Province of Canton,
and from Macao two days sail with a good wind. As Soon as they landed, they
were presenly apprehended according to the custom of that Island, with a noise
and stir which boded no good to those poor shipwrackt men. They found some
Christians in that Island, who were very helpful to them, and among the rest
there was a Mandarine called Ignatius, who had been a long time a Christian, as
also his whole Family, a very good and devout person, as I had formerly known
him to be at Nankim. It pleased God for the comfort and solace of those poor
Portugheses, that he should govern the Island at that time. As Soon as he had
understood what had happened to those prisoners, fearing what might fall out,
he commanded the cause to be brought unto his Tribunal. When therefore the
poor prisoners were brought into his presence; and after that he understood
they were Christians, he not only commiserated their condition, but presently
commanded they should be set at liberty, and kept them for some time in his
Palace. It is hard to express the Charity and Love, with which he entertained
them, endeavoring to refresh and comfort them after the labors and dangers
they had passed, conversing with them so familiarly and so cordially, and
giving them such an example in his own person of all Christian virtues, that
the Portughesses did afterward very highly commend him, both in Macao and many
other places, and not only his own carriage and behavior, but also that of his
household; but above all, they did admire the care and diligence with which he
gave them notice both of Fasts and Holy Days, to the end they might observe
them: so that while they stayed there, he served them also in stead of a Parish
Priest.

On the day of S. Agnes, which was that whereon his wife was Baptized, and
called by the same name, he made a very great Feast: first a Spiritual one in
his Chapel, where they all met to do their devotions, and recommend themselves
unto God; and after that, he gave them a Sumptuous and Splendid banquet. After
he had entertained them a good while, and that they had recovered their health
and strength again, he lent them a Barque and Mariners to carry them to
Macao. I could bring many other examples, which I omit for brevities sake,
seeing these are sufficient to prove what I said before; That the Christian
Religion, one way or other, is dispersed over the whole Kingdom of China.

CHAP. 13.
The life and death of Doctor Leo: and the Conclusion of this History.
THe Chinesse Christianity has so great an obligation to the singular piety,
and charitable assistance afforded them upon all occasions by Doctor Leo, that
I cannot finish this relation without giving a brief Essay of his life and
death, which may serve also for a testimony of the great zeal of those new
Christians; although I shall forbear to mention many things concerning his
sanctity; as also several graces and gifts conferred upon him by Almighty
God, referring the Reader to the yearly letters, where they are more
particularly set down.

Dr. Leo was borne in the City of Hamcheu in the Province of Chekiam, and
having happily finished the course of his studies, he removed to the Court of
Pekim, where he obtained the degree of Doctor, and executed the first
employment, which was conferred upon him after his degree. There he saw and
conversed with Father Matthaeus Riccius, as did also the greatest part of the
chief Officers and Letterati; moved by a curiosity of seeing men of Europe.
This Leo, besides that he was of a quick and vivacious wit, had a most eager
and intense desire of knowledge; by which means he did the more engage himself
to an inward friendship and conversation with the Father, being allured
thereunto by the solidity and novelty of our Sciences, and particularly by the
delight he took in some maps and other curiosities; so that he could have been
willing to have lived always in his company. In the mean while, together with
humane Sciences, the Father did instruct him in the heavenly wisdom of the Law
of God; and he was grown so skillful and well versed in it, that he was able
to help the Father in the correction and augmentation of a Catechism, which he
had made some years before, and was then about to re-print it. He did therein
much admire the great conformity of our Mysteries, with the principalls of
reason, the concordance, order, and admirable consequence of the points of our
Faith: and although he did not at that time give an entire credence to them,
nevertheless he was much delighted to see every thing therein so well ordered
and disposed; being wont often to say, That if these things were not true, they
were wisely invented, and very conformable to the light of nature. He continued
the same affection toward the Father for some years; wherein he much assisted,
both with his counsel and authority, the foundation of that House; and indeed
he was the first that did encourage the Father to the enterprise; and furnished
him with money to buy the ground, and to build the Church.

All these good works, accompanied with the fastings and Penance which he
performed, while he was yet a Gentile, were as so many dispositions, to fit and
prepare him for the reception of that divine light, which the Lord was pleased
to communicate unto him. He was then satisfied in the truth of our Holy faith,
and did much desire to be baptized; which notwithstanding Father Riccius would
not consent unto, by reason of a certain impediment which he had at that time;
but being afterward sick and in great danger of death, the Father was
constrained to Baptize him. And immediately after, the Lord was pleased, by
means and virtue of that Sacrament and the other of Extreme Unction, to
deliver him from that death, which he expected every hour; as he himself
confessed during his whole life, and always gave particular thanks to God for
it.

Not long after, he returned home to his own House; where, having busied
himself one evening in breaking and burning all the Idols he could find, Dr.
Michael his ancient friend, (though yet a Gentile and very zealous in the
worship of Idols, and observant in their superstition) came in to visit him. He
was much astonished at the sight, and could not forbear to reprove him for it:
but by the others answer, he received so much satisfaction, that he had an
earnest desire to hear and understand better the Law of Christ, which he
afterward received; and the same Dr. Leo assisted him as Godfather at his
Baptism; for about that time there came to live in Leo's House, the Fathers,
Lazarus, Catanaeus, and Nicolas Trigaultius, who did often discourse there,
with Dr. Michael; he carried them to a Country house of his, (whither he went
often to dwell,) that he might with more freedom and leisure discourse with
them concerning the Law of God: he doing this often, was at length converted
and Baptized; wherein Dr. Leo had the greatest share and merit; conferring a
most important benefit upon this Church, by the conversion of a person of that
Quality, who for many years together, in the heat and trouble of the greatest
persecutions, did ever receive, protect, and favor us above measure.

From that day forward these two Doctors, Michael and Leo were the heads and
pillars of our Holy faith in those Kingdoms: for, in the greatest fury of that
persecution, wherein the Fathers were banished the Kingdom, eight of them
concealed themselves in that City; not only maintaining what they had already
gained, but also increasing it so much, that whereas about 8 or 10 years
before, there were but three Churches in all China, we have at this day many in
eight Provinces, as also twelve Houses, the number of the faithful being very
much increased every where.

Dr. Leo made continual progress in the Christian religion, and showed in
act, upon all occasions, what he had before embraced and resolved in his mind.
When he went to take possession of the first office, which was given him after
he was a Christian, he was advertised by the Ministers and Officers, that,
according to the custom, he should go and worship, and take his oath before
the Idols, which in great number were placed in a certain Hall of that Palace,
where he was to lodge. The Doctor went, and being come to the room where the
Idols were, the Ceremony he performed was, to cause them to be all overturned
and thrown to the ground, and then to be broken in pieces: so that the
Sergeants themselves, who were constrained to execute this Commandment, which
seemed to them a very great impiety, said among themselves, Sure this new Lord
of ours is not very well in his wits. So great was the horror and hatred which
he had conceived against the devil. He was in this particular very severe and
terrible all the time of his life; neither did he account them men, that were
deceived in that point, and had so little sense, as to believe Idols to be
gods; and those, who had any occasion to hear the Law of God, or to read the
books which treated of it, and did not judge it to be true, to want brains,
and to be void of understanding. He persuaded himself, that all they who could
read, and took a delight in the reading of books, that it was not possible, but
that they should have a great passion for the Learning and Sciences of Europe;
and that by means of them, they must needs arrive at the knowledge of the true
God, and receive his Holy law. Therefore his greatest care always was to
persuade the Fathers to apply themselves to the translating the books of
Europe; and he himself did help them in it all he could, which was not a
little.

Hence it was, that ever since he knew the Fathers, which was about the space
of thirty years, he almost always busied himself in this exercise; which he
followed with so much study and application, that even in the Country, at
recreations, visits and banquets, he never went without a book in his sleeve,
or in the chair, wherein he was carried on men's shoulders* and when he was
alone, he did either read or write; although it was more troublesome to him,
than it would have been to another of less ingenuity and capacity, by reason
of his want of sight in one eye, which he had almost lost; and the little sight
he had in the other which was left: so that in writing or reading he was feign
almost to touch the paper with his eye. And truly he made such progress in our
Sciences, that he could have discoursed upon any subject better than many in
Europe, that esteem themselves learned men.

He perfectly understood the first six books of Euclid; which are now
translated into the Chinesse tongue; he had learned all the kinds of our
Arithmetic, with many particular rules and subtleties which are taught in that
Art; of which subject he composed seven Tomes; he was very well acquainted
with all that belongs to the Sphere, and such like curiosities. But what is
most of all, he understood very well, and helped to translate the books of
Aristotle de Caelo; together with the questions, which are handled upon them by
the School of Conimbra; so that he had perfectly penetrated into that matter:
and finally, he learnt a great part of our Logic, concerning which he left 20
Tomes in the Chinesse language to be printed; besides, he discoursed so
pertinently of all these and other matters, with so much ease and delight, that
it was not so facile for others, who were well versed in them, to follow him.
He never made account of those curious commodities, which came from Europe, and
which were so much este^med by others; all his delight and content was, to see
some new and curious book, that was brought out of Europe: Then would he sigh
to see himself old and alone, not finding in other Christians the zeal, which
he had of a thing so important, to the conversion of that Kingdom, as was the
helping us in the translation of such books. With the Fathers he never
discoursed of any thing, but either of God, or of our Sciences. It was a know^
thing among us, that when he saw us, (which he did many times a week,) the
first thing he would ask, was, What book it was we were about translating; and
if he knew the subject, how much we had already translated? And I can speak it
with truth, that of fifty works which the Fathers have translated into the
Chinesse tongue, both of Divinity and other Sciences, among which there are
some which do consist of many Tomes, there is hardly one which has not passed
through his hands, he either correcting it himself, or helping us to do it, or
revising and fitting it for a new impression; or else re^ding it of more
Authority, with the addition of prologues and other compositions of his own.
He had an unspeakable pleasure in those works, neither could ^e have a greater
Present sent him, than one of our books newly printed in the Chinesse language.

From hence there grew in him a great (...) i^satible desire, wherein he seemed
to consume himself; which was to have many Fathers come into China; and it was
so vehement in him, that it made him fall into complaints against our
Superiors, saying, They did not understand, because they could not see with
their eyes the importance of that business; and that therefore they did not
supply that want so much as was necessary. One day falling into a great heat
upon this subject, the Father with whom he discoursed, mildely replied, Sir, we
thank you for your zeal, and do acknowledge the favor you show us, in
complaining on this manner; but our Superiors have many places to succor and
supply, and it is not possible for them to do it to the satisfaction of all. To
which he replied very gracefully, Your Reverence does reprove me for daring to
murmr against our Fathers and Superiors; but it is not so; but only I say,
That I should be very glad to have the opportunity to speak in person with our
Reverend Father General (in these very terms he spoke it in the Chinesse
tongue, and when ever he mentioned the Superiors of the Company, he always
called them Our Fathers and Superiors) because I would very earnestly desire
of him, that he would be pleased seasonably to supply our Kingdom of China
with store of Fathers, by reason the letters and language are so difficult to
be learnt: for ere long your Reverences will be so old and worn out, that you
will not be able to teach those, who are new comers. Thus he spoke, and this
was his opinion concerning it. And a good Testimony thereof will appear in a
letter which he wrote in answer to one, which Father Mugnez Mascaregnas the
Assistant of Portugal had sent him: wherein he offered to send him whatsoever
curiosity or raritie he desired out of Europe: to which point his answer was,
that he neither wished, nor desired any thing, but only that he would earnestly
endeavor to send more of the Society into China.

In proportion to the love he had for the Fathers, his zeal and care for their
studies and health did increase; as also that they should be well accommodated,
and that they should know how to converse with those of the Country, in such
Terms, Ceremonies, and Compliments, as were most esteemed among them:
admonishing, and instructing us with great confidence upon all occasions, when
ever he saw us mistaken in the Style of that Country. He had so tender a
kindness for us, that many times with his own hands he would open our gowns
before to see whether we were sufficiently provided with clothes to defend us
from the cold. When any of us was sick, he caused the medicines, to be boiled
and prepared at his own House, saying, That either through the ignorance, or
unskilfulnesse of our servants they might lose their force, and so the sick
person would receive no help by them. At the first sight, after a little
discourse, he could very well judge of the talents and parts of every one of
us, and had a great facility in gaining our affections. He had a great esteem
and affection for us all in general, but much more for those who were newly
come, and could not yet speak the language; of whom he had always a very great
care, much compassionating the labor and pains they were to take in the study
of that language, and the letters belonging to it; and to encourage them, would
much rejoice at every word, which he heard them bring out, when they began to
speak it. He gave them very particular instructions concerning the manner and
method they were to study it by. He gave them the names of the books to which
they were most to apply themselves; and many times he sent them to them,
written in his own hand, concerning the points and strokes, of which in China
there is a particular Science. It was an incredible consolation, and truly did
cause no less then our admiration, to hear the two Doctors, Leo and Michael
together, when they came both at once, (as they did often,) to our House; for
they scarce spoke of any thing else but of the way how to propagate the Gospel,
and how to protect, defend and authorize the preachers thereof throughout the
whole Kingdom; consulting with themselves to which of their friends they should
recommend them; what books they would advise them to write; to which Province
it were best to go first; and which Father were fittest to be required of the
Superior for such a part. In the end, all their consulations concluded in
sighs, saying: We are old men, to morrow we shall die; whom shall we leave in
our stead to carry on, that which we have seen begun in our days? Sometimes
transported by their affections, they did imagine themselves to be then at the
Court, informing the King himself by their Memorial of the sanctity and
purity of our Christian Faith; and having obtained leave and authority of him
to set up public Churches, they did already in their imagination make choice
of the ground and situation, and design the form of the buildings; otherwhile
they fancied themselves to be accused for this cause, to be laid in prison, and
after that to be beheaded; and all with so much courage and cheerfulness, as
did well show the esteem they made of the honor of Martyrdom; and the ardent
desires they had to lose their lives for the interest of Gods cause.

Neither did he stop at discourses and desires; for I can justly affirm, That
of all the Houses and Churches our Society has in China, there is not one of
them, which Dr. Leo has not helped both to build and to preserve; giving
toward some of them, although he was not rich, a considerable sum of money.

But that zealous love of Leo was most remarkable, in that occasion of
recalling the Fathers to the Court and City of Pekim, where they formerly
resided. He contrived all possible means to effect it, and made use of all
opportunities: and by reason that China was then infested by the Tartars, and
the Court of Pekim in danger, he took advantage by that occasion to
remonstrate to the King, that besides our learning and skill, which might be of
great use to him, in this conjuncture of time, we had also great power and
interest with the inhabitants of Macao, from whom we could easily obtain a
considerable succor of men and arms to his assistance; and the better to
persuade the King and his counsel to it, he used so much Rhetoric, and
produced so many, and such apt and proper examples out of their books and
ancient Chronicles, wherein he was excellently well versed, that I doubt not,
but the Reader would receive much delight, if I should give him a little taste
of that excellent memorial of his, did not that Brevitie, which I have tied my
self to in this relation, forbid it. In conclusion, he did and said so much,
that he obtained his desire; wherein he received no less satisfaction than we
have, and ever shall have obligation to him for it. Nevertheless, he lost the
great office he had, only upon this account, through the malice of his enemies;
who accused him to the King; though they had nothing to lay to his charge, but
the near friendship he had had with Father Matthaeus Riccius; and that he did
believe and profess a certain Law, which that Father taught, and which was
different from the Law of that Kingdom.

But it pleased the Lord to recompense him abundantly for what he then lost;
restoring him 4 or 5 years after to the same place with much more honor and
Fame throughout the whole Kingdom, by means of Dr. Puul, who being also a
Christian, and of so much courage and understanding, as to be able to assist
and favor our affairs, brought it about upon occasion of the reformation of
the Calendar* He accepted of the employment, the better to enable him, together
with Doctor Paul, to promote the interest of the Gospel; and so he began his
journey toward the Court: but, beside the infirmities of his old age, the
length of the voyage, and the excessive cold of the winter, did so weaken him,
that, not many months after his arrival, he ended his life on the day of
All Saints, which was the very day, whereon four years before the first Mass
was said in that House, which he built on purpose to bestow upon the Society;
where at this day is one of the two Residencies, which we have in the City of
Hamcheu.

I will not stand to rehearse the Piety, compuncton, and resentment, with which
he did several times confess himself during his sickness; nor the
consolation with which he received the holy Sacraments of the Communion and
extreme unction, and with what devotion he hearkened to the discourses and
exhortations, which were made to him (at that time by three of the Fathers, who
were present) at his death, (a reward which certainly the Lord was pleased to
bestow upon that love and affection, with which he had always helped and
favored us, from the first time he knew us,) I forbear, I say, to mention
them, by reason any one may imagine them in so learned a man and perfect a
Christian. I will only take notice briefly of what he said at that time to
Doctor Paul; whom he took by the hand, just as he was about to depart, and
after he had given him thanks for the favors he had received of him upon many
occasions, and particularly in that last, he said to him with tears in his
eyes. Sir, I dye much comforted to see with my eyes how well our Fathers
arere-established, and protected by your zeal. I will not recommend them to
you, because I know the place they hold in your heart. My sins have made me
unworthy to have any share in this work, to which you have done me the favor
to call me for your companion. But if after this work is ended you would be
pleased to make use of my name to any thing, which might result to the glory of
God, and the propagation of his most Holy Law, you would do me a high favor;
and so, Sir, I leave upon your Shoulders the Christianity of China. With these
words, which showed sufficiently the esteem he had of the Gospel, and of the
preachers thereof, Doctor Leo ended piously and holily that life; a good part
whereof he had spent in the assistance of this new Church. He dyed on the first
of November 1630 although his memory will always live, in the breasts of the
Laborers of our Society; and we hope, that his example will be preserved in
other generous minds of the Chinesse Nobility.

To this state and condition is the Church of China arrived, after the
continual labor and pains of the Fathers, during fifty eight years; and
truly so happy and prosperous a success could never have been expected from
such difficult beginnings, and such weak means. Nevertheless, from the
contexture of this Narration, it may well be perceived, what pains, trouble,
caution, patience and longanimity have always accompanied this enterprise, and
also upheld it in the greatest persecutions. The zeal and heat of those
persons, who would convert the world perfectly on a sudden, is much to be
commended; and we do esteem, and reverence it in all; nevertheless, in new
Missions, and particularly in such, which are not susceptible of this fire,
which flameth out so suddenly, but do require to be disposed to it by longer
time, we do endeavor to retain them within the limits of prudence, more safe,
and the bounds of patience, more profitable, for that which is pretended to, by
our Society, when ever we meet with any of such a Spirit among us; and if that
will not serve, we send them to the pulpets and auditories of Europe, where
that fire may shine out without any danger of burning. And this is observed by
us in order to the Gentiles.

As for the new Christians, I doubt not at all, but that it is a holy and
desirable thing, presently to fashion and accommodate them to the common way
of the universal Church, to her laws, decrees, statutes, etc. Nevertheless,
we must look how far that is possible; and if possible, whether it be
convenient; and whether it would not be more for the destruction then
edification of such tender plants. Our Savior Christ and the Apostles have
left us this doctrine so clear, that there does not seem any place to be left
for error. St. Ambrose says, It is a property of false Apostles to teach
every thing to every one without difference of persons; the which difference
was always observed by our Savior in his holy doctrine, Aliter enim p^pulis,
aliter loqu^batur discipulis. St. Paul the preacher of the Gentiles, and Master
of preachers, wrote to the Corintbians, Lac vobis potum dedi: (it is well to be
seen, (says St Gregory) that he brought them up and instructed them as
Children: they were newly begotten unto the Gospel, (says St, Ambrose) Ideo
Apostolus, vir divinus, and medicus spiritualis vnicuique secundum viris
illius, doctri^am tradebat.) And to the Galatians he says; Scitis, quia per
infirmitatem carnis evangelizavi vobis. Wherefore accommodating himself to the
weakness of the flesh, the Apostle did preach no higher things to them: says
St. Hierome, Ut infirm^s Galatas lucrifaceret. Of this opinion also is To
status cap. 7. quest. 9. upon St. Mat.

The same St. Paul, when he would lay the foundation of Christianity at
Athens, began with that Inscription, Ig noto deo, or (as St Hierom will have
it) Dijs Asiae, Europe and Lybiae, dijs ignotis and peregrinis: And without
ever reproving those words, or condemning the superstition, (although it was
bad enough) judging it more convenient at the first, he made use of this
darkness to communicate light to them by it. The Apostles in the first
council treated only of the facilitating of the conversion of the Gentiles,
Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris, quam
haec necessaria: ut abstineatis vos ab immolatis sim^lachrorum, and suffocato,
and sanguine. So that in these three things, they did include the whole
obligation of the Ius Positivum to which those new Christians were obliged* and
(what is more) these were (all three) Jewish Ceremonies; which if they should
be observed at this day, would give much scandal. Nevertheless, to facilitate
the conversion of the Gentiles, and to avoid giving Scandal to the Jews, they
were, at that time, judged necessary. The same thing happened about
circumcision, the which S. Paul not only permitted, but even exercised himself
on the person of his disciple Timothy; condescending to the weakness and
ignorance of those first Christians.

Of this opinion was Panormitanus (cap. licet Graecos. de Baptismo and ejus
effect:) where he says, Potest and debet venientes noviter ad fidem tolerare
in moribus and ritibus (...) antiquis: For otherwise, (as Cusanus says) there
would rather be a perturbation than an edification. Oportet. infirmitati
hominum pl^rumque condescendere nisi vergat contra aeternam salutem. (which is
very manifest, every man being chiefly concerned to take care of his own
eternal Salvation, ne cum alijs praedicaverit, ipse reprobus efficiatur:) nam
exactam quae^ere conformitatem in omnibus, est potius pacem turbare. This
opinion likewise is favored by the Gloss, ( in capit. Reus qui, de
paenitentia and remissione.) where it is said, That in favor of those who are
newly converted to the Faith, detrahendum est jure. The Church has often
practiced the same, and particularly in the Council of Florence; where Pope
Eugenius the Fourth did very prudently dissemble with the Greeks, concerning
the point of marriage; for the Greeks not consenting to treat any thing
concerning Marriage, and the Pope having also already determined the point: yet
Synodice, and, Armeniis, in decreto suo, credendum tradens; mirum dictu;
Graecos ob communem concordiam recentur initam, fortius stabiliendam, non
explicit ad hoc credendum obstrinxit; imo pertinaciam e^rum in reliquis,
violata pace, ne resilirent, videns non vidit; vel (ut in Actis Concilij
pa^et)* non condemnavit. If this was done to Persons of that authority, quality
and antiquity: what shall we say of poor Neophytes, but only that of St.
Gregory? Duris mentibus simul omnia abscindere impossible esse not dubium est:
quia is, qui locum ascendere nititur, gradibus vel passibus, non saltibus
elevatur. So that in the conversion of the Gentiles (according to St. Gregory)
Suaviter etc. prudenter subinsinuare, non violenter abrumpere, Apostolici
muneris est. St. Peter, to preserve those Plants he had newly planted; Inter
Gentiles gentiliter, inter judaeos judaice victitavit. And St. Paul, Factus est
Iudaeis tanquam Iudaus, ut Iudaeos lucrifaceret; and ijs qui sub legeerant,
quasi sub lege esset, ut eos qui sub lige erant, lucrifaceret, idque prudenter
ad bonum animarum (as Baronius declares in his Annals in the year 51.) This is
that, which the (...) Counsels, and Fathers have taught by precept and
examples.

And notwithstanding all these Instructions, how difficult is it to take the
middle way by accommodating ones self to places, times, and persons, and the
several course of things? and how much good is lost, not to say, how much
evil done (and even such evil as at this day we see and lament) by following
everyone his own judgment and fancy whatsoever it be; leaving that more
certain, and saving way which was used by the Saints?

I will conclude this Relation with a Paragraph of a Letter, which the Patriark
of Aethiopia Don Alphonso Mendez wrote from Goa to the Cardinals of the
Congregation de propaganda fide; who for his Learning, Authority, and Virtue,
and above all, for his experience of Missions, wherein he labored and suffered
much, does very much deserve to be believed. He says thus:

But at the end of this Letter I do judge it not from our purpose to be mind
your Eminencies, that God has formerly commanded, that a vineyard should not
be sowed with diverse seeds; nor that a garment ought to be woven of Linen and
Woollen, with which the Queen and Spouse is to be clothed; wherein is implied,
That the several institutions and different manners of living of Religious
Orders, ought not to be entruded upon young and tender Churches, such as are
but yet in a manner sucklings; but only to be introduced into such Churches, as
are come to their full strength, and are fortified by a long continuance of
years. For many times, emulation growing among them, and many wanting prudence,
and others abounding in an indiscreet zeal, they do many things, which tend
rather to ruin than edification etc. The Lord bless your Eminencies etc. From
Goa the eleventh of November 1638.

The Lively Effigies of Thein mingus ye present Emperor of the Western
Tartars, who has Lately ouerrun and Possessed himself almost of the whole
Empire of China.

portrait

BELLUM TARTARICUM, OR THE CONQUEST OF The Great and most Renowned Empire of
CHINA, By the Invasion of the TARTARS, who in these last seven years, have
wholly subdued that vast Empire.

Together with a Map of the Provinces, and chief Cities of the Countries, for
the better understanding of the STORY.

Written originally in LATIN by Martin Martinius, present in the Country at
most of the Passages herein related, And now faithfully Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of
the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA
printer's or publisher's device

To the Reader.
WHereas in the course of this ensuing History there occurs frequent mention of
the chief Provinces and Cities in China; which have either been assaulted and
defended, subdued or destroyed, by the several Armies, as well from North to
South, as from East to West; least the pleasure and delight of this History,
should be any way diminished by the frequent re-encounter of harsh and
barbarous names of Countries, and Towns unknown to the European Reader; I
thought it good to prefix a little Geographical table of the Countries, and
chief Cities, which might serve as a guide to conduct the eye of the
understanding, in the pursuit of the mentioned victories. I confess it is not
so exact as the rigor of Geography exacts, but yet it is such an one, as was
drawn by the hands of their learned Philosophers, and may well give a
sufficient notion of all the places mentioned.

As for more exquisit, and rare Maps both universal and particular, as well of
the Countries, as of the Cities, and of all the rarities they contain, together
with the exact knowledge of their Longitudes and Latitudes, and of all that
does belong either to Astronomy or Geography in relation to them; with what may
be expected from Natural or Humane History, I reserve all these to my Atlas of
China which I am composing; taken from their own ancient records ever since the
time of Noah; all which I have with much pains and industry gathered up
together, and transported with me to Europe. I will not therefore for the
present deflower that work of its greatest beauty, by an unseasonable
exposition of it to the Readers view; but expect till it grow to that
perfection, as I hope will satisfy the appetite of this our curious Age.

SITVS PROVINCIARV^ IMPERII SINIC(...) MDC.LIVE.


BELLUM TARTARICUM, OR, The History of the Wars of the Tartars in China, etc.
THe most ancient Nation of Tartars in Asia, the Parent of many Nations, has
been an Enemy to the Empire of China above four thousand years: during which
time, The Tartars were ancient Enemies to China.
they have had many sharp Wars with those of China, in which they, though
sometimes worsted, yet for the most part, have remained the conquerors.

I call that Nation, Tartars, which inhabiteth the Northern parts, Who are the
Tartars.
behind that famous Wall which stretching out above 300. German Leagues from
East to West, has ever served for a Rampart to hinder their irruptions into
the said Empire.

This Country the Chinese having a defect of the letter R^anciently called
Tata: comprehending under this name, not only the occidentall, but the Oriental
T^rtars, hitherto much unknown to us in Europe, containing the Provinces,
S^mahania, Tanyu, Niuche, Niulha^, and the like, from the lesser Tartary, and
Kingdom of Cascor, to the Oriental Sea above Ia^ony, where they are separated
by the Straight of Anian, from Quevira in America, if yet it be a Straight and
not a Continent.

But it is not my intention to write all the Wars which have passed betwixt
them; but only of such as have happened in our memory and in my presence; All
the rest shall appear at large in my Abridgement of the History of China. And
that we may proceed with more Order, it will be necessary to reflect, how and
from whence those Troubles had their beginning.

It is therefore first to be known, that the ancient Western Tartars, after
they had subdued almost all Asia to their power, The Tartars conquered China
heretofore. Tamberlain never took China.
waged war against China, (of which Paulus Venetus,) and Ayton make mention
under the names of Cataye and Maningin) and this before the times of great
Tamberlain, who never subdued China, as some have falsely writ; for he
flourished about the year MCCCCVI; in which time Taichangus, Emperor of China,
and the second of the Taimingian Family (the Tartars being before beaten out of
his Kingdom) governed peaceably all the Provinces included within the compass
of that Vast Wall which before I mentioned.

But the War which Paulus Venetus touches, betwixt the Chinesses and Tartars
began in the year MCCVI. as their History and Chronology testify, which lasting
77. years, at last the Tartars in the year MCCLXXVIII. having totally conquered
all that potent Empire, extinguished the Imperial Family of the Sungas, and
erected a new Regal Family, which they called Iuena; of which Tartarian Race
nine Emperors by descent, governed in the Kingdom of China for the space of
LXX. years in Peace and Quietness; and about the end of that War, The Tartars
Emperors of China.
came Paulus Venetus into China with the Tartars, as appears by his Writings.

In this tract of time, the Tartars forgetting their ancient Vigor of Mind and
warlike Spirits, which the pleasures and delices of that Country had quailed
and tamed, and being also weakened by so long a Peace, became of a softer
temper, and received a deep Tincture of the Nature and Disposition of the
Natives of China.

Whereupon a contemptible person (who was servant to one of those deputed to
offer Sacrifice to their Idols) called Chu, presumed to rebel against them.

This man commiserating the condition of his enslaved Country, and alsotouched
with the ambition of Reigning, first acted the part of a Thief, or Highway
man; and being of a Generous Nature, bold, and as quick of hand, as in wit;
wanted neither Courage, nor Art, nor Companions, nor Fortune, to gather such a
multitude as in short time made up the vast body of an Army; whereupon deposing
the person of a Thief, he became a General; and with a bold attempt presumed to
set upon the Tartars, and having fought many battles with them, obtained many
singular Victories; so as in the year 1368* he finally drove them out of the
Kingdom of China, receiving for so memorable an action, the whole Empire of
China as a worthy reward of his Heroical Actions.

It was he first erected the Imperial Family of the Ta^inges, and being he was
the first Emperor of that Race, styled himself by the name of Hunguus; which
signifies as much as, The famous Warrior.

After such an illustrious Action, it was no wonder if all the Provinces
submitted to him, both as to one that was a Native of their Country; and also
because they looked on him as a man who had redeemed them from Thraldom: for
it is the Nature of the people of China to love and esteem their own, as much
as they hate and vilify Strangers.

Wherefore he first placed his Court at Nanking near to the bank of that great
River of Kiang, which the Chinesses, in respect of the huge Mountains of water
which it discharges into the Ocean, call the Son of the Sea: And having
speedily ordered, and established that Empire, fearing no Insurrections from
these new redeemed Creatures, he was not contented to have chased the Tartars
out of China, but he made an irruption into Tartary it self, and so followed
the point of his Victory, as that he routed them several times, wasted all
their Territories, and finally brought the Oriental Tartars to such streights,
as he forced them to lay down their Arms, to pay Tribute, and even beg an
Ignominious Peace. This Storm of War fell chiefly on the Tartars of the
Province of Niuche, whither the Tartars of China being expelled were retired.

Afterward those Tartars every year, either as Subjects or Friends, came into
China by the Province of (...) to traffic with the Inhabitants; For, being
brought to poverty and misery, they thought no more of making war against
China. The Merchandise they brought were several, as, the root called Gins^m,
so much esteemed amongst the Chinese; and all sorts of precious skins, as
those of Castor, Martais and Zibell^ns; and also Horse-hair, of which the
Chinese make their Nets, and the men use it in tying up their hair, as the
handsomest dress they can appear in. But those Tartars multiplied so fast, as
they grew quickly into seven Governments which they call Hordes; and these
fighting one against another, at length about the year of Christ MDL. were
united into one Kingdom, called the Kingdom of Niuche.

Thus stood China in relation to the Eastern Tartars; but to the Western
Tartars they paid Tribute, masked under the Title of Presents, that they might
desist from War.

For the Chinese esteem it very unhandsome to make war against any, if by any
other means their Country can be conserved in peace and quietness, being taught
this by their Philosophers.

But in the mean time, A great Ga^ison upon the Wall against the Tartars.
being over jealous of the Enemies to their ancient riches, they never left
that great Wall, which extends from East to West, without a million of
Soldiers to guard it.

Therefore this Kingdom of China being thus established in the Taimingian
Family, A long Peace in China.
enjoyed a constant peace and quietness for CCL. years; and whilst the seven
Tartarian Lords or Governors made civil wars, that renowned Emperor of China,
known by the name of Vanley being the thirteenth Emperor of Taiminges Family,
governed happily the Kingdom of China from the year 1573. to the year 1620.
with as much Prudence as Justice and Equity.

But in this time the Tartars of Niuche had so multiplied and spread
themselves, The Tartars think of invading China.
after incorporated into a Kingdom, that they became daily more formidable to
China: And therefore the Governors of the bordering Provinces, consulted
privatel^ amongst themselves how they might curb and restrain these people
within their limits: For their Governors have so much Power and Authority,
that although they live as Slaves to their Prince, yet when there is question
of a Common and public good, they govern absolutely and uncontroulably; unless
by some higher powers their orders be restrained.

First therefore the Prefects or Governors, The first cause of the Tartarian
war.
did abuse the Merchant Tartars of Niuche when they came into Leaotung, which
is a Province confines next to them.

Then again when the King of Niuche would have married his Daughter to another
King of the Tartars, The second cause.
they hindered this marriage by representing some pretended reasons of State.

And finally, when the King of Niuche suspected nothing from them he conceived
his friends, The third cause.
they took him by deceit, and killed him perfidiously.

Wherefore to revenge these injuries, The first irruption of the Tartars into
China.
the Kings Son gathered a strong Army, and taking his time, found means to get
over the great Wall I mentioned; and the great River being frozen, he presently
set upon the great City Kaiyven, (or as others call it) Taxum, which lies upon
the Confines of Tartary, which he took in the year MDCXVI.

From this City he writ a Letter in Tartarian Characters to the Emperor of
China, The Tartars Protestation against China.
which though writ in Barbarian Characters, yet contained nothing Barbarous. By
this Letter, which he sent by one of their Indian Priests (whom they call Lama)
in a very humble and submissive manner he declared to him, that he had invaded
his Country to revenge the injuries he had received from the Governors of the
neighboring Provinces. But yet that he was ready to restore the City he had
taken, and depose his Arms, if his complaints might be heard, and satisfaction
given him. The Emperor of China, called Vanley, having received this Letter*
though otherwise of an eminent wisdom, and of as great experience, yet being
now broken with Age, in this business seems to have proceeded with less
Prudence than that which accompanied the former Actions of his life; For,
thinking it not to be a business of that moment as that it deserved to be
treated before him in his own Court, he remitted it to the chief Governors and
Commanders. And these men puffed up with their usual pride, thought it not fit
so much as to give an answer to the Barbarian King, but resented it very highly
that he durst be so bold as to complain to the Emperor of any injury received.

The Tartarian King, The Barb^rous and superstitious Vow of the Tartarian King.
seeing they vouchsafed no answer to his just demands, turning his anger into
rage; vowed to celebrate his Fathers Funerals with the lives of two hundred
Thousand of the Inhabitants of China. For it is the custom of the Tartars when
any man of quality dies, to cast into that fire which consumes the dead Corpse,
as many Servants, Women, and Horses, with bows and Arrows, as may be fit to
atend and serve them in the next life: Though now since they conquered China,
they have left off this Barbarous custom, being reprehended and corrected for
it by the Chinesses themselves. The chief City of Leaoyang besieged and taken.
After this superstitious Vow, advancing his revenging Arms, he besieged
Leaotung (which was the chief City of the Province of Leaoyang) with 50000.
men. But the City was defended by exceeding many men, who generally were all
armed with Muskets: The Tartars had nothing but their Scymetars, with Bows and
Arrows, which they discharge with strange Dexterity and Art. But because they
chiefly feared the musket bullets, A Stratagem against muskets.
they resolved by a Stratagem to make that unknown Instrument less hurtful to
them than their enemies did imagine. For the Tartarian King commanded such as
made the first onset, to carry a thick hard board for their Shield, which was
as good to them as a wooden Wall; these men were seconded by other Companies
who carried Ladders to climb up the Walls; and the Horse came up in the Rear.
In this manner he set upon the City in four quarters, and received the
discharge of their Muskets against his wooden wall; Then in a moment the
scaling-ladders being applied, before they could charge again, they were upon
the Walls and entered the City; for such is the quickness and nimblenesse of
the Tartars (in which they excel all Nations, and in which also they place
their chief art) that in a trice, they either prevail in their designs, or
retire: and the little skill the Chinesses had in the use of Muskets, was no
small hinderance to the war. For the Tartars quickness and nimblenesse not
giving them time to charge again, being astonished with the sudden inundation
of armed men, they presently fled which way soever they could; but being
pursued by the swift Tartarian Horse, most of them perished in the taking of
this great City, Many other Cities taken*
This City being taken, the Tartar like a Torrent overrun many others of less
note; but amongst others, he took that Noble City Evamgning, and overrunning
most speedily the whole Country of Leaotung, he entered the Province of Pekin;
and coming within seven Leagues of the very Imperial City, He durst not
advance, fearing the Enemy might compass or surround him, because he heard
that a world of men came in to help their distressed Prince. But the Tartar
struck such a terror into the hearts of all the Countries he had passed, as
both Soldier and Citizen quitting their Houses left the empty walls to the
Tartarians possession; knowing the Tartar to have that custom and practice, to
destroy and put all to fire and sword that did resist, How the Tartars used
their conquered Towns.
and only pillage the Cities that submitted, leaving the Citizens alive, and
treating them courteously. By which means having collected a world of riches,
he returned to Leaotung victorious. And because his South-sayers had persuaded
him that the standing of the old Walls were unfortunate, he beat them down, and
compassed it about with new, fortifying them with new Munitions, and there
proclaimed himself Emperor of China: The Tartar calls himself Emperor of
China, An. 1618.
For although as yet he had taken nothing of China, but only the skirts of the
Eastern Country of the Province of Leaotung, yet in his hopes and aspiring
thoughts he had devoured the whole Kingdom: wherefore he was called in the
China language Theienmingus, in the third year of his Reign, which was in that
of one thousand six hundred and eighteen.

In this year, some in authority about the Emperor Vanley, demanded the
banishment of the Priests, who did then preach the Christian Religion to that
Nation; But the Emperor (who in his heart loved Christanity, and those
particularly that first planted that Religion amongst them) gave no ear for a
long while to their demands; But at length overcome by the importunity of a
chief Commander, who had ever been a sore Enemy to Christian Religion, and was
called Xinchio, it was ordained and proclaimed that all those Fathers that did
propagate Christan Religion should be banished the Kingdom. Upon which some of
them were secretly concealed in several Provinces by some Christian
Governors, others being taken were carried in great Cages to Macao, God
punished China for their persecution of Christians.
wherein being shut up day and night, they suffered extremely; whilst others
also being whipped out of the Country, rejoiced to undergo something for his
sake whose name they bore; but that which added more affliction to all these
miseries, was the Emperor Vanley's Prohibition to all his to profess
Christian Religion. But, upon this occasion, the Christians of China (who from
the horrid wilderness of Infidelity, had been brought to the pleasant Pastures
of Christianity) gave illustrious examples of their Faith and Constancy; but
the longer Narration of this glorious persecution is reserved for another
place. I only touch it here, to admire the Divine Providence of God, who raised
so sharp War against China, when they neglected Christian Peace; and permitted,
at the same time, these Tartars to take so deep a root in this Empire of China,
as afterward grew to that height, as to extirpate the Royal Family of the
Taminges, together with the Kingdom, at the very same time they went about
utterly to destroy all Christianity. But, (as ordinarily it does) by this very
persecution, Christian Religion grew to that height and greatness, that the
Church glories to behold it; whilst, (unless God vouchsafe to lend a potent
helping hand,) the vast Kingdom of China is utterly overthrown.

In the mean time, the Chinese were very solicitous to expel this Enemy from
the bowels of their Country; and first, they selected very chief and eminent
men for Commanders and Governors; then they gathered an Army of six hundred
thousand choice Soldiers. The King of Corea also sent to the Emperor of
China, twelve thousand; with this potent Army therefore they went out in the
beginning of March MDCXIX. to give Battle to the Enemy. The Tartars resolved
to meet them with an undaunted courage; and for a good while the event and
victory was very doubtful; but in the end the Army of China was wholly routed,
and their chief Commanders, with fifty thousand men* were all slain: The
Tartars according to their custom, prosecute the victory with all quickness
and diligence; for the same day they took and sacked two Cities which they
burned. After this, they overrun that whole Country, and came to the very
Walls of Pekin, the Emperors Court; but durst not venture to besiege it,
because they knew (besides the infinite number of Canons it contained) there
was lodged fourscore thousand Soldiers in it.

But the Chinese confess that there was such a fear and consternation in the
City, that the King thought to have left that City and gone into the Southern
parts of the Kingdom: which he had effectually performed, had not some
Commanders suggested; that his flight would give courage to the Victorious, and
breed trouble and confusion in the whole Empire, being that to fly is nothing
else but to yield up the land to the Enemy. Nay more, they say, the disorders
were such in the City, that if the Tartar had come on, he infallibly had made
himself Master of it. But the Enemy was more greedy of Prey; and therefore they
dispersed themselves abroad, spoiling and burning all Towns and Cities, and
killing and destroying an immense company of Chinese in a most cruel manner;
The Tartars return with great Riches.
and so leaving all these places dismantled and without Garrisons, laden with
infinite Riches, they returned victorious to Leaotung, where they had their
first footing.

After these things had passed, The Emperor Vanley dies, Taichangus succeeds
and dies.
that renouned Emperor of China called Vanley died, and left his Son
Taichangus to succeed him; who begun to gather a new Army against the Tartars;
but after four months reign he also died.

To him succeeded Theinkins, Theinkins is chosen.
who as soon as he assumed the Crown, sent an Ambassador, with many
magnificent Presents, and worthy of the China Monarchy to the King of Corea;
The end of this Embassage was to thank him for the Auxiliary forces sent to his
Grandfather, as also to comfort him for the loss he had received in the late
service of China; and finally to solicit and press for further succors;
Those of Corea more valiant than the Chinese.
For it seems those of Corea, as they are nearer to Iapony, so they participate
more of that warlike Spirit and Fortitude, than those of China do.

Besides, that he might more effectually divert the imminent danger of his
Kingdoms ruin, he leavied new Forces throughout all the Kingdom; which he sent
into the Province of Leaotung, to hinder the irruption of the Tartars any
further into the Countery; New preparations against the Tartars.
And for their better supply with necessary Provision, he maintained a great
Navy in the Haven of Thiencin to carry Corn and other necessaries for their
maintenance. The Port of Thiencin very commodious.
This Port of Thiencin is a Station to which an incredible number of ships
resort, both by Sea and Rivers, from all parts of China. So as by this means,
by a very short and compendious way, they were easily provided with all
necessaries. For all the whole Country of Leaotung is almost environed with the
Sea, and the furthest part is but two days distant by water from this Port of
Thiencin; but by land far more time is necessary.

Amongst other Commanders which came with succors to their Prince, The valiant
Amazon of China.
there was one Heroic Lady, whom we may well call the Amazon or Penthesilean
of China. She brought along with her three thousand, from the remote Province
of Suchuen, carrying all, not only Masculine minds, but men's habits also, and
assuming Titles more becoming men than women. This noble and generous Lady gave
many rare proofs of her courage and valor, not only against these Tartars, but
also against the Rebels which afterward riss against their Lord and Emperor.
But now she came in this War to supply her Sons place, whom she left at home in
his own Kingdom, as being yet a Child, and not able to perform that Homage and
Duty to which he was obliged. For in the mountains of the Country of Suchuen
there is a King, not subject to him of China, but an absolute Prince; yet so as
he receives the Honor and Title of a King from the Emperor of China; after
which Investiture, his Subjects only obey him and pay Tribute; But because they
surpass all others in Valor and Courage, therefore they are used by the Kings
of China in warlick Affairs.

By occasion of this war the two noble Christian Doctors, The first invention
of the Christians to advance Christianity.
Paul and Michael, found means to persuade the Emperor to demand of the
Portugeses of Macas, some greater Pieces, and also some Gunnes and Gunners;
hoping by this means also to restore the banished Fathers of Christianity, as
also the Religion it self. And their Proposition took effect; for both the one
and the other were sent for; and the Fathers who hitherto secretly negotiated
the business of Religion were publicly admitted again, and many new Soldiers
of Portugal came to help the Army.

And God did most abundantly recompense to the Emperor this favor done to
Christianity: For, before the Portugese arrived, his Army had cast the Tartars
out of Leaotung, by means of the Inhabitants of that Country, who being much
exasperated by the Tartarians cruelty, The Tartars are cast ou^.
opened their City Gates as soon as the King of China's Army appeared, and
rising against their Garrison, gave entrance to the Army. Insomuch as they
recovered the Metropolitan Town of Leaotung: For the King of Tartary being
diverted by other Wars at home could not come soon enough to relieve it: So as
by this means the affairs of China began to recover Life, and Strength, and the
Tartars seemed wholly restrained.

But though Fortune seemed now to show a smiling face for China, yet, as her
custom is, The Tartars make war again.
she stood not long constant and stable: For the Tartarian King having
dispatched his affairs in Tartary, sent presently sixty thousand Horse to
besiege Leaoyang again; They besiege Leaoyang, and take it.
promising that himself in person would follow with greater Forces. And this
Army took that strong City in the space of forty hours; both parties fighting
with such vigor and fierceness, that thirty thousand of the Garrison were
killed, and the Tartars lost about twenty thousand of theirs. Nay the Chinesses
affirm, that they had never won the City, had not the Governor been corrupted
by great promises of reward, to open them one of the Gates of the Town. But be
it as it will, the Tartars won the Town; The Vice Roy hanged himself for
grief; The Kings Visitor was taken by the enemy, but could never be brought to
submit himself, or to bestow the Title of a King upon the Barbarian; for which,
in admiration and reward of his Constancy and Fidelity, he obtained life and
freedom; Constancy rewarded by the Enemy.
but, knowing that according to the custom of China, he was guilty of death,
only because he had fought unfortunately, more cruel to himself than the
barbarous Enemy, he hanged himself.

The Tartars having taken the City, The Tartars Habits and Manners.
proclaimed by Edict, that they should kill none, if they would cut their hair,
and use the Tartarians Habit. For the Tartars (that I may say something of
their Manners, as my subject gives me occasion) do shave both the Head and
Beard, reserving only the Mustach^es, which they extend to a great length, and
in the hinder part of their heads they leave a Tuff, which being curiously
woven and plated, they let hang down carelessly below their shoulders; they have
a round and low Cap, which is always garnished round with some precious skin
three fingers broad, of Cast^r or Zibellin, and serves to defend their
Temples, Ears, and Foreheads from colds and other Tempests. That which appears
above the skin being covered over either with curious red silk, or else with
black and purple horse-hair, which they die and dress most curiously; so as
their appurtenances being decently joined together, makes the cap both
commodious and handsome. Their Garments are long Robes falling down to the very
foot, but their sleeves are not so wide and large as the Chinese use, but
rather such as are used in Polony, and Hungary, only with this difference, that
they fashion the extremity of the Sleeve, ever like a Horse his Hoof. At their
Girdle there hangs on either side two Handkerchiefes to wipe their face and
hands; besides, there hangs a Knife for all necessary uses, with two Purses, in
which they carry Tobacco, or such like Commodities. On their left side they
hang their Scymiters, but so as the point goes before, and the handle behind,
and therefore when they fight they draw it out with the right hand behind them
without holding the Scabbard with the other. They seldom wear Shoes; and use
no spurrs to their Boots, which they make either of Silk, or of Horse-skin very
neatly dressed; but they often use fair Pattins, which they make three Fingers
high. In riding they use Stirrups, their Trappings are both lower and broader
than ours, their faces are comely, and commonly broad as those of China also
have, their color is white, but their Nose is not so flat, nor their eyes so
little, as the Chinese are; They speak little, and ride pensively. In the rest
of their manners they resemble our Tartars of Europe, though they be nothing so
barbarous. They rejoice to see Strangers: They no way like the grimness and
soureness of the Chinesse gravity, and therefore in their first abords they
appear more humane.

Having thus briefly described their manners, we resume our former discourse,
and return to the victorious Tartars in the City they had taken* In which,
finding many rich and wealthy Merchants of other Provinces, they published a
License that they might depart with their Goods; and withal commanded them
speedily to void the City; The Tartars perfidiousness.
who presently obeying the order, carried away all their goods and riches,
little suspecting the perfideous treachery of the Tartars; For they had not
gone three miles from the Town, but being set upon by the Tartars, they were
plundered of their goods, and lost all their lives; which being done, they
returned into the fearful City, laden with Riches, the Citizens trembling,
lest they might happily experience the like perfidiousnesse.

But the Tartar considering at how dear a rate he had bought the mastering of
that City, and fearing also to find the like provision and preparation in other
Cities, they durst not make any further attempt; for they knew well that the
Emperor had not only fortified all the ancient places, but erected also new
munitions, in the straights of many hard and rude passages.

And amongst all other strong Holds, that of Xanghai, situated in the Island
of Cu, was most eminent; containing a vast number of men in the Garrison, to
resist the further progress of the Tartarian Forces. But that which most of
all repressed the Tartars, was the great valor of the incomparable Commander
Maovenlungus; who having with his great Fleet taken an Island near Corea in the
mouth of the River Yalo, vexed much their Army in the Rear, The valiantest
Commander of China.
and was victorious in several Skirmishes against them; so that the Tartars
bent all their care and thoughts against this their Enemy. This renowned person
was born in the Province of Evangtung, where being near the Portugese of Macao,
he had much perfected himself in the Art of war, and he brought with him many
great pieces of Artillery, which he had recovered from the Shipwreck of a
Holland Ship, upon the coasts of that Territory. And because the Emperor of
China had declared the City of Ninguyven to be the chief (in place of Leaoyang)
(where also he had placed a new Viceroy, and his Royal Visitor) therefore
Maovenlungus placed the best part of his Artillarie upon the Walls of this City.

The Tartars therefore acted nothing till the year 1625. and because they
resolved to besiege the new Metropolitan City of ninguyvne, they first purposed
to try Maovenlungus his fidelity; The faithfulness of the Commanders in China.
offering him half of the Empire of China, if he would help them to gain it;
But that noble Soul of his, proved as faithful, as valiant, by rejecting those
demands with indignation; and came presently with his Forces to succor the
City Ninguyven which they besieged; by which means, The overthrow of the
Tartars.
the Tartars having lost ten thousand men, were put to fight; and amongst the
rest, the King of tartary's own Son was killed. Wherefore being furious with
anger, they passed the frozen Sea, and invaded the Island Thaoyven, where they
killed ten thousand that kept Garrisons there, together with all the
Inhabitants; and by this one A^t, Their cruelty.
having revenged their former discomfiture, they returned into Tartary, not
with a resolution to sit still, but an intention to return with greater
Forces; By which retreat, all things remained quiet till the year 1627. in
which the Emperor Thienkius dyed in the flower of his age, The Kings of China,
and Tartary both died.
and with him the whole Empire of China seemed to fall to ruin and destruction;
and, in the same year, the King of the Tartars, who had cruelly murdered many
men, himself augmented the number of the dead.

After Thienkius, in the Empire of China, succeeded that unhappy Emperor
Zungchinius, brother to the former, Zungchinius chosen Emperor of China.
Thienzungus more mild than his Predecessors.
(of whom more hereafter.) And after Thienmingus King of Tartary, succeeded
Thienzungus his Son, who changed the manner of his Fathers Government, and by
good Council began to govern the Chinese in courteous and sweet manner; but
though he lived not long, yet he served for a good example for his Son to
conquer China more by Civility and Humanity, than by force of Arms.

In this year, great Maovenlungus Soldiers being insolent by want of action,
grew very trouble some and offensive, The Soldiers Insolences exasperate the
Country of Corea.
by their R^pines and Disorders, to the Coreans, who were friends and Allies;
and particularly they much exasperated the Province of Hienkin; insomuch that
some of the Inhabitants of that place, moved with indignation of several
passages, secretly treated with the Tartarian King, to invade the Chinesses
Army, in the habit and attire of the Inhabitants of Corea, from whom they could
expect no treason, being leaguerd with them in friendsh^p and amity: to effect
which design, these Traitors both to their Country, King, and the Emperor of
China, promised their best assistance. This Counsel pleased the Tartar; and
therefore he sent a Viceroy with a potent Army, to which the Coreans showed
the ways, The Tartars are b^ought into Corea.
and guided them through all the passages; who falling upon the Chinese Army
(which suspecting nothing, was divided, and many straggling up and down the
Country) made a huge Carnage amongst them. But when Maovenlungus perceived they
were Tartars, he presently made head, rallied his forces, and vigorously
opposed all those sharp assaults. But yet at length he was forced to yield the
Field; and therefore leaving a Regiment or two, to hold the Enemy in action
whilst his Army retreated, he fled to his ships, and to the Island which he had
fortified. The Tartars were vexed and grieved, both to see their victory so
bloody, and also that Maovenlungus, whom they chiefly aimed at, had escaped
with most of his Army; and therefore enraged with anger, they fell upon the
Corean Traitors, as false to them, and killed every man; (which action the King
of Tartary himself afterward much condemned;) and then turning their wrath to
the four Northern Provinces, Corea wasted.
which border upon Tartary, they wasted and destroyed them all in a moment.

In the mean time the King of Corea gathered an Army to resist the Tartars; and
Maovenlungus also, having recruited his Forces, came into Corea, to revenge the
received loss. The victorious Tartars were come within seven Leagues of the
principallest City of all Corea. And, finding the King to have taken the
Straights and Passages of the Mountains which lead, unto it, they desperately
resolved to force their passage. The Battle was hardly begun, when
Maovenlungus, after a long march, falls in upon their Rear: the Tartars finding
themselves encompassed before and behind, nor any means to escape but by dint
of Sword, fought most desperately, sustaining the shock of two Armies; such was
the fury of this battle, as China never saw; for, (it is strange to write, yet
very true) of the three Armies, none was victorous; The Fight and slaughter of
3. Armies.
but all, in a manner, destroyed. Of the Tartarian Army fifty thousand were
found wanting; The Corean Army lost seveny thousand; and few or none escaped
of the Chinese; for their Quarter being most commodious for the Tartars
flight, they there made their most vigorous Charges, and so forced their way
toward their own Country. So as none of them all gained the field, or could
prosecute the course of a Victory. Yet the King of Corea made a shift to rallie
so many together again, as to take possession of those his Countries which the
Tartarians by their flight had left desolate. But the Tartars after all their
losses, ceased not to make frequent in-rodes into the Country of Leaotung, and
took all the Oriental part of it. The Eastern part of Leaotung is under the
Tartar.
From thence they made incursions into the other part, and carried away great
Preys and Booties; But they were always so beaten, and so defeated, as they
could never fix a constant habitation there. For by this time were arrived
seven excellent Gunners from the Portughese quarters, which both by themselves,
The Portugese send succor.
and by teaching the Chinese, advanced infinitely the King of China his
affairs; especially where that Christan Viceroy, called Sun Ignatius, was
Commander in chief; of whose affairs we shall say something hereafter.

In this conjuncture of affairs, the Emperor Zungchinius sent a new Commander
called Yvenus into Leaotung, with a new Army and full power to conclude a
Peace with the Tartars, A crafty Commander of the China Army.
if they would admit it: For the disorders of the times had caused so many
needy persons, Thieves, and Cut throats, that the Emperor grew more anxious how
to suppress this great domestic Enemy, which seemed to aim at the Kingdoms
ruin, than he was of the Tartarian Forces. This Yvenus was a crafty and subtle
wit, most eloquent both in speaking and writing; who by politic discourses,
drawn from his military experience, had wrought so much, not only upon the
Emperors mind, but also upon all the Council, that they esteemed what he
concluded as a Law to be observed: Wherefore the Chinese put all their
confidence in him; nor had they been frustrated of their hopes, had not this
wicked man been more wedded to his own inteterest, and love of Riches, than to
the public good, and fidelity to his Prince: For first he received of the
Tartars a vast Sum of gold; which wrought so much upon him, as that having
invited to a Banquet that most Valorous and Faithful Champion Maovenlungus,
M^ovenlung^^ poisoned.
whom the Tartars only feared, he there poisoned that great Commander. After
this he made a most ignominious and shameful Peace with the Tartars,
condescending to all, that those that had fed him with Riches, could desire.
But when the Emperor had perused the Treaty, he presently found his
Plenipotentiarian had sold him, and therefore refused to ratify or confirm the
Articles. What should Yvenus act in this exigent? That he might force the
Emperor to admit them, he persuaded the Tartars, in the year 1630. to enter
China by another Country than that which was committed to his charge, promising
them for his part, he would no way with his Army hinder their progress. The
Tartars knew that his avarice had so potent an Ascendent over him, as that they
need to fear no hurt from him; and upon that confidence admitted of his
Counsel. Wherefore being secure from all assaults from any Enemy behind them,
they entered the Province of Peking, and at length besieged the Kings Court: The
Kings Court besieged.
Insomuch that his Council persuaded him to leave the Imperial City, and retire
to the Southern Provinces; but he protested he would rather die, than quit the
Northern quarters; and not only so, but he forbade any to depart the Court, or
Town besieged. In the mean time, the Tartars make many fierce assaults, and as
often were valiantly beaten back with great loss and Carnage. Yvenus was
called to resist the Tartars, for as yet his Traitorous Complo^s were not
discovered. And lest he should discover his Treason, he comes with his Army
near the very Walls of the Court, which was of a vast extent, and as it were a
great partition between the two Armies, from which both the Chinese and Tartars
forces were perfectly discerned. But though Yvenus was under the Emperors eye,
yet he acted little; for his only aim being to return home laden with Riches,
he never desisted to persuade the Emperor to admit his conditions of Peace. So
that the Emperor finding him evidently to be a Traitor, disclosing his
intention to none of his Council nor Governors, sends to invite him to a
private Council of war, giving also order that he should be admitted into the
City over the Walls, lest if any Gate should be open, the Tartar being so near
might press in upon them; but indeed he ordered the business in this manner,
lest he should bring his Army into the City with him. Yvenus therefore knowing
he had many chief men about the Emperous person, who were both his favourities
and friends, and that none of them gave him the least sign of any distaste that
the Emperor might conceive against him, The perfidious General killed
boldly and securely presented himself at Court; and as soon as he appeared, he
was presently arrested, and after some few questions, the Emperor commanded
him to be killed. The Tartars hearing of his death (before the China Army had
a new General assigned) raise the siege, The Tartars ^orrage all the Country of
Peking, and depart.
ransack all the Country round about, and after they had made excursions to the
next bordering Province of Xantung, richly laden with all manner of Spoils,
return to their first residence in Leaotung. From these times til the year
1636. the event of their Wars was very various; The King of Tartary dies;
another succeeds.
but in general we observe, that the Tartars could never fix a foot in China,
but they were presently beaten out again. In this same year Thienzungus, King
of the Tartars died; after whom, succeeded his Son Zungteus, Father to him that
now governs China, of whom we now must begin to treat.

This Prince, before his Reign, expressed much judgment in several
Occurrences, Zungteus the new King of Tartary, prudent and mild.
surpassing all the Kings of Tartary in Humanity, and obliging courtesy: For
when he was young, he was sent by his Father into China, where he lived
secretly, and learned the China's Manners, Doctrine and Language, and now
coming to the Kingdom, he changed, and far surpassed all the Examples of his
Predecessors: For having observed, that their too hard and cruel usage of the
Chinesses, had been the principal obstacle of their advancement, Mildness and
Gentleness to be used in Conquering Nations.
to the end he might conquer that Empire he so much thirsted after, as well by
Love as by Arms, he courteously entertained and cherished all those of China
which came unto him, using all Prisoners with great sweetness, and inviting them
either to submit freely to his Government, or take their course with full
freedom. The fame of his humanity was spread far and near; which induced many
Commanders and chief Officers to fly unto him; by whose means and help, at
length he became Emperor of that spacious and flourishing Country. For
experience shows us, that Love and Humanity do work more upon men's hearts, in
conquering and conserving Kingdoms, than Arms; and cruelty of the Conquerors
has lost that, which strength of Arms had happily subdued. Wherefore when the
Chinesses came to understand, that the King of Tartary did not only afford them
a refuge, but friendship, many great persons flying the Indignation of the King
of China, sheltered themselves under the Tartars protection. For, by reason of
the China's great Avarice and Perfidiousness, A barbarous Principle of the
Chinese.
it is a necessary, (though most inhumane) Maxim, that those Officers perish,
who have managed the Kingdoms Affairs with less success. For they easily are
brought to believe, that such unhappy events, do not proceed so much from the
frown of inconstant Fortune, as it does from the perfidie or negligence of the
Commanders. So as if any fought unhappily, or if he lost the Country committed
to his charge, if any Sedition or Rebellion happened, the Governors hardly ever
escaped alive. Seeing therefore they found so much Humanity in the Tartar, and
so much Inhumanity in the Emperor, they rather chose to fly to the former.

By this occasion give me leave to relate what happened to that incomparable
Commander (renowned both for Fidelity and Fortitude) called Ignatius the chief
Commander of the Christians unjustly killed.
Ignatius. This Heroic mind preferred his fidelity to his Prince, before his
life, before the Tartarian's protection, yea even before the strength of his
formidable Army; and chose rather, with his unparalled Fidelity, to submit
his head to a Block by an unjust sentence, than to abandon his Country, or once
commit the least fault against his Sovereign, though guilty of much injustice
toward Him: Ignatius his fidelity.
He might perchance have swayed the Sovereign Scepter of China, if he would
have hearkened to his Soldiers, but he rather chose to die gloriously, than to
be branded with the name of a Traitor.

After this man therefore had gained several Victories against the Tartars, and
recovered many Cities from their possession, so as he hoped shortly wholly to
extirpate them out of China, His Soldiers being long without pay, seditiously
plundered and pillaged a Town which had ever been faithful to the King.
Ignatius by several petitions and Remonstrances to the Emperor, had declared
his wants of money, and their want of Pay; but because he fed not those venal
souls that managed the business for money and presents, Ignatius his Piety.
they always suppressed his humble addresses for relief. Besides, this man
being a very pious Christian, he did nothing in his government, but what was
conform to Reason and Justice; which was the cause he incurred the hatred of
all the ancient Prefect^; who usually receiving Bribes from the contesting
parties, demanded favor of Ignatius for their Clients. But it was in vain to
intercede for any, unless the justness of the cause did also balance their
Petitions. And these men attributing this proceeding, not to virtue, but to his
Pride, thinking themselves undervalued by him, dealt underhand with the
Prefects in the Court, to stop the Armies pay, that so they might destroy this
innocent man. Moreover, he was envied by the Commanders in the very Court,
because he came to this eminent dignity by his own valor and industry; which
they imagined was only to be given to Doctors, and Ignatius was but a
Licenciat; as if the most learned must needs be also the most valorous. In this
conjuncture of affairs, the Soldiers not contented with the seditious pillage,
seeing the most imminent danger hanging over their most esteemed and beloved
Governor, by reason of their folly, go about to persuade him to make himself
King of that Province; nay more, to take the whole Empire to himself, as a
thing due to his Prowess and Merits; promising their whole strength to effect
the business; and also to extirpate those men about the Emperor, that aimed
more to compass their malicious ends, than to promote the general affairs of
the Empire: But Ignatius, by pious admonitions, staved them off from further
violence, made them obedient and quiet, commanded all to stand faithful to the
Emperor of China, and punished the chief of that sedition.

This supreme act of fidelity deserved a better esteem and acceptance, than
that which was returned by the Emperor and his Court: who slighting this his
allegiance, sent another Viceroy in his place, and commanded him to appear in
Court: He then perceived they aimed at his life; and the Soldiers suspected
the business; and therefore, mad with anger, they all jointly rose in Arms for
him, swearing they would live and die with him, and that he should not present
himself at Court. It is our duty (say they) to conserve thy life, which have
been so careful of ours; and we have strength and courage enough to resist all
the force of thy perfidious Enemies.

But Ignatius was deaf to all these allurements, He chooses rather to die, than
either to reign, or to serve the Tartars.
and studied by all means to sweeten their exulcerated minds; always
inculcating to them to die true and loyal to their Sovereigns service: choosing
rather to water that ungrateful Soil of his native Country with the streams of
his Blood, than either to spill his Enemies blood by the force and power of his
Soldiers, or to retire to the Tartarian King, which offered him so fair
preferments. But many of his Captains fell off to the Tartars; following, in
this, not his example, but that of many others, whom they saw eminently
promoted amongst the Tartars. Some of those that then fled from the Emperor,
are now chief Commanders under the Tartarian King, in their China Empire; some
also have obtained the dignity of Princes, or Royolets in several Countries,
for the reward of their Valor and faithful Service against China. So much
more piercing is that wedge, which is made of the same wood.

But although hitherto these Tartarian Wars had caused great troubles and
tempests in the China Empire, yet all things now seemed so calmed and pacified,
as they seemed secure from any further danger; for the Western part of Leaotung
was strongly fortified, and there was a great Army in the Island of Cu, and the
bordering quarters, which hindered the Tartars in the Eastern part of the
Country, The Thieves in China, a chief occasion of its overthrow.
which they possessed, from further passage. But now the chiefest danger was
from the Traitors and Thieves which were in the very Bowels of the Country;
who finally destroyed it, and gave it up in Prey to the Tartars.

I touched something of their Commotions before, now we must treat a little more
largely of their proceedings, that the Reader may see how the Tartars came to
subdue and conquer China.

The first Combination of these Rovers appeared in the remote Country of
Suchuen, Several Thieves.
who having pillaged diverse Cities, and emboldened by prosperous success,
ventured to besiege the chief City of that Country called Cingtu; which they
had infallibly taken, if that valiant Amazon, whom I mentioned before, They are
defeated, but not vanquished
had not come to relieve it with her Army; but by her valor they were beaten
off with great loss; and, not being wholly extinguished, they retired into the
mountains to recruit their Forces. These were seconded by a like race of people
in the Province of Queicheu, who took occasion of rising by reason of an unjust
Sentence passed in a sure betwixt two Grandees of that Country; he who lost the
cause being offended with the Governors. These roving companions, first killed
all the Magistrates which had pronounced that unjust sentence; and then they
defeated the Viceroy his Army; Famine augments the Thieves.
yet afterward he routed them with a new Army, but could not extinguish them.
Besides these, the Famine increasing in the Northern quarters in the Countries
of Xensi and Xantung, by reason of a great inundation of Locusts which devoured
all, there riss up by this occasion, many loose fellows which lived by Rapin.
These men at first were few in number, and small in strength, and after only
preying in little places, presently fled to the Mountains; but finding they got
both Meat and Riches, with little labor and less cost, they quickly got
Companions to reinforce them; This Sedition being also much augmented by the
Emperor Zungchinius his notable avarice, And the Emperor his avarice.
who so exhausted the people by Imposts and Taxes, as if it had been a year of
the golden Age. The Prefects of the Provinces, not being able presently to
repress the insolency of those people, they daily increafed in courage and
strength; Insomuch as in several Countries they had eight very considerable
Armies. They chose the strongest and valiantest men amongst them for their
Commanders; and these persons being grown rich and potent by preying, deposed
now the person of Ringleaders of Thieves, and aspired to no less than to the
Empire of China. The Commanders aspire to the Empire.
And at first they fought one against another, every one pillaging another of
what he could: But at length things were brought to that pass, that two of the
Commanders being only left alive, these two prevailed with the Soldiers of
those that were killed, to follow their Ensigns and Fortune; and they knowing
well that if they were taken by the Emperors Officers, they could not escape a
most certain death, easily resolved to shelter themselves under the Arms of
these two victorious persons. The names of the chief felons
The name of one of these chief Brigands was Lacungzus; the second was called
Changhienchungus; two notorious bold roguish fellows; who lest they should
destroy one another fortunes by their ambitious emulation, separated
themselves far from one another, resolving both to pursue their prosperous
fortunes. Licungzus therefore possessed himself of the Northern parts of Xensi
and Honan; and the other tyrannized over the Countries of Suchuen and Huquang.
But that we may not interrupt our discourse, by delivering the Acts of both
these together, we will first treat of Licungzus his feats, being he was the
cause of the Tartars coming to the Empire, (which he himself might have
possessed, if his proceedings had been moderate and humane;) and of the other
we shall speak hereafter. Therefore in the year 1641. these pilferers having
got immense riches in the Province Xensi, made an irruption, in a vast body,
into that delicious sweet Province of Honan, They vex several Provinces.
and went strait to the chief City called Caifung, which they besieged. There
was in that place a very great and strong Garrison, who by the benefit of
Artillery mounted upon hand-wheeling Cars, forced them to quit the siege; then
they fell upon all the neighboring Cities, plundring, spoiling, and burning
all they could master. Having hoorded up store of provision of Corn, and
augmented their Army by a company of rascally Vagabonds and loytering Fellows,
they returned again to besiege the Metropolitan City; They besiege the noble
City Caifung.
but dispairing to take it by Force or Assaults, they resolved to ruin it by a
long siege, that they might enjoy the immense Riches of that noble City; and
though this Town be three great Leagues in circumference, yet they rounded it
so by their lines, as nothing could enter the City; this drove them to some
straits; for although the Purveyer for victuals had brought in good store of
provision in the two months space in which they were absent, yet because that
Province which used to be most plentiful, was now deficient in Corn, they
could not make sufficient provision for six months siege, for such an infinite
multitude of people as were retired within the Walls; Yet it held out most
resolutely for the space of six months, in which time though they were brought
to hard shifts, yet hoping always for succor from their Emperor, they would
never submit to any conditions. I dare not relate to what an excess this Famine
came to; but it seems it surpassed the Famine of Jerusalem; a pound of Rice was
worth a pound of Silver; An unheard of Famine.
and a pound of any old rotten skin was sold at ten Crowns; dead men's flesh was
sold publicly in the Shambles as Hogs flesh, and it was held an act of Piety
to expose the dead in the streets for others to feed on, who shortly were to be
food for others; but I will pass over, and conceal yet more horrible things
than I have related. This City lies toward the South side of that vast and
precipitate River which the Chinese call Hoang, because the streams always
appear of a yellowish saffron color; and because the River is higher than the
plain level downs, of a Leagues distance from the Town, they built upon the
River side, a long and strong Bulwark of great square stones, to prevent all
inundations. The Emperors Army, after long expectation, came to relieve the
Town, and advanced as far as these Bulwarks, and having considered the
situation of the Country and Enemies Camp, it was thought the fittest and
easiest way to raise the siege without giving battle, and to let in the water
upon the enemies Army, by some breaches made in that long Wall or Bulwark. It
was in Autumn when they took this resolution, and the River, by reason of
extraordinary rains, was swollen bigger than ever before; and they, making the
Sluices, or inlets, too great, and the Breaches too wide, gave way to such an
Ocean of water, as it overran the walls of the Town (which were very stately
and high) involving not only many of the enemies in its ruin and destruction;
The City of Caifung is drowned.
but also 300000. men, and the City it self perished in those floods of water.
So the ancient City, which heretofore had been honored by the Emperor's
Residence, appeared no more a place of pleasure, but a vast Pool or Lake for
Monsters of the waters to inhabit; for the houses of the Town were not overrun
with water, but also beaten down; and also the Church of the Christians,
together with their Priest, who was one of the Society of Jesus; who when he
could timely enough have saved himself, chose rather to laydown his life for
the sheep: For that City had many Christians. The destruction of this City
happened the ninth of Oct. 1642. about which time this famous Conductour of
Thieves took the name of King, The General of the Thieves takes the Title of a
King.
with an addition of Xunvang, which sounds as much as Prosperous, and so was
styled Licungzus the prosperous; and having in a manner taken all the Country
of Honan into his Dominion, he returned into the Province of Xensi, He takes
the Country of Xensi.
and won it wholly to his subjection. When he came to Sigan, which is the
Metropolis of Xensi, he found some resistance from the Garrison; but yet he
took it in three days, and for a reward and encouragement to his Soldiers, he
gave it to them to pillage also for three days space; and then he gathered up
all the Corn of the whole Province, as well to keep all the Country in their
duty to him, as also to leave no Provision for the Emperors Army. And now
thinking himself secure of the whole Empire, he took the name of Emperor upon
him, Calls himself Emperor.
and styled the Family wherein he thought to establish this Dignity,
Thienxunam, as much as to say, Obedient to Heaven; By which Title he persuaded
the Soldiers and the People, that it was by the disposal of the Heavens that
he should reign, that he might deliver the people from the Emperors Avarice,
and extirpate those wicked Governors that so much vexed the Nation, and
deliver them from all their perfidious plots. For he knew well, that this
Glorious Title would be very acceptable to them of China, who believe that
Kingdoms and Empires come only from Heaven, and are not gained by any Art or
Industry of Man; and that his actions might carry a face correspondent to his
illustrious Title, he began to use the People with all humility and sweetness;
not permitting any Soldier to wrong or injure them; The Thieves good
Government.
only he persecuted all the Officers called Presidents, which he could find,
and all those he put to death; and as for those that had been Presidents,
because he found them rich, he made them pay great Fines, and let them live;
remitting all Taxes in the places he subdued; severely commanding that the
subjects should be treated with all civility and courtesy. So as all men
applauding and loving so sweet and mild a Government, easily submitted to his
Power and Dominion; but where the Governors use Tyranny, there the subject
has little care of Fidelity. There were in this City Sigan two Priests which
served the Christians that were Jesuits, and suffered much in the saccage of
the City, but being afterward known for Strangers, they were used with all
humanity.

In the mean time a third cause of this Empires ruin grew up in the Court;
which was hatched in the Emperor Thienkins his time: For that Emperor exalted
an Eunuch called ^ueio, The Prefects Discord was another cause of the ruin of
China.
to such a height and power, as he gave the absolute, and sovereign Command
into his hands, and passed so far, as always to style him by the name of
Father. This extravagant power caused much Envy, Dissension, and banding one
against another, amongst the Governors, Presidents, Commanders, and
Counselors: and the Eunuch also added much to incense the flame, by his
indiscreet usage of the favor he possessed; for if any man had touched him,
either in word or writing, or expressed less respect unto him in conversation,
or behavior, or did not flatter the base fellow, he would presently give order
to put him to death, though he were a very eminent person; or at least degrade
him from all Office or Dignity. By which means he exasperated many, and amongst
the rest he offended Zunchinius when Prince; who now, by the death of his
Brother without issue, was come to to be Emperor of China. This Emperor knew
that the Eunuch had moved Heaven and Earth to hinder his coming to the Crown;
but seeing he could not effect that, at least he maintained a seditious faction
against the great ones, which finally proved the destruction of the Estate; For
these men banding in two factions, studied more how to destroy one another,
than to advance the public good; yet both parties pretended the general
benefit, but both neglected it; Every party endeavoring to extol and exalt
his own Creatures into places of trust and power: All which when Zunchinius the
emperor went about to redress, he exasperated the minds of many of the
Commanders against him; for as soon as he came to the Crown, he cruelly
persecuted all that favored the Eunuch; and in fine, killed this very Eunuch
which had been his, Predecessors Favorite, together with many more of his
party; of which Tragedy I will only relate the Catastrophe. The Emperor
Zungchinius resolving to destroy both the Eunuch and all his power, sent him an
order to go visit the Tombs of his Ancestors, to consider if any of those
ancient Monuments wanted reparation: the Eunuch could not refuse so honorable
an employment, which seemed rather an addition to his former hounours; but he
had not gone far upon his journey, but there was presented to him (from the
Emperor) a Box of Silver gilt, with a Halter of Silk folded up in it; by which
he understood he was to hang himself by the Emperors order: which he could not
refuse, being that kind of death (amongst the Chinese) is counted honorable,
when it is accompanied with such formalities. But by this occasion the Emperor
raised against himself new Factions and more Traitors, which held secret
correspondence with the Thieves Army. Hence it came to pass, that no Army was
sent to oppose them; or if any went, they did no manner of action, being
always hindered by the emulation of others; nay it happened often, that when
they might have taken great advantages, yet the occasion was neglected, lest
the Commanders should increase other men's* Power and Credit, (by their
Victories,) with the Emperor. These Dissentions and Emulations happend so
seasonably to the Roving Army of Thieves, as that to come, to see, and conquer,
was to them one and the self same thing, as I shall declare unto you.

Whilst these transactions passed in the Court, The Thieves take the Province
of Xensi.
Licungzus Conductor of the Thieves, having settled all things in the Country of
Xensi, passed to the East; and coming to the famous great River of Croceus,
finding no body to defend it, he passed over with as much facility, as it might
have been maintained with ease, if there had been placed but a handful of
Soldiers. For this River runs with a violent rapid course, and a vast Sea of
waters from West to East; but being there was no man to defend it, they passing
it easily, presently seized upon the chief and richest City in all those
quarters, called Kaiangch^u, which is situated near the South ^ankside of that
River; and being carried on with a strong gale of Fortune, he seized upon many
other Cities, every one desiring either to free themselves from further
vexation, or blindly and fondly submitting themselves to any new change of
Government. For we commonly delight in varieties and novelties, and hoping for
better, we find worse. Only the City of Thaiyven made some resistance, but
being presently subdued, was fined with great sumes of money for their
temerity. The Emperor Zungchinius hearing the Thieves had passed the River
Croceus, and were advanced to the very Confine; of Xensi (which borders upon
the Province where he had placed his Throne and Royal Seat) he sent an Army
under the Lord Marshal of China, to hold them at least in play, if he could not
overthrow them; But this Army did just nothing; nay most of the Soldiers ran
to the Thieving party, in so much as the Lord Marshal himself, called Colaus
Lius, seeing Affairs grew so desperate, Hanged himself for fear of further
shame and dishonor. The Emperor of China is troubled,
The Emperor hearing of the ill success of his Affairs, began to think of
leaving the Northern parts, where his Royal City of Peking is situated, and to
pass to Nankuing which is far more Southward; but he was dissuaded from this
intended course as well by his loyal, as disloyal subjects: by these, that they
might give him up more speedily into the enemies hands, before their treachery
was discovered; and by the others, lest his flight might trouble the Kingdom
more, and discourage all his Subjects from giving their best assistance; for
they thought the City impregnable, being fortified with so strong a Garrison;
nor did they doubt that the Kings presence would draw the forces of the whole
Kingdom to him. And their Counsel had been good, if the Court had been purged
of Traitors.

In the mean time the Thieves Conductor, The Stratagem of the Thief.
who was no less quick and nimble in execution, than witty in invention,
sowing a Fox his tail to the Lions skin, caused many of his Soldiers in a
disguised habit to creep into that Princely City, and gave them money to trade
in trifling ware, till he assaulted the walls with the body of his Army; for
then they had order to raise sedition, and tumult in the City; and, considering
they were a Company of desperate Fellows, and of a very low and base fortune,
it is stupendous to think how they could keep so profound secrecy in a matter
of so high concernment: But to this mine, which was prepared in the bowels of
the City, he held a secret train of Intelligence, with the Lieutenant of the
City; who seeing the Emperors Affairs desperate, is said to have dealt with
the Conductor of these Brigants about giving up the City unto their power; But,
however it was, these Pilferers came in a short time to besiege the Royal City
of Peking. There was in that City a vast Garrison, and as great a quantity of
Artillery; but on the Quarters upon which the enemy made their assault, there
was none charged with Bullets, but only with Powder.

Wherefore being secure from any annoy from that side, The Royal City of Peking
is taken.
in the year MDCXLIV. before the rising of the Sun, they entered the
Metropolitan City of all China by one of the Gates which was opened to them;
nor was there any long resistance made, even by those that were faithful to
their Prince; for the Soldiers of the Thief, which lay lurking in the City,
made such a tumult and confusion, as none knew whom to oppose, in which respect
they made a great slaughter, so as Lic^ngzus in this Babylonian confusion,
marched victorious through the City, till he came to the very Emperors Palace;
where though he found some resistance from the faithfullest Eunuchs, yet
notwithstanding he presently entered that famous and renowned Palace; And that
which exceeds all admiration, the enemy had passed the first Wall, and
Precinct, and yet the Emp^rour knew nothing of so strange a passage; for the
Traitorous Eunuchs, which were of most Authority, fearing he might escape by
flight, deferd to admonish him of his own danger, or of the taking of the City,
till they saw he could not possibly evade: Who hearing this doleful news,
first demanded if he could get away by any means; but when he heard that all
passages were beset, he is said to have left a Letter writ with his own Blood,
in which he bit^erly expressed to all posterity, the infidelity and
perfidiousnesse of his Commanders, and the innocence of his poor Subjects;
conjuring Licungzus, The Emperor having killed his Daughter hanged himself.
that seeing the Heavens had cast the Scepter into his hands, he would, for his
sake, take revenge of such perfidious Creatures. After this reflecting that he
had a Daughter Marriageable, who falling into the villains hands might receive
some affront^, he called for a Sword, and beheaded her with his own hands in
the place; then going down into an Orchard, making a Rope of his Ga^^er, he
hung himself upon a Prune tree. Thus that unfortunate Emperor put a period, as
well to that Empire, which had flourished so long with much splendour, riches,
and pleasure, as to his Illustrious Family of Taimingus, by finishing his life
upon so contemptible a Tree, and in such an infamous manner: To all which
circumstances, I add one more; that as the Empire was erected by a Thief, so
it was ^xtinguished by another; for although others were chosen to succeed him,
as we shall relate hereafter, yet because they held a small parcel of the
Empire, they are not numbered amongst the Emperors. His example was followed by
the Queen, and by the Lord Marshall, who is called in their language Colaus,
together with other faithful Eunuchs; So as those pleasant Trees which served
heretofore for their Sports and pleasures, now became the horrid and surest
Instruments of their death. And this cruel butchering of themselves passed not
only in the Court but also in the City; where many made themselves away, either
by hanging, or drowning by leaping into Lakes; For it is held by this Nation to
be the highest point of fidelity, to die with their Prince, and not to live and
be subject to another.

Whilst these things were acting, Licungz^s enters the Palace Victorious, and
ascending up to the Chair of State, sat himself down in that Impariall Throne;
but it is recorded, that in executing this first Act of Royalty, he sat so
restlesly and unquietly, yea so totteringly, as if even then that Royal Chair
would foretell the short durance of his felicity. The next day after, The Theefs
Tyranny and cruelty.
he commanded the body of the dead Emperor to be cut into small pieces,
accusing him of oppression and cruelty against his subjects; As if he, being a
villainous Traitor, and a Thief, after the saccaging and burning so many
Provinces, and shedding such an Ocean of blood, had been of a better
disposition. So we often condemn others, when we do worse our selves, and
remark, yea augment, the least faults of others, when we either take no notice
of, or diminish our own. This Emperor Zungchinius was Father of three Sons, of
which the eldest could never be found, though all imaginable means was used for
his discovery; some think he found means to fly away; others think he perished
by leaping with others into the Lake; the two others being yet little Children,
were by the Tyrants command beheaded three days after; his barbarous humor not
sparing even innocent blood: Which disposition he made further to appear, when
casting off that vail of Piety and Humanity, with which he had for sometime
charmed the people, he commanded all the Principal Magistrates to be
apprehended, of which he murdered many with cruel torments, others he fined
deeply, and reserved the Imperial Palace for his own abode. He filled that
most noble and rich City with ransacking Soldiers, and gave it up to their
prey and plunder; where they committed such execrable things, as are both too
long, and not fit to be related. But by this his horrid cruelty, and Tyranny,
he lost that Empire which he might have preserved by courtesy and humanity.

Amongst the other imprisoned Magistrates, there was one a venerable person
called Us, whose Son Usangueius governed the Army of China, in the Confines of
Leaotung, against the Tartars. The Tyrant Licungzus thereatned this old man
with a most cruel death, if by his paternall power over his Son, he did not
reduce him with his whole Army, to subjection and obedience to his power;
promising also great Rewards and Honors to them both, if by his fatherly power
(which they hold facred) he did prevail for his submission. Wherefore the poor
old man writ to his Son this ensuing Letter.

It is well known that the Heavens, Earth, and Fate can cause these strange
vicissitudes of Fortune which we behold; know my Son, that the Emperor
Zunchinius, and the whole family of Taimingus are perished. The Heavens have
cast it upon Licungzus; we must observe the times, and by making a virtue of
necessity, avoid his Tyranny, and experience his liberality; he promises to
thee a Royal dignity, if with thy Army thou submit to his Dominion, and
acknowledge him as Emperor; my life depends upon thy answer; consider what
thou owe to him that gave thy life.

To this Letter his Son Usangu^ius returned this short answer. He that is not
faithful to his Sovereign, will never be faithful to me: and if you forget
your duty and fidelity to our Emperor, no man will blame me if I forget my
duty and obedience to such a father. I will rather die than serve a Thief.

And presently after the dispatch of this Letter, he sent an Ambassador to the
King of Tartary, The Tartars called into China against the Thieves.
desiring his help and force to subdue this Usurper of the Empire; and knowing
that the Tartars abound in men, but want women, he promised to send him some
store of them; and presented him with several curious Silks, and sent him
great store of Silver and Gold. The Tartarian King neglected not this good
occasion, but presently marched with fourscore thousand men, which were in
Garrison in Leaotung, to meet General Usangueius, to whom he expressed himself
in these words. To the end to make our Victory undoubted, I counsel you to
cause all your Army to be clad like Tartars, for so the Thief will think us all
Tartars, seeing I cannot call greater Forces out of my Kingdom so soon as is
required.

Usangueius, thirsting nothing but revenge, admitted all conditions, little
thinking (as the Chinesses say) that he brought in Tigres to drive out Dogs.
The Thieves fly from the Tartars.
Licungzus hearing the march of the Tartars, together with Usangueius, knowing
himself not able to resist, quitted the Court and Palace as easily as he had
taken it: but he carried with him all the rich spoils of the Court, and marched
away into the Province of Xensi, where he established his Court in the noble
City of Sigan, which heretofore had been the seat of the Emperors. It is
accounted that for eight days space by the four Palace gates, there was
nothing seen but a continual succession of Coaches, Horses, Camels, and
Porters, carrying away the preciousest treasures; They carry away the Treasures
of the Palace.
though they left also much, because the enemy approached. Thus the immense
Riches of Gold and Silver, which the Emperors of the Taimingean Family had at
leisure hoorded up, in the space of two hundred and fourscore years, were in a
moment dispersed. But although they fled very speedily, yet they could not
avoid the swift Tartarian Horses; for overtaking their Luggage, and the Rear of
the Army, they pillaged and vexed them for eight days; but yet they either
could not, or would not pass the River Croceus, that so they might speedily
return to amuse the trembling hearts of the Territory of Peking. The Tartars
return therefore victorious and rich into the City Peking, and there being
admitted by the Chinese, they gave them the Empire. Where it is to be
observed, Zungteus King of the Tartars dies.
that although Zungteus, the Tartarian King, dying at the first entrance into
China, did not obtain that noble Empire he so much thirsted after; yet he gave
those Instructions, of the manner of conquering it, to his Council, that they
never desisted till they obtained it. This Prince dying, declared his Son of
six years old, his Successor; commanding all his own Brethren to manage the
Child's Affairs with all fidelity and circumspection, making his eldest brother
his Tutor; and all those brethren, being uncles to the Child, by a stupendous
union, and never to be paralleled in any ambitious Nation, exalted this Infant
to the possession of the Empire.

These things being thus passed, Usangueius, seeing the Thief expelled, began
to think of creating a new Emperor, The Tartars refuse to depart China.
one of the Taiminga's Family, who was a Prince not far distant: But first
being mindful of his promises made to the Tartars, he offers them their
rewards; he highly extols their Fortitude and Fidelity in the Kingdoms
quarre^; and finally, desires them now to depart the Country quietly, and to
entertain a strict alliance and friendship with it, seeing they had abundantly
revenged all former injuries. To this demand the Tartars returned a long
premeditated answer, but far contrary to what Usanguei^s expected, which they
delivered in these terms.

We do not think it yet a fit time to leave you and this Empire, unless, having
heard our Reasons, you shall still press it; for we consider, that many of the
Thieves are still extant, and seem rather dispersed than extinguished; and we
hear that their great Conductor Licungzus, has fixed his Imperial Seat in
Sigan, the Metropolis of the Province of Xensi; by which means he still
possesses the richest and most populous Provinces, which are still under his
Dominion. If we depart, worse is to be feared will follow: He feared us
Tartars; when he hears we are gone, having now time to recruit his Forces, he
will doubtless make new Invasions, and perchance we shall not be able to send
new Succors: We therefore resolve to prosecute the Victory, and quite
extinguish those Vagabonds, that so you may deliver the Empire to your designed
King, in full peace and tranquillity. Be not solicitous of paying our promised
rewards, for they are as safe in yours, as in our own, hands. That which we now
desire to execute, is, that which presses most, and seems to us to require no
delay; ^^eir Craft (...) Decei^.
that you, with part of your Army and part of ours, ^arch speedily against
Licungzus, and we with the rest, take our march toward the Province of
Xantung, to extirpate those Thieves that have settled there; By this means the
peace of the Kingdom will be firmly established.

Usanguieus either did not understand the Stratagem, or if he did, he
condescended not to irritate an Army which was in the Bowels of the Kingdom.

Before the Tartars (which were called) entered China, they sent into their own
and other Kingdoms to raise as many men as possibly they could, to the end they
might conquer the Empire after they had acquitted themselves of their promised
assistance against the Thieves. But these Succors, not being arrived to
reinforce them, therefore they thought it best as yet to use no force, but
gain time by fair words and new projects. But whilst this business was
contriving, A great company of Tartars enter China.
there came an immense company of Tartars into the Empire; not only from the
Kingdoms of Ni^che, and Ni^lham, but also from the old Occidental Tartary, and
from a Country called Yupi, which is more Oriental, and lies above the
elevation of Iapon. This people is called Yupi, by reason they make their Coats
of defense, or Breast plates, of fishes skin, which are in a manner impregnable.
Nay, which is more, I saw very many who were come as far as the River Volga;
which people these Tartars call Alga-Tartars, and I find they have a Notion of
Muscovy, and Pol^^; but they are far more barbarous than the Oriental Tartars
be; with these auxiliary Forces, came in the infant King of six years old, Son
to the late deceased King of Tartary; The Tartars seize upon the Empire of
China. Xunchiis crowned the first Emperor of the Tartars (...) China.
and when these were joined with the body of the Army, then they publicly
proclaimed their right to the Empire, and openly declared their concealed
intentions; and proclaimed this child of six years old, Emperor of China, by
the name of Xunchi; and the new erected Imperial Family they styled by the name
of Taicing. The Child of six years old took possession of the ancient Throne of
his (...), with a great Gravity and Majesty, from whence he delivered this
judicious Speech to the Commanders and to his Army.

It is your strength and power more than my felicity (my dear and generous
Uncles, and you the rest of my noble Commanders) which supports my weakness,
and makes me so undantedly ascend and possess this Imperial Throne. My present
assurance and this Chairs stability, I hope, is as happy a sign of my future
prosperity, as its tottering proved unfortunate to the Thief Licungzus his
Tyranny. You see my first step to the Empire; But I know your valor to be
such, that I look not only upon the Kingdom of China as my own, but conceive
the Empire of the World, not only by me possessed, but also established. The
rewards due to such incomparable Virtues, shall be no other than the riches of
the Empire, and Royal dignities; proceed therefore valiantly and stoutly. The
whole Court was astonished to hear a Child of six years old speak such things,
and hence concluded, that fate or Heaven had elected him for King; the young
Prince did assume his eldest Uncle, as his Tutor and Father, the same day he
was admitted to the Empire: and therefore the Tartars in their language, called
him Amahan, as much as to say, the Father King; which very thing, the China's
express by the word Amavang. The fidelity of the Kings Tutor called Amavangus.
To this man therefore he remitted all the Conduct of his Wars, and to him it
is, the Tartars owe all their greatness and Dominion: for as he excelled in
Counsel and Prudence, so also he was as eminent in fortitude and fidelity; and
withal, by the strength and force of his Reasons and Counsels did ravish the
wisest men amongst the Chinese; and his Justice and Humanity did wholly
enthrall and enchant the popularity. To all which I add those fugitive
Magistrates, who, as I related heretofore, had fled to the Tartars (to avoid
the Emperors indignation) and did not a little promote their cause; for these
men, sometimes by word and example, did seduce the hearts of the Subjects, and
sometimes suggested excellent Counsels to the Tartars, against their own
Country; and by both these means advanced themselves to high and eminent
dignities amongst the Tartars.

The same day some Bands of Soldiers were dispatched, with order to proclaim
Usangueius a Tributary King to this new enstalled Emperor; which they
performed with great magnificence, adding to his name (as usually they do) the
Surname of Pingsi, which sounds as much as Pacifier of the Western world:
establishing his Kingdom in the Capital City in the Province of Xensi. This
Prince considering, that he could expect no more honorable Dignity from the
lawful Successor to the Empire of China; and that the Tartars were come into
the Empire, in so vast a number, that he could never hope to Conquer them,
found means to dispense with his hitherto uncorrupted fidelity, admitting the
dignity, and submitting to the Emperor, Vsangueius forced to serve the Tartars.
and so he that had hitherto waged War for China against the thieves, now was
forced to march against China to subdue its Provinces to the Tartarian Empire.
And as he was a Great Commander, so also by the help of the Tartars he quickly
drove out the Thieves from his little Kingdom of Xensi, where to this day he
reigns in the Metropolitan City of Sigan. But by these honors the Tartars
removed him from the practice of Arms, who remaining Armed, might have proved a
dangerous Enemy.

It was hitherto never known what became of Licungzus; It is not known what
became of Licungzus.
some think he was killed by Usangueius in the fight; though he never appeared
more, neither dead, nor alive, after this fight, in which all his forces were
dissipated, or cut off. And with the same facility the Tartars subdued the
Provinces of Peking and Xantung; where they immensly augmented their Armies, by
the access of the China's Soldiers and Commanders which submitted to them;
for the Tartarians admitted all, even the Conquered, to their Army, if they did
cut their hair, and wear their habits after the Tartarian fashion: for in this
Puntillio of habit and hair they were so rigorous, as they proclaimed it high
Treason in all that did forbear it. Which Law, did many times endanger them,
and disturb the whole frame of their Affairs: For the Chinesses both grieved,
and fought more valiantly for their hair and habit, than for their Kingdom and
Emperor; So as many times they chose rather to die, or lose their heads, than
obey the Tartars in these Ceremonies; of which I could relate many examples,
unless in this relation I had resolved to be brief. The Tartars subdue several
Provinces.
But all these little rubs, did not hinder, but that in less than the space of
a year, (not counting Leaotung) they had conquered Peking, Xansi, Xensi, and
Xantung, which are the four vast Northern Provinces of China. In all which they
changed nothing in their Political manner of Government, nay, they permitted
the usual custom of the Philosophers of China to govern the Towns and
Provinces; they left also the same Examens as were used for the approving of
learned men; for by this prudent Counsel they wrought this effect, that having
given the places of honor and trust to men of their own Creation, they found
they supassed the very Tartars in fidelity to them: They changed no Laws of the
Nation.
yet they kept the Militia in their own hands, and the ordering thereof, and
yet they stick'd not to admit even to these Offices, such of the Country as
were faithful to them; so, as in the Royal City they retained still the same
Orders and degrees of Prefects, together with the six high Tribunals, as they
were established in the former Emperors time: but so, as they were now
compounded of Chinesses, and Tartars.

In the mean time the news of the Emperors danger came to the Southern parts
of China, and the Prefects of every City gathering together very great forces
marched toward the City of Peking, but in their march they received the sad
news of the Emperors death, and the taking of Peking; they therefore speedily
called back their Forces, and also all their Ships, which yearly used to carry
Provisions to the Emperors Court; a little after this, they received the news
how the Tartar was invested in the Kingdom and proclaimed Emperor. Hungquangus
Crowned Emperor in Hanquin.
I was then my self in the great City Nanquin, where I beheld a strange
consternation and confusion in all things, till at length having recollected
themselves, the Prefects resolved to choose an Emperor of the Family of the
Taiminges, whom they called Hungquangus. This man had come hither (flying from
the Thieves) out of the Province of Honan, and being he was Nephew to that
famous Emperor Vanley, and cousin Germain to Zungchinius the last deceased
Emperor, they Crowned him with great pomp and ostentation, hoping for better
fortune under his Government. As soon as this Prince was chosen, he sent ^n
Embassage to the Tartars, begging Peace, rather than demanding it; for (...)
offered them all the Northern Provinces which they had taken; if they ^ould
join in amity with him. But the Tartars well understood the Policy of these
Prefects and Counselors; which was only to amuse them with a Peace, The
Tartars admit no Peace
whilst they could recover their strength and force; And therefore they
returned answer, that they would not receive as a gift, that which they had
conquered by force of Arms; but seeing they had chosen a new Emperor, they
might do well to defend him; but as for them, they were resolved to have all or
nothing. This Legacy coming to nothing; whilst both parties prepare to take
the Field, Zunchinius his Son appears at Nankuing.
appears at Nankuing a young man, who gave himself out to be the eldest Son to
the late deceased Emperor Zunchinius; and he gave no small evidences of this
truth and Claim; nay, he was acknowledged by many of the Eunuchs. But the new
elected Emperor Hunquangus, being strongly possessed with an ambition of
reigning, would never acknowledge, nor admit him; but commanded him to be
imprisoned, and killed, as an Impostor; though many of the Prefects enraged to
hear of this order, He causes troubles in China.
hindered the execution of the sentence. But by this accident, things grew into
a sedition, and the dispute was so high, that it gave occasion to the Tartars
of assailing the Province and City of Nankuing; some of the Prefects winking at
it, if not enticing them underhand to this exploit. The Tartars, vigilant to
lay hold of all advantages, hearing of these emulations and divisions presently
march out into the Territory of the City of Hoaigan, and coming to the East
side of the River Croceus, they pass over speedily by the help of their Boats;
on the other side of this River stood the Army of China, which was so numerous,
as if they had but cast off their very shoos, they had erected such a Rampart
against the Tartars, as all the Horse would hardly have surmounted it. But it
is the resolution and valor in War, that carries the Trophies, not the number
of men: for hardly had the Tartars set foot in their Boats, but the Chinese
ran all away, The flight of the Chinese.
as Sheep use to do when they see the Wolf, leaving the whole shore unfenced,
to their landing. The Tartars having passed the River, finding no enemy to
resist, enter the most noble Province of Nanking, and in a trice make
themselves Masters of all the North part of the Country, which lies upon the
great River of Kiang, which is so vast, as it is worthily called the Son of the
Sea; where it deserves particularly to be noted as a rare thing in the Warfare
of the Tartars, that before they enter into any Country, they choose and name
both the Governors, and Companies, with all the Officers necessary for all the
Cities and places which they aim to take; so as in a moment they run like a
lightning, and no sooner they possess it but it is fortified, armed, and
defended. There was one City in these Quarters which made a generous resistance
to all their re-iterated assaults, The City Yangcheu resisting the Tartar is
taken and burnt.
called Yangcheu, where the Tartars lost the Son of a little Royalet. This City
was defended by that faithful Imperial Champio^ called Zuuis Colaus; but though
he had a mighty Garrison, yet he was a^ length forced to yield, and the whole
City was sacked, and both Citize^ and Soldier put to the Sword; and least the
multitude of the dead Carcases, should corrupt the Air, and engender the
Plague, they laid them all upon the tops of the Houses, and setting fire both
to the City and Suburbs brought all to ashes, and to a total desolation.

By this progress the Forces of the Tartar much increased; The Tartars take
several places.
for the Governors of many places, and several Regiments came to submit to his
Dominion. To all whom he, commonly, continued the same Commands and Offices
they were established in before, and advanced many of them to higher dignity;
and so by this Humanity with which he treated all that came flying to him, and
by the cruelty he used to those that resolved to make resistance to the Force
of his Arms, he gained this, that most men resolved to partake of his sweet
treaty, rather than of his cruelty; so he easily conquered all that which lies
on the North side of that River, which I named before the Son of the Sea. This
River being a German League in breadth, and rising from the West of China,
holds its course to the East, and divides the Kingdom into Northern and
Southern Quarters; it also divides the Country of Nanking in the very middle;
though Nanking the Metropolitan and Royal City be placed in the Southern part.
To Master this great City, they were to pass this River. They gathered
therefore together many Ships, to Conquer this new Emperial seat, and also the
new settled Emperor. The Fleet of China commanded by the most generous and
faithful Admiral called Hoangchoangus, lay toward the other side of this
River. Here the Admiral fought so gallantly and resolutely, that he made it
appear to the world, that the Tartars were not invincible; Till at length one
of his own Commanders called Thienus born in the City of Leaotung, being
corrupted by the Tartars, shot him with an Arrow to death: which Arrow fixed
the unconstant wheel of Chinas fortune, and lost the whole Empire. But the
Traitor, not contented with this perfidious Act, began himself to run away, and
by his example drew all the rest to imitate this Ignominious Action. His
impudence passed yet to a higher strain: for coming to the Imperial City, and
finding the Emperor preparing to retire, he joined himself with him, as a
faithful friend, participating of his adversity; till he saw the Tartars (who
passing the River followed the Kings flight with all imaginable diligence) were
come near him, The Emperor Hunquangus is taken and killed.
and then he took the Emperor Prisoner, and delivered him to the Tartarian
Army in the year MDCXLIV. This unfortunate Prince being thus betrayed before he
had reigned full one year, was sent to Peking, and there upon the Town Walls
was hanged publicly in a Bow string, which kind of death the Tartars esteem
most noble. The pretended Son to the Emperor Zunchinius, (whether he were true
or false,) run the same course of fortune, when they had discovered him being
kept still in Prison: for they did not only put to death all those which
belonged to the Imperial Family of the Taiminges by Consanguinitie, but after a
diligent search extirpated all they could find, which belonged to them even by
Affinity; for it is a custom in Asia, if any one conquer a Kingdom, to root
out all that belong to the Royal Family.

After this, they divided their Army into two parts; the one they sent to
conquer the Mediterranean Provinces of Kiansi, Huquang, and Quangtung, which
are all of a mavelous extent; the other, like a swift Torrent, overrun all,
The Tartars run to the City Hangcheu.
till they came to the very Walls of the renowned and vast City of Hangcheu,
which is the head City of the Province of Chekiang. Into this City the
principal fugitives of the Army of China were retired; and those not only of
the common Soldiers, but many great Commanders, and Prefects; where they
resolved to choose a new Emperor called Lovangus, of the ancient Family of
Taimingus: But this Prince would never assume the Title of Emperor, but
contented himself with the Title of King; thinking his fall would be less, and
his death not so bitter, as if he fell from the Throne of an Emperor: but yet
to the end to animate them to fight with more vigor than they had done
heretofore, he promised them to take that Title when they had re-gained one
Imperial City. He had not reigned three days (a shorter space than their
personated Kings use many times to reign in their Tragedies) but the Tartars
arrive; Which the fugitive Soldiers seeing, and thinking by this pinch of
necessity to force their pay from the King and City, refused to fight before
they had received their salary. It was on this occasion, that King Lovangus his
heart, being not able to bear such a desolation of the City, of his people and
subjects, King Lovingus love to his Subjects.
as he foresaw, gave such an example of his Humanity and Piety, as Europe never
saw; for he mounted upon the City Walls, and calling upon his Knees to the
Tartarian Captains, begged the life of his Subjects. Spare not me (quoth he) I
will willingly be my Subjects victime; and having said this, he presently went
out to the Tartars Army, and was taken. This Illustrious testimony of his love
to his Subjects had not wanted a reward to Crown so Heroic an Action, if it
had met with a generous Soul, like that of Alexander or of Caesar. When they
had the King Prisoner, they commanded the Citizens to shut the Gates, and keep
the Walls, least either their own, or the Kings Soldiers should enter the
City; and presently they fell upon the Kings men, whom they butchered in a most
cruel manner, but yet the water destroyed more, than their Swords or Arrows;
for many cast themselves headlong into the great River of Cianthang, which is a
League broad, and runs near the City; others leaping and overcharging the Boats
in the River were presently sunck; Many of the Kings Soldiers drowned.
others flying away full of fear and confusion, thrust one another at the River
side into that unmerciful Element; and by all these many thousands perished.
The Tartars wanting boats to pass this River, Hangcheu is taken.
having thus expelled or killed the Soldiery, they returned Triumphant to the
City, where they used neither force, nor violence; by which means this noble
City was conserved, whose beauty, greatness, and riches, I hope to describe
elsewhere, not by hearsay, but by what I saw, in the three years space I lived
in it, from which I lately came into Europe. This City of Hangcheu has an
Artificial Channel or Dike to pass by water to the Northern parts of China;
This Chanel is only separated by the high part of the way like a Causeway from
the River, which as I said, runs on the South part of the City. The Tartars
therefore drew many Boats out of this Chanel over the Causeway into the River
Cienthang, and with the help of these Boats they passed the River without
resistance, and found the fairest City in all China, called Xaoking, prone
enough to submit to their victorious Arms. This City in bigness yields to
many others, but in cleanness and comeliness it surpasses all: it is so
environed with sweet waters as a man may contemplate its beauty by rounding it
in a Boat; it has large and fair Streets paved on both sides with white square
stones, and in the middle of them all runs a Navigable Chanel, whose sides are
garnished with the like ornament, and of the same stone there are also built
many fairs Bridges and Triumphant Arches; the Houses also, (which I observe no
where else in China) are built of the same square stone; so as in a word, I saw
nothing neater in all China. They took this Town without any resistance, and so
they might have done all the rest of the Southern Towns of this Povince of
Chekiang. But when they commanded all by Proclamation to cut off their Hair,
The Chinese defend their Hair.
then both Soldier and Citizen took up Arms, and fought more desperately for
their Hair of their Heads, than they did for King or Kingdom, and beat the
Tartars not only out of their City, but repulst them to the River Cienthang:
nay forced them to pass the River, killing very many of them. In truth, had
they past the River, they might have recovered the Metropolis with the other
Towns: But they pursued their victory no further, being sufficiently contented
that they had preserved their Hair, resisting them only on the South side of
the shore, and there fortifying themselves. By this means the conquering Arms
of the Tartars were repressed for a whole year. But the Chinois that they might
have a Head, chose Lu Regulus of the Taimingian Family for their Emperor; who
would not accept thereof, but would be only styled, The Restorer of the Empire.
In the mean time the Tartars had sent for new forces out of Peking, with which
they left nere a Stone unturned, that they might get over the River Cienthang:
but all was in vain, The drooping affairs therefore of the Chinois now breathed
again, nay, having gathered together more Forces, they promised themselves
greater victories. But the ambition and emulation of rulling frustrated all
their hopes. For the Commanders, and Presidents which fled out of the Province
of Chekian into the Country of Fokien, carried with them one of Taiminga's
Family, called Thangus; and this man they chose King in the Country of Fokien,
which confines with Chekiang. This Prince pretended that the King called Lu,
should yield up his right to him, both because he had but a few Cities under
him, and also because he was further removed from the Imperial Race, than he
was. But King Lu, pretended he was Proclaimed by the Army, before him, and
failed not to set forth his victories over the Tartars, By which two
contentions, the Tartars kept the Crown; for these two Royalets, would never
yield to one another, nor so unite their Armies, as jointly to repress the
Tartars. Since therefore this petty King Lu had only eight Cities under his
command, whose Contributions were not able to maintain the necessary pay of his
Army, he never durst venture to pass over the River, but endeavored only to
defend himself. But the Tartars sought all means possibly to get over this
River, yet they durst not venture to pass in Boats, because King Lu had many
ships, and good store of Artillery which he had caused to be brought from Sea.
But the Tartars felicity, and prosperous fortune, overcame this difficulty:
for, as it happened, that year being dryer than ordinary, this River toward
the South, where it runs betwixt high Mountains, and is deprived of the flowing
of the Sea, had lost much of its depth; The Tartars pass the River, and
recover the City Xa^king.
and here the Tartars Horse found it passable; and because the rudeness of
those Mountains, seemed a sufficient Guard to the Country, they found no
Soldiers to resist; but as soon as the Clowns espied twenty of their Horse to
have passed the River, they presently advertised the Army, and they all betook
themselves to flight, King Lu himself left the City Xaoking, and not daring to
trust himself to the Continent, he took Ship and failed to the Island called
Cheuxan, which lies opposite to the City of Nimpus; where he remains to this
day safe, and keeps still his Regal dignity; The Island of Cheuxan becomes a
Kingdom.
which Island being heretofore only a retreit for Fishemen, and some Clowns,
now is become a potent Kingdom; by reason that many fly from China to this King
Lu, as to their sanctuary to conserve the liberty of their Hair. In this
Island there are now found three score and ten Cities, with a strong and
formidable Army, which hitherto has contemned all the Tartarian Power and
Forces, and watch for some happy occasion to advance again their Kingdom in
China, But by this means, the Tartars took all the Cities and Towns of the
County of Chekiang into their Dominion. One only City of Kinhoa, whose
President was as well a Native of the place, as also the Commander in chief, and
my very singular friend, sustained the Tartars assaults for some months. But to
the end the resistance of this City should not be a hindrance to the course of
their Victories, the Tartars divided their Army into three parts. The first
part marched by the City Kiucheu, and the Mountains; the second by the City
Vencheu, and the Sea shore, The City of Kinhao is taken and destroyed.
into the Province of F^kien; and the third obstinately besieged the City of
Kinhoa. At which time I by leave from the Emperor Longuvus, resided in Henxus
a City subject to that of Venchen, which presently after was besieged, and
taken by the Tartars, together with many other neighboring Cities. I dwelt in
a very fair house of the City Venxus, the whole Town then being in a tumult by
reason of the fear and flight of most of the Citizens. As Soon as I understood
of the approach of the Tartars, I fixed over the fairest gate of the house, a
red paper very long and broad, with this Inscription upon it. Here dwells the
European Doctar of the Divine Law. For I had observed the China Governors when
they take any journey to affixe such Inscriptions upon the houses where they
happen to lodge, that all men may take notice what great persons are there.
Likewise at the entrance of the greater Hall, I set out my greatest and
fairest-bound books: to these I added my Mathematical Instruments,
prospectives, and other optic glasses, and what else I thought might make the
greatest show; and withal I placed the picture of our Savior upon an altar
erected for that purpose. By which fortunate stratagem I not ont only escaped
the violence and plunder of the common Soldier, but was invited, and kindly
entertained by the Tartarian Viceroy: Who demanded of me whether I would with
a good will change my China-habit, and cut off my hair. To which I readily
consented; and so he commanded me to be shaven there in his presence; and I
telling him, that a shaven head would not so well suite with a China-Garment,
he pluk't off his own boots, and made me draw them on, put his Tartar bonnet on
my head, feasted me at his Table, and accommodating me with his Pass,
dismissed me to my ancient quarters in the noble City Hancheu, where we had a
stately Church and College: In the siege of Kinlna, the Tartars by reason of
great Guns which continually played upon them, and by the wise conduct and
courage of their noble Commander, suffered many and great losses; insomuch as
he forced them to pitch their Camp further from the City; But at length they
also brought Artillery from the chief City of the Province, by which they made
so many breaches in the Walls, as these being in a manner dismantled, they
found entrance; and burned and sacked it with all imaginable Hostility. The
Governor blew up himself and all his Family with a Barrel of Gunpowder in his
own Palace, least he, or his, should fall into the Enemies hands.

The Province of Fokien is environed with the bordering Countries of Quamgtung,
Kiansi, and Chekiang; from all which it is separated by a continual Chain of
Mountains which are in breadth of three days journey to pass over; and
withal, so full of ragged and ruggy Clifts, and obscure Valleys, as they make
the very Paths horrid, dark and obscure at Noon day. Insomuch, as without any
exaggeration, they may well be parallelled either to the Grecian Straits of
Thermopolis, or to the Asian ruggy and strait passage of Taurus. These places
might have been easily defended if they had but placed a few Clowns, to repel
the Enemy, or crossed the ways by any encumbrances; but the very imagination
of a Tartar was grown so terrible to them, as they fled at the very sight of
their Horses; leaving therefore these Mountains wholly ungarnished, the Tartars
found a passage, The Tartars take in Fokien very easily.
but so very painful, and full of difficulties, as they were forced to leave
much of their Baggage behind them; and lost many of their Horses, in those
fearful precipices; but by this means they took the Province of Fokien with
as much ease, as it might have been defended; for they hardly spent as much
time in taking it as a man would do to walk the extent of it. The King himself
named Lunguns (which signifies a Warlike Dragon) showed himself a fearful
Sheep, flying away with a good Army of men, if that word rightly can be applied
to a numerous multitude that had no hearts; but his flght served him for
nothing; for the Tartars following him with their swift and nimble Horses, King
Lunguus slain.
shot all this flock of silly Sheep to death with Arrows. It is thought the
King himself was involved in this Massacre, for he never appeared, nor was
heard of afterward.

Now because the whole Province submitted it self voluntarily unto them without
any resistance, it did not only suffer little from the Tartars, but they had
many choice and select Soldiers out of it; and having thus again recruited
their Army, they made another irruption into the Country of Quamgtung; and its
worth remarking, that the other Tartarian Commander, who, when the Army was
divided (as I related before,) had order to subdue the Mediterranean Countries,
The Provinces of Quamgtung is taken.
with the same felicity and expedition passing victorious through the Provinces
of H^qua^g and Kiangsi, entered also on one side of this Country of Quamgtung,
whilst the other came in by Fokien upon the other fide; and because the Town of
Na^kiung resolved to fight it out, they consumed it all, by fire and sword. So
the poor Country of Quamgtung oppressed by a double victorious Army, was
quickly overrun and subdued. After this, one of these victorious Armies,
enriched with all the rarities of China, was called back to Peking, but yet
they left a Garrison in every City, assigning in the name of the King of
Tartars both Civil and Martial Officers, for the Countries Government.

The happy success in taking the impregnable Province of Fokien, is
attributed by wise men, (to whose judgment I also submit) to a more remote and
hidden cause, which I will briefly relate. There was at this time a famous and
renowned Pyrat called Chinchilungus; this man was both in the Province of
Fokien, of which we are treating; he first served the Portughese in Macao; then
he served the Hollander in the Island called Formosa, where he was known to all
strangers by the name of Iquon. After this he became a Pyrat, but being of
quick and nimble wit, he grew from this small and slender fortune, to such a
height and power, as he was held either Superior or equal to the Emperor of
China; A famous Pyrate in China.
for he had the Trade of India in his hand; and he dealt with the Portugese in
Macao; with the Spaniards in the Phillippins; with the Hollanders in the Island
Formosa, and new Holland; with the Iaponians, and with all the Kings and
Princes of the Eastern parts in all manner of rich commodities. He permitted
none to transport the Wares of China but himself or his, to whom he brought
back the riches and the Silver of Europe and Indies; for after he once rather
extorted, than obtained pardon of the King of China for his Pyracies, he became
so formidable, as that he had no less than three thousand Ships of which he
was Lord and Master. Now was he contented with this fortune, but aspired
privately to no less than to the Empire; But because he knew he never should
be accepted of the Prefects and people, as long as there was any of the
Imperial Family of the Taiminges alive, he hoped by the Tartars means to
extinguish them wholly, and after this was done, then he resolved to display
his Banners and Ensigns in so pious a cause, as the driving out the common
Enemy from the bowels of the Kingdom; and no doubt but under this pretext, they
would all have followed, helped and even adored him, as their Savior. It was
therefore evident that he had secret correspondence with the Tartars; and that
he favored them for his own profit; And that which made the business more
suspicious was, that at that time when the Tartars made their irruption into
Fokien, he was then declared Lord Marshal of the Kingdom, and all the Generals,
Commanders and Soldiers, were either of his affinity, or wholly at his Command
and Obedience. And therefore it is no wonder, if the Tartars found an easy
admittance into the Country of Fokien; of which they presently made him King
Pingnan, (as much as to say; Pacifier of the South) and they added many other
Dignities, The Tartars deceive the Pyrat, and take him prisoner by mere Art.
and Offices of trust, that they might more speciously illude him; for either
they knew his aspiring mind, or else his great power and authority was
suspicious and formidable to them; but yet all the while that the General of
the Tartars remained in Fokien, they never expressed the least diffidence in
him, but both with favors, courtesies, presents and honors, they studied how
further to engage him, and promised him the Government of many more Provinces.
He made himself therefore secure of the Government of all the Southern
Provinces; but all happened quite contrary to his expectation; for when this
General of the Tartars, who was observed as a little King, was to depart to
Peking, the custom was for all the Officers of the Kingdom to conduct him, for
some part of his journey, to give him an honorable farewell; which last duty of
Civility, Iquan could not handsomely avoid, nor indeed, had he any reason to be
diffident in him; so as he left his Navy in the Port of Eocheu, and
accompanied the Royolet with great splendour and magnificence. But when he came
to take leave, and demand License to return, the General of the Tartars,
invited him a long to Peking, where he promised him yet greater honors from
the Kings own person, to reward his Merits. He endeavored by all imaginable
impediments, to excuse this journey, but nothing was accepted, he was forced,
by their kindness, to accompany them to Peking; and so he was taken by Art,
who by Arms seemed Insuperable. He is yet detained in Prison in Peking, because
his Brothers and Kindred hearing of his Captivity, presently seized on the
Fleet; with which they have much infested China, as we shall touch hereafter.

In the mean time the other Army which had passed the Mediterranean Provinces
of Huquang, The Tartars overthrow Quangsi.
Kiansi, and Quamgtung, invaded the Country of Quangsi. But here it was that
the Arms of the Tartars which hitherto were held invincible, were showed to
beweak, and where they least expected opposition, there they found a stop to
their conquests. It happened that in this Province of Quangsi the Viceroy,
called Khiu Thomas, was a Christian; and also all the Militia of that Country
was commanded by Ching Lucas, whose family for five Generations has served the
Emperors of China, with as much constancy and fidelity, as they did Christ.
These two having gathered many together, which fled from all parts into
Quangsi, after the Tartars had taken many places in the Country, overthrew the
Tartarians in a set Battle; and passing into the confining Province of
Quamgtung, they recovered all the Western part of it. After this, that they
might have a head to fight for, and who might command and govern them in all
Occurrences, and withal, to draw the minds and hands of the Chinese to the
common defense of the Country, knowing that in the City of Queilin, which is
the head City of Quangsi, Iungley made Emperor of China.
there was one of the Taiminges Family living, who was Nephew to the Great
Vanleius, they elected him Emperor, and called by the name of Iungley. This
Prince fixed his Imperial seat in the noble City of Chatking in the Province of
Quamgtung, and hitherto has fought several times with the Tartars, with good
success. And in this Princes Court, the chief Euncuh called Pang Acbilleus, is
the greatest favorite, and a great Servant of Christ, whom he has long
professed sincerely to worship, both by word and deed; for, to propagate
Christianity, he has ever maintained a mission of Jesuits about him, by whose
painful endeavors many have embraced the Faith of Christ. And amongst others
the very Mother of this Emperor, his Wife, and his eldest Son, The Heir to the
Empire becomes Christian.
Heir of the Empire, called Constantin, did all embrace Christianity. May this
Man by the prayers of all Christians prove another Constantine to the Empire of
China. The Emperor himself is not averse from Christianity, but hitherto he
has deferred his Baptism, but yet he permitted his Wife to send a Father of the
Society, to do homage to the Sea* Apostolic, as all Europe has heard. God of
his goodness grant him that felicity, which may redound to the universal good
of China, and Gods greater glory.

But it was not only in Quangsi that the Chinese began to resume their
courage, Thieves infest the Province of Fokien.
but in the Province of Fokien also, for no sooner was the Tartarian Army
called back to Peking, but a petty Heathen Priest broke out of the Mountains of
Fokien, with a band of seditious fellows, and subduing the Tartarian Garrisons
took the fair City of Kienning, and many others from their subjection; and
others which lay lurking in the Mountains following his example, recovered
also many other Cities; about which time also the friends and Kindred of the
Captive Iquon did extremely infest the Sea, and making descents upon the Land,
vexed the Province extremely about the Quarters of Siuencheu, and Changcheu. At
this time a chief Governor of the Tartarians, Viceroy of two Provinces was at
Cheksang; who hearing of these commotions came presently by night in great
haste with all the force he could make, toward the Mountains of Fokien; for he
with reason feared lest they should take possession of the Passages of those
places, which if they had done, the whole Province had been re-gained. But when
this Viceroy, called Changus, found the Mountains and Passages clear, and no
opposition made in such difficult places, he then proclaimed himself victorious,
and his enemies persidious Rebels: wherefore coming without resistance into the
Country, Changus the Commander of the Tartars besieges Kienning in vain.
he besieged the City Kienning, which was defended by Vangus. This Siege held
some weeks, but he never could take the place by force, and therefore having
lost many of his men by assaults, he judged it best rather to block up the
place afar off, than to besiege it so close and near. But yet by this, he
hindered other forces from joining with Vangus, so that he was not strong enough
to sally out upon them.

When the noise of these commotions came to Peking, the Emperor presently sent
a new supply to appease these tumults; and this fresh Army coming to join with
the other, It is at length taken and razed.
brought the City to great streights; but yet they could not win it, til at
length they found means by a rare invention to transport their Canons over the
Mountains upon Porters Shoulders, by which means they dismantled the Town, and
put all whatsoever to the Sword, to the number of thirty thousand persons, as
my own friends writ unto me; and not content with this, they set fire on the
Town, and brought it all to ashes, by which means, the stately Church erected
by the Christians for the service of God, was also consumed by that devouring
flame; yet the Priests that served in that Church got out miraculously as Lot
did out of Sodom; which name was appropriated to this City, by reason of that
infamous vice. This City being taken, it was no hard matter to recover the
Country; for some fled to save themselves in the Mountains, others ran to the
Sea, and so when this new Army had pacified all, they were called back to
Peking; where it is not amiss to observe the policy which the Tartars use in
the Government and ordering of their Army: They are ever calling back some, and
sending out others; in which proceeding they aim at two things; first to keep
the Countries in awe and subjection, by seeing variety of Troops continually
passing up and down; and secondly, to provide for the poorer sort of Soldiers;
for the wealthy Soldier is called back to recreat, and ease labors, and the
poor Soldier seeing his Companion grown rich, takes heart and courage to run
the same course upon hopes of the like good fortune.

Yet for all these preventions and cautions, their Empire was not so
established, but by frequent rebellions it was often endangered; and
particularly by one Rebellion, which now I will relate, which shaked shrewdly
the foundations of the new Empire. The Kingdom of China is of so vast an
extent, How the Tartars dispose their Garrisons.
as it is a business of main importance, to distribute judiciously the Armies
and Garrisons. Now because the Tartars alone cannot suffice to furnish both,
they are forced to use the help of the Chinese themselves, although they have
a special care never to leave or place either Commander or Soldier, who is a
Native, in the same Country; yet this care could not exempt them from several
Treasons, and Rebellions; though they distribute and order their Militia, with
great circumspection; for the chief Commander or Governor resides in the
Metropolitan City, whom all inferior Officers obey. This man maintains
always a complete Army, which he commands to march, when he hears of any
risings. Every City has also their own proper Governor, with a competent
number of Soldiers, but those for the most part are Tartars, and these are
Chines. But all this Political, and well-established Government could not
defend them from Traitors amongst themselves. The first man that did revolt
from them was one Kinus Governor of the Province of Kiangsi, Kinus Governor
of a Province rebelleth.
This man was born in Leaotung, and because it is a Country that borders upon
Tartary, the King commonly most confides in the Natives of that Province. It
happened I know not how, that this Governor, by reason of some corruptions,
and Avarice of the Visitor of the Country, had some contests with him, which
grew by little and little to a secret hatred; The hatred betwixt the two
Prefects disturbs the Country of Kiansi.
and although they both dissembled their private malice, as usually they do in
China, yet at length the flame broke out to the ruin of the Country; for being
the one was Governor of the Arms, and the other of Justice, there was a
necessity of often meetings, and feastings also. It happened once that whilst
they were feasted with a sumptuous Banquet, they were also entertained by a
pleasant Comedy; in which the Actors were attired with the habits of China,
which were more comely and fairer than those which the Tartars use; upon which
occasion Kinus turning himself to the Visitor said, Is not this habit better,
and graver than ours? This innocent speech was interpreted by his corrival
Judge, as if he had contemned the Edict about changing of Habits, and expressed
too much love to the Chines Garments, before those of the Tartars; and of this
he sent an Express to advertise the Emperor.

But the Governor Kinus, had corrupted a Secretary, which served the Lord
Chief Justice; who gave him intelligence of all that passed in word or deed in
his Masters House. And as soon as he had notice that this Letter was sent to
the Court, he presently dispatched those, who intercepted the Packet; which the
Governor having read, went presently armed to the Judges Palace, whom he
suddenly killed. Then presently he with the whole Province revolted from the
Tartars, and with the great applause of all the Chinese, he submitted himself
to Iungley the new elected Emperor. One only City called Cancheu, which was
governed by an incorrupted Tartar, refused to submit; which was the whole, and
only cause, that the Tartars did recover the two Provinces Kiansi and Quamtung;
both which Provinces revolted at the same time with their Commanders, and both
submitted also to the new elected Emperor. Many places revolt from the Tartar.
^ihuzus was Governor of Quamgtung at that time, who resolved to join his
Forces with Kinus, and so to cast the Tartars out of the Empire; which it is
believed they might have effected, if the Governor of Cancheu, which is the
Key and entrance into four Provinces, had not cunnigly undermined all their
designs and intentions. But this man hearing that Lihuzus had revolted, and
marched to join his Army with Kinus, dispatched to him this deceitful Letter,
The deceit of the Governor of Cancheu.
I have not hitherto submitted to Kinus, because I knew his forces were not
equal, nor able to resist the Tartars: But seeing thou, most renowned and
valiant Captain, beginnest also to march against them, my hopes concerning them
are at end, I am thine, and embrace thy cause; whenever thou shall come, or
send, I will render my City to thee or thine. But in the mean time he sent to
all the Governors in Fokien, to send him secretly all the possible succor
they could raise altogether. Lihuzus having received the Letter marched toward
him, cheerfully, and confidently; But though he found the Gates of the City
open, yet he was furiously repelled by the Tartarians opposition; which
unexpected accident so astonished his Soldiers, as many of them perished, and
amongst the rest it is thought himself was killed, for he was never heard of
after.

This reverse and cross fortune did much disturb the progress of the Emperor
Iangley's affairs; though Kinus in the mean time had many singular victories
over the Tartars; for when the chief Governor of all the Western parts of
China, who had placed his chief Seat in Nanking, had gathered great Forces to
repress his aspiring mind, yet he was several times routed and overthrown by
him; and if Kinus had pursued the course of his victories, he might have come
to the very Walls of Nanking; but he was sollicitous of the City of Cancheu,
which obliged him to a retreit; for neither was it safe for him to leave an
enemy behind him, nor could be receive victuals from the Emperor Iungley, but
by Cancheu, which is the natural descent of the River; and therefore when he
heard of Lihuzu's defeat, he presently besieged that City with his whole Army;
But whilst he was besieging this City, there came, unfortunately, a new Army of
Tartars from the Imperial City of Peking, which had order to recover this
Province of Kiangsi; and therefore Kinus was forced to raise his Siege to
oppose their entrance by the Northern parts of the Country; And at first having
a vast Army, and used to the Tartarian warfare, he fought both valiantly and
happily; but not being able to sustain any longer their redoubled violent
assaults, Kinus besieged by the Tartars.
he was forced to retire for his security to Nanchang, the chief City of that
Country; which City the Tartars durst not venture to take by force, but
resolved to reduce it by a long Siege; for which end they gathered together a
Company of Country Clowns to make a large and spacious Trench round about the
City to the River, and there they placed Ships, so as no Provision could
possibly enter. This City of Nanchang is great and extremely full of
inhabitants, besides the multitude of Soldiers which defended it at that time;
so as although Kinus had made great Provision for a Siege, yet after some
months he came to great want and pennury; and yet he held it out though many
dyed, expecting still some succors from the Emperor Iungley, which could not
be sent; because the Soldiers of Quamgtung could never subdue the City of
Chancheu, by which his succor was to pass; wherefore Kinus being brought to
great extremity, expressed his mind to his Soldiers in these words, There is
no further hope, (my faithful Companions) but in our own valor and strength,
we must force our way through the Tartarian Army by dint of Sword; be
courageous, and follow my example. Kinus breaks out of the City.
And having ordered all affairs, he suddenly made a Sally out of the Town upon
their Trenches; where, though he found a vigorous opposition, yet, with great
difficulty, he passed and forced their Trenches, by which means he saved
himself and his Army, having killed many Tartars; for it is constantly reported
that Kinus with a good part of his Army lives in the Mountains, expecting there
some good occasion to renew the War.

He being thus escaped, The City of Nanchang is destroyed.
the Tartars pillaged the City, and put all the Citizens to the sword; for it
is the Tartars custom to spare all Cities which submit to them; and to those
which have made resistance before they be taken, they are more cruel; but they
never spare or pardon those Cities which revolt after they have once been
taken. In this Slaughter they killed the two Priests which there assisted the
Christians; and their ancient and fair Church was burned in the City. After
this, the Tartars easily recovered the whole Country, and having appeased all,
and left new Garrisons in all places, the Army returned victorious to the Royal
City of Peking. In the mean time this Court prepared new Armies to reduce
Quamgtung with the other Provinces which acknowledged Iungley for the Emperor
of China; for the Tutor to the young King of Tartary, finding the defections
and rebellions in the Southern parts to be very frequent, resolved to give
those Quarters over to some Tributary Royolets, Three Kings created with as
many Armies against Iungley the Emperor of China.
the better to contain those Countries in their duties; wherefore in the year
MDCXLIX. he sent three Armies, consisting partly of Tartars, and partly of
Chinese, under three Tributary Princes, to govern these Provinces with
absolute power and Dominion; one of these was King of Fokien, another of
Quamgtung, and the third of the Province of Quangsi; but with this condition,
that first, of all they should join their Forces to recover the Country of
Quamgtung, and drive away the Emperor Iungley. But we shall say more of this
hereafter; now having seen the Rebellions of the South, let us look a little
back on the Rebellions in the North against the Tartars also.

In these Northern parts the Chinese showed their desire of Liberty as much as
they had done in the South; where the Commanders though overthrown, yet not
taken, retired into the abrupt and precipitious Mountains, where they held
Counsel, how they might shake off the Tartars Dominion; three of these heads
inhabited the thickest and highest places of that mountanous Country; House
rises against the Tartars.
the chiefest of whom was called House; this man being strong in men, invited
the rest to join with him, to deliver his Country from this miserable
thraldom; one of them consented, the other could not come, but sent him two
thousand men to assist him; so as House marched out with five and twenty
thousand men; which was no contemptible Army if they had been as courageous, as
numerous: He put out a Proclamation, in which he challenged the Tartars, and
threatened them all extremities; and to the Chinese, he promised all liberty
and freedom; and upon these hopes, many Towns and Cities admitted him very
willingly. Sigan, the Metropolitan of the Country, was the only place able to
resist him, having within its Walls three thousand Tartars, and two thousand
selected men of China, who served the Tartar. The Governor of this Town
hearing of House his motion, gathered all things necessary for a long Siege,
till a new supply of Tartarian Forces could be sent him. But when be heard that
all the Towns and Cities in the Country did voluntarily submit themselves to
House, The barbarous resolution of a Tartarian Governor.
to prevent the like effect in this City, he resolved to murder all the
Citizens most barbarously; nor would he ever be removed from this unhumane
sentence, till the Viceroy commanding and persuading, and the Citizens
promising all faithful service, at length he changed this Tyrannical Counsel.
But he commanded under pain of death, that the Chinese, who loved so much
their Hair, that they only cut a little of it away, about their Temples, should
hereafter shave it off wholly and totally, that so he might distinguish the
Citizens from any others, if perchance they entered: he ordained besides, that
if any spoke more than two together, they should all be presently killed; he
forbad all men to walk upon the Walls, or to walk in the streets by night, or
to keep a fire or candle in his house by night; and finally disarmed all,
declaring it death to in^^inge any of these orders.

These things being thus ordered, The chief City called Sigan is besieged.
he sent out some Scoots to discover the enemies strength, who were partly
killed, and partly came flying back to the City; but this Tartarian Governor,
as well to make an oftentation of his strength, as of his security, commanded
the City Gates to be left open, nor would he permit the Draw. Bridge to be
raised or pulled up, to show he feared nothing. But for all this, the Commander
House besieges this City afar off, (which was three leagues compass,) out of
the reach of their Artillery; and to the end he might make a show of greater
forces than indeed he had, he joined to his Army a company of dull headed
Clowns, by which means he made up a body of thirty thousand men. The Governor
of the City seeing such an Army, as appeared, believed them all to be
Soldiers, and lest his Citizens should join with them, he thought again of
cutting all their throats; but his friends ever diver^ed him from this
outrageous cruelty; and it diverted him from such horrid projects, when he
walking upon the Walls, saw the Chinese under his colors fight so valiantly
against House; for when he saw this, he used to cry out in their Language, Hoo
Manzu, (as much as to say) O good Barbarians; for so the Tartars call the
Chinaes, as conquering Nations use to expose the conquered to scorn and
derision; and he crowned this scoff with these words, Mauzaxa Manz^, as much as
to say, Let the barbarous kill the barbarous; and when they returned
victorious, he did not only praise them, but gave them Money, and other
precious rewards, which were exposed to public view upon the Walls, to animate
them to high and generous exploits; so as House finding no Body stir in the
City, as he expected, could do nothing; besides, there came new succors to the
Tartarian Army, which when Ho^^ understood by his spies, he presently retired.
But yet this flight did not serve his turn, nor could he wholly escape the
Tartars hands, for the Horsemen pursuing them, fell upon the Rear, and (...)
many, c^^rying away great store of Riches, which the Commander distributed in
such proportion, as he gave most to such as were wounded; what became of House
after this action, is unknown, and therefore I conclude, that these Northern
revolts produced no other effect, but the spoil, Rapin and Plunder of all those
Quarters, as it had produced the like, in the Southern parts. The Tartars
having happily overcome all difficulties hitherto, fell into another by their
own insolency; The Tartars insolences produced great danger.
from the year MDCXLIX. the Emperor of the Tartars, being now grown up to man's
Estate, desired to Marry the Daughter of the King of Tayngu, who is Prince of
the Western Tartars, hoping by this match, to conserve the friendship of him,
whose Forces he feared; for this end he sent his uncle to him, who was King of
Punang. This Prince passed by the impregnable City of Tartung; which as it is
the last City toward the North, so also it is the Key and Bulwark of the
Province of Xansi against the irruption of the Western Tartars, for it commands
all the Soldiers which keep the many Fortifications of those Quarters, where a
fair Level down extending it self beyond that famous. Wall, I mentioned
heretofore, gives a fit occasion for the incursion of the Tartars. The Women of
this City are held the most beautiful of all China; and therefore it happened,
that some of the Ambassadors followers did ravish some of them; and also
carried away by a Rape, a Person of quality, as she was carried home to her
Spouse, which was a thing never heard of heretofore amongst the Chines^s. The
people had recourse for these injuries to Kiangus, who governed those Quarters
for the Tartars; who hearing of this gross abuse, sent to that petty Prince
Pauang, to demand the new Married Lady to be restored, and to desire him to
prevent future disorders in that nature; but he gave a very slight Ear to such
complaints; and therefore Kiangus himself went unto him, who was not only
slighted, but even cast out of the Palace. Kiangus rises against the Tartars.
His anger was quickly turned into rage; which made him resolve to revenge that
injury by the Tartars blood; he therefore Musters up his Soldiers, and
presently falls on the Tartars, kills all he could encounter; the Ambassador
himself being let down by the Walls of the Town, hardly escaped by swift (...).
Then Kiangus displayed a Banner, wherein he declared himself a Subject to the
Empire of China, but named no Emperor in particular, because perchance he had
heard nothing of the Emperor Iung^^y, by reason of so vast a distance. But,
however, he invited all the Chinese to the defense of their Country, Kiangus
gathers great Forces.
and to expel the Tartars; and many Captains as well as Soldiers, came into
him^ (...) even the very Western Tartars against whom he had ever both Arms,
being promised great rewards, sent him the Forces which he demanded. This
accident extremely troubled the Court; for they knew well that the Western
Tartars did both aspire to the Empire of China, and also were envious at their
prosperous course of fortune; they also knew that they were more abundant in
Men and Horses than they were; for from hence it is they bought all their best
Horses, and they feared that now they should have no more; and therefore they
resolved to send presently a good strong Ar my against him, before he should
gather a greater strength. But (...) who was as crafty as valiant, and one who
by long experience knew how to deal with the Tartars, first feigned to fly with
his Army; But in the (...) he placed very many Carts and Wagons, which were all
covered very carefully as if they had carried the richest Treasures they
possessed, but in real truth they carried nothing but many great, and lesser,
pieces of Artillery, with their mouths turned upon the Enemy: all which the
Tartars perceiving, presently pursue; they fight without any order, and fall
upon the prey with great Aviditie; but those that accompanied the Wagons,
firing the Artillery, Kiangus overthrows the Tartars by a stratagem. He bears
the Tartars again.
took off the greatest part of the Army; and withal, Kiangus wheeling about,
came up upon them, and made a strange carnage amongst them; and after this he
showed himself no less admirable in Stratagems than in fortitude and courage;
when he fought a set pitched Field, with a new recruited Army of the Tartars,
in which he obtained so noble, and renowned a victory, that he filled all the
Court at Peking with fear and trembling; for by this means victorious Kiangus
had gathered so vast an army, as he counted no less than a hundred and forty
thousand Horse, and four hundred thousand foot, all men having recourse to
him, to defend their Country against the Tartarian army; and therefore
Amavangus, Tutor to the Emperor, thinking it not fit to commit this business
to any other, resolved himself to go against Kiangus, and try the last turn
of fortune for the Tartars; Amavangus himself goes against Kiangus.
he therefore drew out all the eight Colors, that is, the whole Forces that
were then in Peking; for under these eight colors are comprehended all the
Forces of the Kingdom of China, whether they be Natives or Tartars; the first
of which is White, called the Imperial Banner; the second is Red; the third is
Black; the fourth is Yellow; and these three last are governed and commanded by
the Uncle of the Emperor, but the first is immediately subject to the Emperor;
of these four colors by several mixtures, they frame four more, so as every
Soldier knows his own colors, and to what part of the City to repair, where
they have ever their Arms and Horses ready for any expedition; The Tartars
Banners.
so as in one half hour they all are ready; for they blow a Horn just in the
fashion of that, which we appropriate usually to our Tritons, and by the manner
of winding it, they presently know, what Companies and Captains must march, so
as they are ready in a moment to follow their Ensign, which a Horseman carries
tied behind him, though commonly none but the Commander and Ensign knows
whither they go: this profound secrecy in their exercise of War, has often
astonished the Chinese: for many times, when they thought to oppose them in
one part, they presently heard they were in another Quarter: and it is no
wonder they are so quick, for they never carry with them any Baggage, nor do
they take care for Provision: for they feed themselves with what they find,
yet commonly they eat Flesh, though half roasted, or half boiled; if they find
none, then they devour their Horses, or Camels: but ever when they have
leisure, they go a hunting all manner of wild Beasts, either by some excellent
Dogs and Vultures, which they bring up for that end, The Tartars delight in
hun^ing.
or else by incompassing a whole Mountain, or large Field, they beat up all the
wild Beasts into a circle, and drive them into so narrow a compass, as that
they can take as many as they please, and dismiss the rest. The earth covered
with their Horse-cloath is their Bed, for they care not for Houses, and
Chambers; but if they be forced to dwell in Houses, their Horses must lodge
with them, and they must have many holes beaten in the Walls; but yet their
Tents are most beautiful, which they fix and remove with such Art and
dexterity, as they never retard the speedy march of an Army. Thus the Tartars
train their Soldiers to hardness for War.

Out of all these Ensigns Amavangus chose the choicest men to accompany his
person. And besides, he took part of those which he had deputed to follow the
three Royalets which he dispatched to the South, ordering them to take as many
out of the several Garrisons through which they passed, as might supply this
defect. But although Amavangus had so gallant, and such a flourishing Army, yet
he never durst give Battle to Kiangus, lest he might seem to expose the whole
Empire of the Tartars to the fortune of one Battle; Amavangus, durst not fight
with Kiangus.
So that although Kiangus did frequently offer him Battle; yet he ever refused
to fight, expecting still to hear what reply the Western Tartars would make to
his Proposition of his Nephews Marriage; for he had sent a Legate to that
Tartarian King with precious gifts, as well to demand his Daughter for the
Emperor of China, as to desire him to afford no succor to the Rebel Kiangus:
The precious gifts of Gold, of Silk, of Silver, and of Women, obtained
whatsoever he demanded; and therefore Kiangus seeing himself deserted of the
Tartars, that he might provide as well as he could for his own affairs,
returned to the City Taitung, of which he soon repented himself, when it was
too late; for Amavangus calling in an innumerable number of Pezants, in the
space of three days, with an incredible diligence, cast up a Trench of ten
Leagues compass, which he so fortified with Bulwarks and Ramparts, that in a
trice he blocked up that City. Then did Kiangus see his error in granting them
leisure to draw their Trench, which he knew would debar him from all manner of
Provision. And therefore being enraged with anger, as he was a man full of
metal, and a great Soldier, turning himself to his Soldiers, he said, If I
must dye, I had rather dye by the Sword, than by Famine; and upon this marched
out presently to the Enemies Trench with his whole Army. Here it was that both
the parties fought most obstinately, the one to seek his Passage, the other to
hinder his Advance; so as the fortune was various, and the victory doubtful,
until an unlucky Arrow transpier^'d Kiangus; Kiangus is killed.
and in him all the hope of China perished. His Soldiers seeing him dead,
partly ran away, and partly submitted to the Tartars, who received them with
all courtesy and humanity; for they had cause enough of joy, to see they had
escaped the danger of losing the Empire, and that they had conquered so
formidable a Commander. But yet they Plundered the City Taitung, and burned the
City of Pucheu, where the Church of the Christians also perished. From hence
the Tartars returned to Peking, where I saw them enter overladen with Riches
and triumphant Laurels; But Amavangus pursued his journey to the Western
Tartars; where he ratified his Nephew Xunchius his Marriage, and brought back
with him an infinite Company of Horse from the Tartars of the Kingdom of
Tanya. Xanchius the Emperor Marries.


In the mean time, the three Royalets which went to the Southern Kingdoms, to
pacify those unquiet Provinces, took their journey by the descent of the
River Guel; and when they passed through that Province, which the Emperor had
given the Tartars to inhabit, and cultivate, after he had expelled the Chinese
for their Rebellion, most of these Pezants, being wholly ignorant of tilling
and manuring the ground, as having never been used to manage a Spade or a
Plough, but their Swords; these men, I say, desired earnestly these Princes,
that they might accompany them in these Wars, and in their expeditions; Two of
these Princes rejected their Petitions; but the third called Kengus without any
consent or order from the Emperor, listed them amongst his own Troops; upon
which they joyfully changed their rustical instruments into weapons for war;
when the Emperor heard of this proceeding, he sent word to Kengus to dismiss
them; but he pretended various excuses, and did neglect the Emperors orders.
He therefore commanded the supreme Governor of all the Southern Quarters who
resides ever at Nanking either to take Kengus alive, or cause him to be slain.
He presently cast about how to compass the Emperors command with all secrecy,
and received the three Royolets with all sorts of divertisements, of Comedies,
Banquets, and the like pleasures, as if he had received no distastful order
from the Emperor. And when the day was come that they resolved to prosecute
their journey by the great River of Kiang, the said Governor contrived his
business so, as he met them again in the River, and under pretense of taking
his last farewell, he entertained them nobly with a Royal feast, and in as
Royal a Junck; which in China are so magnificent, as they resemble rather some
gilded Palaces than floating Vessels. In this Princely Ship he entertained
these Princes in all jollity and mirth, until their Army had advanced a good
way before, and then he declared to Kengus the Emperors order; who presently
promised all submission, and to return to Nanking with him, if he would only
permit him to go to his Ship, which expected him in the River, to order some
little affairs of his own; which being granted, he no sooner got into his Ship,
Kengus hangs himself.
but, knowing he could not avoid death by another man's hand, he chose rather to
be his own executioner; and so hanged himself. Yet for all this, the supreme
Governor in the Emperors name, granted to this Man's Son the same Dignity and
Province which had been conferred upon the Father; and thus the three Royolets
joining again, having passed Nanking and Kiangsi, came at length into the
Province of Quamtung, to carry on the War against the Emperor Iungley; and at
their first entrance, they took many Cities, which durst not oppose the
strength of their Armies; only, the City of Quangcheu resolved to try its
fortune and strength.

This City of Quangcheu is a most rich and beautiful place, environed with
large waters; only the Northern Gate joines to the Continent, on all other
sides it is entrable only by boat. In this Town was the Son of the Captive
Iquon whom I mentioned before; besides, there was a strong Garrison to defend
it, and amongst others many fugitives from Macao, who were content to serve the
Emperor Iungly for great stipends; and by reason the Tartars had neither
Ships, nor skill to govern them, and that the Town had both the one and the
other, it is no wonder if they endured almost a whole years Siege, having the
Sea open for their relief; the Tartars made many assaults, in which they lost
many men, and were ever beaten back, and vigorously repelled. This courage of
theirs, made the Tartars fall upon a resolution of beating down the Town Walls,
with their great Cannon, which had such effect, as in fine they took it the 24.
of November MDCL. and because it was remarked that they gave to one of the
Prefects of the Town, the same Office he had before, it was suspected it was
delivered by Treason. The City of Quang^hen is taken and pillaged.
The next day after, they began to Plunder the City, and the sackage endured
from the 24. of November till the 5. of December, in which they neither spared
Man, Woman or Child; but all whosoever came in their way were cruelly put to
the Sword; nor was there heard any other Speech; But, Kill, kill these
barbarous Rebels; yet they spared some Artificers to conserve the necessary
Arts, as also some strong and lusty men, such as they saw able to carry away
the Pillage of the City; but finally the 6 day of December came out an Edict,
which forbad all further vexation, after they had killed a hundred thousand
men, besides all those that perished several ways during the Siege. After
this bloody Tragedy, all the Neighboring Provinces sent voluntarily their
Legates to submit, demanding mercy, which they obtained by the many rich
presents which were offered. After this the Royalet marched with his Army,
against the City Chaoking, where the Emperor Iungley held his Court; but he
knowing himself far inferior in Forces, and unable to resist, fled away with
his whole Army and Family, leaving the City to the Tartars mercy. The Emperor
Iungly flies.
But whither this Emperor fled, is yet wholly unknown to me, for at this time
I took Shipping in Fokien to the Philippines, and from thence I was commanded
to go for Europe, by those whom I must not disobey. But I make no doubt, but
the Emperor retired into the adjoining Province called Quangsi.

Now to give the Reader a little touch how the Tartars stand affected to
Christianity; in the Metropolitan City of Quangcheu, which (as I now related)
was utterly destroyed, we had a stately Church, and there was a venerable
person, who had the care and superintendency of all the Christians, The Author
of the Relation of China.
whose name was Alvarus Semedo a Jesuit; this Man they took and tied hand and
foot for many days, and threatened to kill him every hour, unless he would
deliver the Christians Treasures; but the poor man had no Treasure to produce;
so as he suffered much, till at length the King heating of his case, took pity
of his venerable gray Heirs and comely Person, and gave him not only his life
and liberty, The Tartars offer a Church to Christians.
but a Bible, and a Breviary, together with a good sum of Money for an Alms;
and finally a House to build a Church for Christians; and this is less to be
wondered at from him, because heretofore he had been a Soldier under that
famous Sun Ignatius, whom I mentioned before, where he knew what belonged to
Christianity, and also had seen the Jesuits in his Camp, from whence he fled to
the Tartars. Nor is it only this Tartar that favors us Christians, but in a
manner all the rest do love, honor, and esteem those Fathers, and many have
embraced our Religion, nor do we doubt but many more would follow their
example, if we could enter Tartary, as now it is projecting, where doubtless
many great things may be performed, for the reducing of that Nation to the
Faith of Christ; and perchance God has opened a way to the Tartars to enter
China, to give Christianity a passage into Tartary, which hitherto to us has
been unknown and inaccessible.

About this time also they made War against the Kingdom of corea; who of late
years became also Tributary to the Tartars, upon condition that they should
still conserve their Hair and Habits: Corea revolted from the Tartars.
but now the Tartars would needs constrain them to conform themselves to the
Tartarian fashion; and therefore all that Kingdom revolted from the Tartars;
but my departure hindered me from knowing since what has passed.

But all these glorious victories were much eclipsed, by the sorrowful death
of Amavangus, Amavangus dies.
which happened in the beginining of the year MDCLI. He was a Man to whom the
Tartars owe their Empire in China, and such an one as whom both Tartars and
Chinese loved and feared, for his prudence, Justice, humanity, and skill in
Martial affairs. The death of this Potentate did much trouble the Court; for
the Brother to this Man called Quingtus, would needs pretend to the Government
of the Empire, and of the young Emperor Xunchius; but both the Tartars and the
Chinese resisted his claim, alleging, that, being of sixteen year old, he
was able to govern the Kingdom himself; and in conformity to this opinion, all
the Presidents deposed the Ensigns of their Offices, refusing ever to receive
them from any, but from the young installed Emperor Xunchius. To which
Constancy the King Kuintus, Uncle to the Emperor, prudently yielded, lest he
should exasperate the minds of many, and raise greater troubles in the Empire.

But I cannot doubt, but the death of Amavangus, must needs endanger the
Tartarian Empire, and bring all their affairs into great disturbance; for they
will hardly find a Man so beloved, feared, and expert in all Military
Discipline and Government as he in effect showed himself to be; but time will
teach us, what will become of all, for since his death we have no certainty of
any relation.

Now let us turn the thread of our discourse as I promised here above, and
consider the fortune and success of the other Great Brigand, caled
Changhienchungus, to let the Reader understand how the Tartars did invade, not
only the Mediterranean and Oriental parts, but also the Occidental Quarters of
that vast Kingdom.

But before I begin to speak of this monster of nature, I must ingeniously
confess, Changhienchungus a cruel Tyrant.
I am both ashamed, and also touched with a kind of horror, to declare his
villainies, both in respect they seem to exceed all belief, and therefore I may
perchance be held to write Fables; as also because it is no grateful thing to
make reflections on such Subjects; yet I may sincerely protest, that I have in
my hands a long relation of all his Acts, written by two Religious persons, who
were then in the Province of Suchuen to exercise their Functions, which Country
was the Theater of all his Brutalities, which I shall relate; and because I
judge these two persons to be of an incorrupted Faith, I judge therefore that a
mortal Man might arrive to this pitch of wickedness and inhumane Cruelty. I
therefore gathered out of that relation, what I here relate; which is nothing
else but a vast Mass of such abominable Cruelty, as I doubt not even the most
mildest Reader will take the Author to be no Man but some horrid wild Beast, or
rather, if no more execrable name occurres, some Devil trans^vested in our
humane Nature.

This monster, like a wild Bear, entered into diverse Provinces, filling all with
Rapin, Death, Fire and Sword, with all other imaginable miseries; for he had a
mind to destroy all, that so he might have no enemies, or leave any alive that
might revolt from him, but only content himself with his own Soldiers; and
oftentimes he spared not these. But the Province of Suchuen, where he usurped
the Title of a King was the chief Theater of his barbarous cruelty; for after
he had afflicted and vexed the Provinces of Huquang and Honan, and part of that
of Nanking and Kiangsi, he entered the Province of Suchuen in the year MDCXLIV.
and having taken the principal City called Chingtu, in the heat of his fury he
killed a King of the Taimingian Race, which here had established his Court; as
he has done also to seven other Grandees of the same family. These were the
Preludes of the Tragical Acts, He kills diverse Princes.
whose Senses I go about briefly to describe, that so Europe may see, what a
horrid and execrable thing an unbridled and armed cruelty appears to be, when
it furiously rages in the darkness of Infidelity.

This Brigand had certain violent and sudden motions of furious cruelty, and
maxims drawn from the very bowels of vengeance its self; for if he were never
so little offended by another, or suspected another to be offended with him, he
presently commanded such to be massacred; and having nothing in his mouth but
murder and death, he often for one single Man's fault destroyed all the Family,
respecting neither Children, nor Women with Child; nay many times he cut off
the whole Street where the offender dwelled, For one offending, he puts all to
death.
involving in the Slaughter, as well the innocents as nocents. It happened once
he sent a man post into the Country of Xensi, who being glad he was got out of
the Tyrants hands, would not return; to revenge this imaginary injury, he
destroyed all the Quarter of the City in which he dwelt, and thought he much
bridled his fierceness, that he did not wholly extinguish all the City. To
this I add another unhumane Act, about his hangman, whom it seems he loved
above the rest, because he was crueller; this man dying of a disease, he caused
the Physician who had given him Physic to be killed; and not content with
this, he Sacrificed one hundred more of that Profession to the Ghost of his
deceased Officer.

He was affable and sweet toward his Soldiers; he played, banquetted, and
feasted with them, conversing familiarly with them; and when they had performed
any Military Action, with honor and valor, he gave them precious gifts of
Silks and Moneys; but yet many times he commanded some of them to be cruelly
put to death before him upon very small cause, especially such as were of the
Province of Suchuen where he reigned; (whom he entirely hated, because he
thought they did not rejoice in his Royal dignity.) Insomuch as he hardly ever
did any public Action, which though it began like a Comedy, yet had not in
fine, the sad Catastrophe of a Tragedy; His hatred to the people of Suchuen.
for if, walking out, he did but epsy a Soldier ill clad, or whose manner of
Gate or walking was not so vigorous or Masculine as he desired, he presently
commanded him to be killed. He once gave a Soldier a piece of Silk, who
complained to his fellows of the poorness of the piece, and being overheard
by a spy, (of which he had a great number) who presently acquainted him with
what was said, he presently commanded him, and this whole Legion which were of
two thousand men, to be all Massacred.

He had in his Royal City some six hundred Prefects, or Judges, and men
belonging to the Law, He cuts off a Legion for one man's fault. He kills many
City Officers.
such as managed the principal Offices; and in three years space there was
hardly twenty left, having put all the rest to several deaths for very slight
causes; He caused a Sergeant Major which the Chinese call Pingpu, to be flayed
alive, for having granted leave to a China Philosopher, without special order,
to retire a little to his Country House. And whereas he had five hundred
Eunuchs taken from the Princes of the Taimingean Family, after he had put their
Lords to death; he commanded all these to be cruelly put to death; only
because one of them had presumed to style him, And he killed also the Eunuchs.
not by the Title of a King, but by the bare name of Changhienchungus, as if he
then were no Thief.

Nor did he spare the Heathenish Priests, who sacrificed to their Idols. These
sort of men, before he came into this Country, having feignd many crimes
against the Priests, which preached the Faith of Christ, had raised a bitter
persecution against them; which God of his goodness did turn so much to their
good, as they had permission to teach and preach publicly the Law of Christ.
But after this Tyran^ came into the Country, the chief of these Heathenish
Priests was apprehended for some words let fall against him, and in the
presence of the Fathers, who by accident were then at audience with the Tyrant,
he was beheaded; And although they had learned of Christ to do good for evil,
yet knowing the phrenetical anger and fury of this monster, who used to punish
those that interceded, with the punishment of the offender, they durst not make
any motion for the least favor. It is true, this cruel Beast loved these
Fathers, and would often converse with them, whom he experienced wise and
learned, and he would often call them to the Palace to entertain him in
discourse; but they knowing well his precipitous anger, went ever prepared for,
and expecting death; and indeed they were thrice deputed to death; and a fourth
time escaped also by Gods particular providence, as we shall relate in time and
place. But he was not contented with the death of one of these same Heathenish
Priests, but having got together about twenty thousand of the same profession,
he sent them all to hell, to visit their Masters whom they had served. And then
he would applaud himself, as if he had done a very Heroical Action, saying to
them, These men would have taken away your lives; For one man's fault he kills
twenty thousand.
but Thiencheu, so they call God, which signifies the Lord of Heaven, has sent
me to revenge your cause, and inflict due punishment upon these wretches. He
would often confer also with the Fathers of Christian Religion, and that so
properly, as a man would take him for a Christian. He praised, and highly
extolled the Religion of Christians, which he well understood, partly by the
conferences which he frequently had with the Fathers, and partly by reading
their books, which for the Instruction of Christians they had writ in the China
language; and has often promised to build a Church to the God of Christians,
worthy of his magnificence, when he once came to be Emperor of China; and
indeed all the works he erected were ver^ splendid and magnificent; but he
polluted them all with the blood of the Workmen; for if he found they had but
committed the least error, or the least imperfection, he presently put them to
death upon the place.

On the North part of the Country of Suchuen, where it confines with the
Province of Xensi, lies the strong City called Nanchung, which though it be
seated in the County of Xensi, He endeavors to take Hanchung.
yet in respect, it is both so strong and of so great an extent, it is held to
be the Key of both the two Provinces. The Tyrant endeavored by all industry to
make himself Master of this important place, as being a convenient passage to
the rest; wherefore in the year MDCXLV. he levied a vast Army, consisting of
one hundred and fourscore thousand men, all Natives of the County of Suchuen,
besides those of his own, which had always followed him. He sent before this
numerous Army, which besieged the Town a long time, but found so rigorous
resistance, that they began to be weary, and about forty thousand of those
Soldiers of Suchuen revolted to the Prefects which governed the be-leagured
City; by which means the Army was constrained to return to the Tyrant, without
any memorable Action: and he being en^aged with anger to see them retire,
commanded all the rest of the Soldiers of the Province of Suchuen, (which were
in number one hundred and forty thousand,) He kil^ 140000 men most cruelly.
to be all massacred by the rest of the Army. This horrible Butchery lasted
four days; in which slaughter he commanded many of them to have their skins
pulled off, which he filling with straw, and sowing on the head, commanded to
be carried publicly and visibly into the Towns where they were born, so to
strike more terror into the hearts of the inhabitants; and after all this, yet
he had such a malicious hatred against this Country, that he never ceased to
vex and torment it, even when it was in a manner left desolate. Many unexpert
persons, without head or guide, did take Arms against him, but he quickly
dispersed them, being wholly unexperienced in Military Discipline; others that
were wiser, leaving the City, retired into the Mountains, which were in a
manner the only men who escaped his fury.

After this he called all the Students of the Country to be examined for their
degrees, promising to give those honors, to whomsoever should deserve them
best; and the Chinese are so bewitched with the desire of these dignities, He
kills all the Students.
that they did not conceive the perfidious Stratagem of the Tyrant. There
appeared therefore in the public Hall deputed for that Ceremony about eighteen
thousand persons; all which he commanded his Soldiers to massacre most
barbarously, saying; These were the people who by their cavilling sophisms,
solicited the people to rebellions.

I have a horror to relate so many unhumane slaughters, and yet I see my self
overwhelmed with new ones; for what an addition is it to all his related
barbarities, to tell you, That he never spared Children, Boys, nor Girls, no
nor M^trons with Child, and ready to lie down? what an excess of all inhumanity
to take the Prefects Wives; He kills the Children and exposes the Matrons.
when their Husbands were condemned, but yet alive, and to expose these Women
to all kind of villainies; and then to kill them? This was so resented by many,
as they rather chose to kill themselves, than to undergo so infamous and
public an opprobry to their honesty. I forbear to relate more of such
detestable and execrable examples, lest I offend the ears and minds of the
Reader by such abominations.

Let us therefore suppress these impurities, and pass to what happened in the
year MDCXLVI. when the Tartars entered into the Province of Xensi to give him
Battle, so as he was forced to go out to meet them, And, to the end he might
leave the Country behind him with more security, he resolved to cut off all the
inhabitants, (except those which inhabited the North-East Quarters by which he
was to pass, and therefore must needs reserve these Creatures to assist and
furnish his Army with all necessaries; and therefore he deferred their death to
another time.) First therefore he commanded all the Citizens of what quality or
condition soever, that did inhabit his Metropolitan City of Chingtu to be bound
hand and foot, which was done by a part of the Army, which he had called in;
and then riding about them, (which vast multitude is related to have been above
six hundred thousand Souls,) he viewed them all with less compassionthan the
cruellest Tygre would have done; whilst in the mean time, these poor victims
with lamentable cries, He kills 600000 in the City Chingtu.
which penetrated the very vault of Heaven, and might have moved a heart
composed of stone or Rock, holding up their hands, begged of this outrageous
Tyrant to spare the lives of his innocent people. He stood a while Pensive,
like an astonished and amazed Creature; so as it seemed to be an imperfect
Crisis, wherein humane nature struggled a little with those bowels, and that
heart which was composed of all cruelty; but presently returning to his beastly
nature, Kill, kill, says he, and cut off all these Rebels, upon which words,
they were all massacred in one day out of the City Walls, in the presence of
this bloody monster. Those Religious persons, which were there, the Fathers of
Christianity, resolved to make their addresses for the Tyrant to save their
converts lives; and though all men judged it a desperate attempt, yet they
obtained the lives of those they claimed. So as they distributed themselves at
the City Gates, and as their Clients passed bound to the Shambles, they
mercifully unbound their Shakles, and rescued them from death. By which
occasion also they performed another acceptible Sacrifice to God, in Baptizing
an infinite number of Children, which the Soldiers willingly permitted, so as
the horrid and execrable cruelty of this Tyrant proved as advantageous to these
little Angels, as Herod's slaughter did to the Blessed Innocent^.

They write, Many Children Baptized.
that in this massacre there was so much blood spilt, as made the great River
of Kiang, which runs by the City, to increase and swell visibly; and the dead
Corpse being cast into the River, and carried downwards to the other Cities, did
denounce unto them, that they were to expect no better Treaty from this Tyrants
hands. And it quickly proved true, for he dispatched his Army to the rest of
the Cities, and killed all that he could lay hands on; and thus this Tyrant did
bring that populous Province of Suchuen into a vast wilderness. After this, he
mustered all his Soldiers in a Field, which in every City of China is deputed
for that end, and is called by the Natives Kioochang; in this place, he
delivered himself thus unto them, I hope by your valor to obtain the Empire of
the world, when I have expelled the Tartars; but I desire to see you yet
quicker and nimbler than hitherto you have been; you all know, to free you from
all burdens and heavy luggage, how I sunk threescore Ships full of Silver in
the River of Kiang; which I can easily recover, to reward your pains and
merits, when I shall once have obtained the Empire; (he had indeed sunck the
Ships, and killed the Ship men, to conceal the place;) but there remains yet a
greater encumbrance, which retards much our journey, and all our enterprises,
which is your Wives, which are a heavy burden to you all; Therefore now put on
a generous resolution; There will not be wanting other exquisit Women, when we
are come to possess the Empire; and although as Emperor I ought to have some
Prerogative, and make a difference betwixt you and my Royal person, yet I am
content in this, to give you all a leading example, He kills all the Soldiers
Wives.
which may serve as a President. After this Speech, of three hundred handsome
and beautiful Maids, which he kept for his voluptuous pleasures, he only
reserved twenty to serve his three Queens, and commanded all the rest to be
killed upon the place. The Soldiers presently followed the example and command
of their cruel Tyrant, and cut off the heads of innumerable innocent Women, as
if they had been their mortal enemies.

Having now no more men in the Province of Suchuen to put to death, he turned
his fury and hatred against the Cities, Houses and Palaces: for whereas he had
built himself a very stately and magnificent Palace in the City of Chingtu, he
consumed that, and with it, a great part of that noble City with fire; besides
he cut down all Trees and Woods, that they might profit no man. And thus (as he
said) having purged his Army, he matched on into the Province of Xensi to meet
the Tartars, but as he marched, if he found any man remaining alive, he
commanded him to be killed. And not content with all this, if he espied any
Soldier which marched either too far before, or too far behind, though the
fault were never so little, he killed him presently. He killed all his sick or
weak Soldiers, that they might be delivered (as he said) out of so miserable
and ruined a Country. I suppress many more passages of his cruelty, because I
will hasten to the Catastrophe of this Tragedy.

He was no sooner entered into the Province of Xensi, but one of the Emperors
Uncles meets him with five thousand Tartars, He burned his Palace in the City
of Chingtu,
the Body of the Army marching after him; five Horsemen are sent out before the
Army (as usually they do amongst the Tartaes;) who if they be well received of
the enemy, they take it as a sign of Peace and submission; but if they receive
any Act of hostility, then the Army marches up to sight. These Horsemen were
espied by the Tyrants Scouts; who presently brought him Tidings of their
approach. But he laughed at the news, and jestingly asked them, If the Tartars
had learned to fly. He drove at that time, many persons bound before him, which
he intended to massacre, and amongst the rest two of the Jesuits, for asking
leave to return into Suchuen, which was the Country they had undertaken to
convert to Christianity. But the sudden death of this Arch-brigand delivered
them all from the imminent danger; for at the same time came in his chief
Commanders, assuring him the Tartar was upon him; upon which news, he being of
a bold and courageous humor, burst out of his Tent, and without either
headpiece or Breast Plate, snatched up a Lance, and went out with a few, to
view the enemy. The foresaid five Tartars presently assaulted the Tyrant; and
the first Arrow was shot, (happy to the Tartars, The Tyrant is slain.
and many others,) pierced the heart of that monster of Cruelty, killing that
Man^ who had an intention to make an end of all Men; and who from the base
condition of a raskally Thief, presumed to take the Sacred Title of King and
Emperor. The head being down, the Tartars easily seized on the body of his
Army; many of the Soldiers submitted to them, others were killed, others ran
away; and the poor inhabitants of the Province of Suchuen received the Tartars
as their Saviors. The Province of Suchuen is made subject to the Tartars.
By which means this Province which is the most Western in China, and borders
upon the Kingdom of Tibet, became subject to the Tartarian Empire.

When they had established Garrisons, and all their other Affairs in that
Country, they prepared to return to the Royal City of Peking; leading with
them the two Captive Priests, which they had found in Chains, as a present most
acceptable to the Tartarian Emperor; there I saw them, and left them in great
veneration and honor in the year MDCL.

But this victorious Conqueror returning crowned with Laurels, was ill
received and worse recompensed, One of the Emperors Uncles is ill received.
by his Brother the great Amavangus, (who was the Emperors Tutor;) and in
stead of a deserved triumph, he received an unworthy death; for being to make a
march of many Months, to undergo much labor, and many troubles, it happened
so, that he lost more Men in marching than in fighting; upon which he was
accused of great negligence in governing his Army; and being of a generous
nature, he thought he deserved high praise, but no blame, and therefore he took
his Tartarian Cap, and scornfully trampled it upon the ground, (which is the
greatest sign of indignation, which they can express;) upon which fact he was
committed to a Prison proper to those of the blood Royal which he accused of
any Crime; But he scorned to be the first of the Tartarian Family, which should
suffer this opprobry in China; and therefore before he was carried to this
Prison called by the Chinese Coaciang, he hung himself miserably in his own
Place. He hangs himself.
A Gallant Prince, and worthy of a better fortune. Many think this disgrace to
have grown from Amavangus his eldest Brothers emulation; but I think that
Amavangus was afraid that this Man, though wanting no courage, yet of a
precipitit nature, would quickly ruin the Tartarian affairs, by his rash
proceedings. And here I will put a period to this brief Narration of the
Tartars War to the year MDCLI. in which year I was sent to Europe, by those
that may command me. In which relation if there be nothing else worthy of
admiration, yet it seems wonderful to consider, that in seven years space they
conquered more ground, than an entire Army could have walked through in the
whole length and breadth thereof in that space of time; for they overran the
twelve vast Provinces of China; besides the immense extents of Lea^tung, and
the Kingdom of Corea.

What since has past, in such vicissitude of fortune, I know not; but as soon
as God shall bless me with a prosperous return into my beloved China; or that
my friends acquaint me with any new Occurrences by Letters, I will procure that
all Europe shall understand the Issue of these prodigious revolutions.

FINIS.
An Addition to the former History, taken out of the last Letters from China
Written in the years 1651. 52. and 53.
AFter the Printing of this our History of the Tartarian Wars, returning to
Brussels from Amsterdam (where I used all possible expedition to bring my Atlas
Sinieus to the Press) I there received my long desired Letters from China,
sent by my friends from Rome; some of which being dated the 14. of November
1651, were writ by a Sicilian, called Father Francis Brancatus, who sojurns in
the City of Xanchai, in the Province of Nanking; and reflecting, that happily
it would not be ungrateful to our Europeans, if I made a private relation, of
public use* I resolved to draw out this little ensuing Narration from those
Letters written in several years.

The Empire of China is how grown to a more fixed and settled Estate, since the
death of Amavangus Uncle to the Emperor: to whose expedition in invading that
Empire and Vigilance in conserving it, the Tartars owe their happy success.

But yet, the opinion framed of him after his death, was far different from the
authority and power he carried in his life; for no sooner was the exercise of
governing by his death devolved into the hands of his Nephew, called Xunchi;
but that this Emperor, though a youth in years, began his reign by the
approbation of all estates and orders, with such maturity of judgment, and
council, as he seemed to surpass the gray and hoary heads of his wisest
Counselors. He was no sooner enthroned, then he expressed a strange ripeness
of judgment, and severity of Justice joined together; for having discovered
his Uncles wicked counsels and designs, and traced the obscure track of his
abominable vices, which were hid during his life: he did so much resent those
detestable Acts, as he commanded his body to be dug up, and his magnificent
Sepulcher to be beaten down; which kind of punishment amongst the Chinese is
held to be the greatest that can be inflicted; being taught by their Religion,
to carry all veneration and respect to the tombs of dead persons. The Carcass
being dragged out, they first beat it with Clubs, then they scourged it with
Rods; and finally, cutting off the head, they made it a spectacle to all
criminal opprobies. Thus the splendor of his Tomb, was brought to dust; and
fortune paid him after his death, the disgrace she owed him in his life. He
punished also all the Officers and Prefects, which were privy to his councels;
putting some to death, and depriving others of their dignities. Amongst all
which I find the fortune of General Fung to have been very various: who though
he be no Christian, yet being a singular friend, and protector of our society,
and particularly known to my self, I cannot but rejoice to hear him restored,
to his place and dignity, after his discovered innocence. In the mean time the
Emperor Xunchius, growing up to man's estate, and solicitous to propagate his
honor to his posterity, resolved to accomplish his long intended Marriage with
the Daughter to the Emperor of the Occidental Tartars: In which action, the
Tartars imitate the European custom; for they take a Lady of some like
illustrious blood or descent; But the Emperors of China seem little to value
the nobility of blood, but select the pri^est beauty; nor will they refuse a
person of a mean fortune, if she be but graced with beauty; In so much, as the
Wife to the late Emperor of China, was Daughter to a man, that got his living
by making straw Shoos. So King A^asuerus raised a poor Captive maid to be
Consort with him in his Royal Throne: which kind of custom happily the Chinese
drew from the Persians, or the Persians from them. But to return to the subject
that caused this little digression. The Emperors Wedding was performed with a
Pomp and splendour proportionable to such an Empire: nor was there any
magnificence wanting on the Spouses part; for according to the fashion of the
Nation, she came accompanied with whole Armies of men, and so many Troops of
Horse, as they seemed innumerable; nature seeming to have framed the riches of
the Tartars more for warlike affairs, than for pleasure. Nor is this infinite
multitude of Horse incredible, for I my self have seen eighty thousand Horse,
all at one time, sent as a present from the Occidental Tartars to the King of
China.

Which boundless power of the Tartars, as it cannot be contained within any
limits, so also it has lately broke out into the Province of Quamtung, which
they have wholly subdued; and out of that, like an impetuous Torrent, they ran
into the Province of Quangsi; which they likewise have conquered to their
Empire. So as the King of China called Iungley, with his chief favourit the
Eunuch, called Pang Achileus, who professes Christianity, were feign to fly to
the Confines of Tunking, being in a manner excluded the whole Empire. In so
much as a friend of mine writes out of the Province of Fokien, that the King
Iungley fearing to fall into the Tartars hands, was feign to leave the Land,
and fly to Sea. Neither have we any news of our Father Andrew Xaverius Koffler
who followed the Court of King Iungley, having had the happiness to have
Baptized his Queen, his Son, and his Mother, with many others of that Court.

In the mean time, whilst one Cung, a Royolet amongst the Tartars, subdued the
Province of Quangsi, the Colaus, who was Governor of the Country, and a
Christian, fell into the Enemies hands; and the Tartars, hoping by rewards and
promises of dignities, to win the submission of this so gallant a man, and so
eminent a Philosopher, abstained three days from any cruelty, or ill usage
toward him; But he scorned to prefer his life before his allegance and fidelity
to his King; and therefore lost his head.

But yet, this generous Action was admired and honored by those brutish Souls,
who presently erected a magnificent Tomb, in memory of so honorable an Act;
for although the Tartars solicit the Chinese to revolt from their Prince, yet
they honor and praise such as show themselves constant to him; And this
memorial of him, I owe as well to the singular friendship he was pleased to
contract with me, as also to his eminent virtues, of which I my self and the
whole Church of Christians in China, were both Spectators and Admirers, for the
space of twenty years. He was Born in the Province of Nanquin, in the City
Changcho, being called Kiu Thomas, a Name most worthy of eternal Memory.

During the saccage of these Provinces, news arrives from the Country of
Suchuen, (which the notorious Brigand called Changhienchungus, famous for his
strange cruelty and abominable villainies, had so wasted,) that it begins again
to be shaken with several tempests of War; and though he seemed to be quite
destroyed in the last Battails, yet from thence does appear again new trouble
and vexation to the Empire.

The Province of Fokien also begins to groan under the same miserable condition
of War; for the Reverend Father Peter Canevary Native of Genua, writes out of
the City Changcheu, which was besieged the 30. of March 1652. that Quesingus,
having made a descent from his Ships into that Province, has overrun the whole
Country, taken some Cities and Towns, and carried on the War with great terror
to the Inhabitants. Insomuch as the Tartarian Commanders keep themselves, and
their Army in their Forts, and other places of strength, not daring to appear
in the field to oppose him; but yet he said they expected new forces and
Succors from Peking; by which they doubt not, but quickly to subdue him.

This Quesingus, who now vexes this Province of Fokien, is Son to the famous
Pyrate Iquon or Chinchilungo whom the Tartars imprisoned by a slight, as I
recounted to you in my former History.

And to let you know what I further heard from some passengers of China, who in
the month of January 1653. were cast, in a Ship of China, upon the Coasts of an
Island called New Holland; whither I had been brought before by their Barks,
and Soldiers, as their Prisoner; These men related that a great Army of
Tartars was arrived, to subdue Quesingus; whose Commander thought it fit to
join Art to his Force; and therefore he commanded a handful of men, to charge
the Chinese Army, and presently by feigning flight, to retire to more
advantageous and surer places. In the mean time, he had placed a number of
Horse in a deep valley behind a Mountain, toward which Quarters the fugitive
Troops retired. This flight gave courage to the Chinese, and the desire of
victory, made them venture so far from the River Chang, where their ships lay
at Anchor, as they found themselves environed by the Tartars Army. This
desperate condition which excluded the Chinese, from returning to their Ships,
caused a very great, and bloody slaughter, in which there perished above 80000
of the Chinese Army; Whilst Quesingus a spectator of this sad accident from
the Mast of his Ships, as they relate, was heard to say, that he would once
more try his fortune against the Tartars; but if she proved again adverse unto
him, he then would submit, and shave his Hair, like a Tartar.

Concerning the present state of Christian Religion, being at Brussels this
last Iunse, in the year 1654. I received letters from China; in which they gave
me notice, that the Father Jesuits, were very favorably treated by the
Tartars; yea better than before; that they permit free exercise of the
Christian Catholic Religion, through all their Kingdoms, granting them leave
not only to enjoy their ancient Churches, but also liberally contributing to
build new ones; so, by the goodness of God, that which endamaged others,
proves gain to them. But I reserve all particulars to a larger Relation in a
greater Volume, which shall continue Trigautius his History of the missions
dispatched into China, concluding with the year 1610, to these our present
Times.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and to be sold by John Crook at the sign of the Ship in St
Paul's Churchyard.
Annals Veteris Testamenti, a prima Mundi Origin deducti; una cum rerurn
Asiaticarum and Aegyptiacarum Chronico, A tempo^ris Historici principio usque
ad Maccabaicarum initia producto: A Viro Reverendissimo, and Doctissimo Jacobo
Usserio Archiepi^copo Armachno. Folio. -- Ejusdem Annalium Pars secunda, quae
ad annum Christi Octogesimum producitur, una cum harmoni^ Evangeliorum ab
exercitatissimo in Sacris literis Doctore Johanne Richardsono Episcopo
Ardachensi conscripta. Folio. -- Ejusdem de Textus Hebraici Veteris Testamenti
Variantibus lectionibus ad Ludovicum Cappellum Epistola. Quarto. -- ejusdem de
LXX interpretum versione syntagma, quo hebraici textus veritas contra LXX
interpretum versionis assertores declaratur, vna cum libro Estherae etc, ad
pristinam antiquitatem cum obeliscis, asteriscis and leniscis reducto. Quarto.
The Holy History: centaining excellent Observations on all the remarkable
Passages and Histories of the Old Testament: With a Vindication of the Verity
thereof from the aspersions of Atheists and Anti-Scripturians. Written
Originally in French by the curions Pen of Nicolas Caussin S. I. And now
Elegantly rendered into English out of the Seventh and last Edition by a Person
of Honor. Quaeto. The Perfect Ambassador; Treating of the Antiquity,
Privileges, and Behavior of Men belonging to that Function: By Francis
Thynne, Esquire. 12o. Wisdom and Innocence; or, Prudence and Simplicity, in
the Examples of the Serpent and the Dove, propounded to our imitation: By
Thomas Vane Doctor in Divinity and Physic. 12o. The Spiritual Nursery
decyphered, in a Sermon Preached at Mercers Chapel in London, Febr. 9. 1650.
By Thomas Baker late Rector of St Mary the More in Exon. Quart^: Seven Sermons,
Preached upon several Occasions, by the most Reverend and Learned Father in
God, William Laud, late Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. heretofore Printed
severally, but now gathered together, and reprinted. 12o. Loci Communes D.
Martini Lutheri ex Scriptis ipsius Latinis, forma Gnomolcgica, and Aphoristica
collecti and in quinque classes distributi a M. Theodosio Fabritio Ecclesiae
Gottingensis Pastore, Quarto. Disputatio Scolastica de Divina Providentia,
adversus Jesuitas, Arminianos, Socinianos de Domino, Dei, etc, studiis and
industria Samuelis Rhetorfortis S* Theologiae Professoris in celebri and
inclyta Academia Andreapolitana, Quarto. A just vindication of the Church of
England from the aspersion of criminal schism, by John Bramhal Bishop of
Derry. Octavo. -- His defense of true liberty from anti-cedent and extrinsecall
necessity, being an answer to a late book of Master Thomas Hobbs of Malmesbury.
Octavo. -- His answer to Mons. Militiers Victory of truth, with Militiers own
Epistle. Octavo. Miscellanea sacra, or devout and Spiritual essaies, by Walter
Mountague 4o. Parthenissa, an excellent new Romance, written by the Lord
Broghill in 4 parts. Quarto. (...), sine introductorium anglico-latino-Graecum,
complectens colloquia familiaria, Aesopi fabulas and Luciani mortuorum
Dialogos. In usum scholarum, per Johannem Shirly. Octavo. De Hibernia and
antiquitatibus ejus disquisitione, Authore Iacobo Waraeo Eq. Aurato. Octavo. By
whom also all sorts of Books brought from beyond the Seas, are to be sold.
FINIS.
The true Effigies of F. Aluarez Semedo Procurator of ye Provinces of Iapan and
China.

Tho: Cross fecit






