MEDEA: A TRAGEDY. Written in Latin by LUCIUS ANNAEVS SENECA. Englished by E.
S. Esquire WITH ANNOTATIONS.

Non estis teneris apta Theatra Modis. Ovid. Amorum. L. 2. Eleg. 1. LONDON,
Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

To the Reader.
HE who has spent some vacant Hours in the rend'ring of this Piece into
English, conceives it a thing altogether needless to persuade the Reader to a
better liking thereof then his own Judgment shall inclinehim to. For since
there are but two things against which the Reader may seem to except, either
against the work, as Senceca's in the Original, or as his in the English, he
is of Opinion, that for the first it is secure in its own worth, and himself
likewise in the choice of this from amongst the rest of the Tragedies of
Seneca, if the Reader, as he was, will be led by the judgment and suffrage of
the Learned. And therefore in that respect he thinks it may rather challenge,
then entreat an Approbation. And for the latter, (though he be not ignorant
unto how much prejudice Works of this Nature are liable, yet) he conceives
that to seek by any kind of prepossession to take off the freedom of
judgment (he means such as he appeals to the Censure of a Competent Judge)
would seem no other then a Bribery of the Pen, a way not suiting with his
Ingenuity. He therefore held it best to expose it as it was drawn in its own
Colors, unset off with any Varnish. Nor shall he take it ill, if he find the
judicious passing a Rigid or severe Censure on the same, since he declares, it
is no more then what he himself has already done. Yet thus much he thought
fit to desire the Reader to take notice of; that this Version (such as it is)
is not-by him styled a Translation, but a Paraphrase, (although it may be with
some it might find the Favor to pass under the first Title) a way perhaps
more generally taking wherein (his Modesty gives him not leave to say so of
this Peece^) the Majesty ^eque (...) esse Inter pretationem tantum volo. s. d
circae^sdem Sensus certamen atque aemulationews. Quintil. l. 10 c. 5.
and spirit of an Author is Retained, though not the Letter. Now, whether this
be answerable to those * Laws by Quintilian not only allowed of, but
commended; let the knowing Reader determine.

Farewell.
To my Honored Friend EDWARD (...) Esquire Upon his Translation.
THat wi^e Philosopher, that had designed
To life, the various Passions of the Mind,
Did wronged Medea's Jealousy prefer
To entertain the Roman Theater;
Both to instruct the Soul, and please the Sight,
At once begetting Horror, and Delight.
This Cruelty thou do once more express
Though in a strange, no less becoming dress:
And her Revenge have robbed or half its Pride,
To see it self, thus by it self out-vy'd;
That boldest Ages past may say, our Times
Can speak, as well as act, their highest Crimes,
Nor was it enough to do his Scene this ^ight,
But what thou gav'st to us, with equal light*
Thou would bestow on him, nor were more just
Unto the Authors Work, then to his Dust;
Thou do make good his Title, aid his Claim,
Both vindicate his Poem, and his Name;
So shar'st a double Wreath; for all that We
Unto the Author owe, he owes to thee.
Though change of Tongues stolen praise to some afford,
Thy Version has not borrowed, but restored.
THO. STANLEY.

TO HIS Honored Friend Edw: Sherburn Esquire ON SENECA'S MEDEA by him ENGLISHED.
Whilst lofty Seneca's Cothurnall Muse
Does in Medea a new rage infuse,
And in her Breast kindles a greater fire,
Then that in which Creusa did expire,
Gives her a Tongue as killing, as the Steel
She armed her hands with, when her Sons did feel
Her murdering Stabs; that't may in question fall
Which were her tongue, or hand, most Tragical;
And whilst (dear Friend) thy industry presents
His Latian Scenes in English Ornaments
With equal Grace, and with as high a Rage,
As when presented on the Roman Stage
They did a horror, mixed with pleasure, raise,
He spreads her Infamy, and thou his Praise.
A. F.

Dramatis Personae.
MEDEA. CREON. NUNCIUS, Nurse to MEDEA. JASON. CREUSA. C^ORUS.
Mutes.
MARMORUS PHAR^TES
the Sons of MEDEA. GUARDS and SOLDIERS.
The Scene. CORINTH. The Argument.
MEDEA, having under Pretense of restoring Pelias his Youth (as she before had
done old Aesons) deceitfully caused his Daughters out of that pious hope,
impiously to murder their Father; and so revenged her self of him for the
Wrongs he had done her Husband, by the slaughter of his Kinsfolks, and the
unjust detention of his Kingdom of Thessaly: By Enchantments avoids their
vengeance, and escapes to Corinth; where Jason, flying from Acastus, (who for
the Murder of his Father Pelias, pursued both him and Medea, with revengefull
arms) likewise arrived. Whom Creon King of Corinth courteously entertained,
upon Condition he should put away Medea, and marry his Daughter Creusa. This,
Jason out of Necessity consenting to, Creon for the better security of his
State, enjoynes Medea present banishment. She full of Rage, and thirsting for
revenge before her departure by Entreaty obtaines of Creon one days Respite
for the taking of her last farewell of her Children. In which space she sends a
Crown, and a rich Robe infected with magical Poisons as a Present to the new
Bride Creusa: Which being put on, sets her all on flame, consuming likewise her
Father Creon coming to her Rescue, and with him his whole Palace. That d^ne,
to be further revenged of her Husband, she murders the two Sons she had by
him, in his sight; And so mounting her Charrio^ drawn by Dragons, takes her
Flight through the Air.

ERRATA.
In the POEM.
PAge 15. l. 8. for reserved ne^d preserved. p. 20. l 3. for Matin^rs r.
Mariner. p. 27. l. 22. for We r. with. p. 39. l. 12. for Swedes r. Sweve. ib.
l. 22. for these r. those. p. 44. l. 2. for Rays r. raise. p. 47. l. 13. for
by r. be.

In the ANNOTATIONS.
Page 55. l. 6^ for Nuptiall^ r. Nuptiala, ib. l. 10, for Nuptiare (...) r.
Nuptiarion Conciliatrin. 16. l. 19 for President chief, r. President and
chief. p. 59. l. 28. for Ticket. r. Thicker. p. 62. l. 7. for (...) r. (...).
ib. l. 5. for ^elus r. Pele^s. and for Andro^ack r. (...). p. 65. l. 26. for
Virgilia r. Vergilia. p. 68. ^. l. 4; for lead to r. lead her to. ib. l. 19.
forended r rendered. ib. l. 20. for I render, r. which I render. p. 69. l. 13.
for the r. they. p. 73. l. 22 for, (...) r. (...). ib. l. 29. for running r.
^ning. p. 74. l. 9. for whose r. those p 67. l. 11. for as r. so. p. 77. l.
ult. for justly r. justle. p. 97. l. 1. for India r. I^dea.

MEDEA. A TRAGEDY.
Act the first,
Scene the first.
Enter MEDEA Sola. YOu (1) Nuptial Powers! and thou (2) Lucina, Proeses
Puerperii, se^ Praefecta Parturientibus.
Head,
And careful Guardian, of the (3) G^niall Bed.
And (4) thou who Tiphys taught'st, as with a rein,
To guide the (5) first Ship, through the subdued Maine!
(6) Dread Sovereign of the Seas! thou ever bright
Phoebus! that to the world divid'st thy light.
(7) Three-formed Hecate! that do display
On nightly mysteries thy conscious Ray
And all ye Gods by whom false Jason swore!
Or you, Medea rather should implore,
Dark Chaos! deeps Infernal! damned souls!
The King who Hells sad Monarchy controules,
And Proserpina.
Queen with better faith was ravished,
Hear whilst we imprecate! ye (8) Furies dread!
The punishers of guilt; in bloody hands
Grasping your pitchy-blacke, and sulph'ry Brands,
With snaky Curles, and squallid looks appear!
As horrid, at our Nuptials as you were.
Death on the new-made Creusa the Daughter of Creon King of Corinth, whom Jason
(repudiating Medea) had newly married. Euripides (in Medea) and some others
give her the name of Gl^uca.
Bride, on Corinths King,
And our own Progeny, untimely bring.
And with some imprecation yet more dire,
'G ainst my false Husband, my fell mind inspire.
Live he, through Towns, despised and friendlesse rove,
Fear, hatred, poverty, and exile prove,
Wish me his Wife again; and harbor, from
A stranger crave; now a known Guest become.
And, then which, none a greater curse can be,
Children be get he like himself, and me.
See! our Revenge does with our Wish conspire;
These we have borne: We Plaints in vain expire.
Why rush we not upon our Foes? and there
The Bridal Tapers from the Bearers tear,
Extinguish them, and bury all in Night?
Behold'st thou this thou Fountain of all light,
Phoebus, (9) the Radiant Author of our Race?
And driv'st through Crystal skies, thy wonted space?
Runn'st thou not back unto the East? and Day
Remeasur'st? O! to me resign thy sway;
Give me the Guidance of those burning Reins
That rule the Coursers with the fiery Maines,
I Would scourge, 'till Corinth whose. (10) small Land divides
Two opposite Seas, and breaks their battering Tides,
Consumed in Flames, should make them way to join.
Naught rests to do; but that a Nuptial Pine
We bear; and when the holy Prair's, and all
The Rites are done, then, that our victimes fall.
Through thine own Bowels reach at thy Revenge
Soul if thou liv'st; all Womanish Fears estrange,
Let thy stout mind, on her old strength presume,
And more then Scythian Ferity assume.
What Ills, once (11) Colchos, now shall Corinth see,
Horrid, unperpetrated cruelty,
Terror to Men and Gods, works in my Mind;
Wounds, Death, See the Annotations at the number (11) in fine.
spread Funerals of Limbs dis-joyn'd;
Pish! what flight, trivial Ills do we recount?
Acts of our Virgin hands: Our Rage should mount
Ills more sublime, more horrid Acts of Blood
Suite with our married state, and Motherhood.
Courage then: On, to act thy Tragedy
With all thy Fury; that Posterity
Thy fatal Nuptials, and divorce may find
Equally signal; -- Stay; thou rash of mind!
Thy spouse by what means leave thou? -- by the same
I once did follow him: All sense of shame
Abandon, and delays as fruitless fly,
*The Faith by Ills confirmed, by Ills shall dye.

Ex. Medea. CHORUS Of Corinthian Women, Singing an Epithalamium to the
Nuptials of Jason and Creusa. (12) You Gods, whose Empire in the skies,
Or in the tumid Ocean, lies!
These (12) Princely Nuptials bless we pray,
(12) Whilst all due Rites the people pay:
First to those (13) Powers that thunder fling,
And Scepters bear; for offering
A Bull, white without spot, shall dye,
A Heifer that did never try
The servile Yoke, then snow more white,
Thee, (14) O Lucina! does delight.
(15) To her, who Mars his bloody hands,
Does ma^acle in peaceful Bands,
Who strifes of Nations does compose,
Whose (15) Horn with growing plenty flows,
Shall fall a gent^er Sacrifice.
(16) And thou who these Solemnities,
And Rites As opposed to Medea's Nuptiall^, which were (...) and Illegitimate;
(...) in (...) (...) of this Chorus.
Legitimate do grace,
And the nights sullen darkness, chase
With thy auspicious hand, come drowned
In Wine, thy (16) Head with Roses crowned.
(17) And thou bright Star, with silver ray,
Forerunner of the Night, and Day;
That slow to those do still return
Who with loves mutu'all flames does burn.
Mothers that long, Daughters new wed
Wish thee thy early beams to spread.
Among the (18) Cecropian Dames, the Pride
For Beauty, veil unto the Bride
The Virgins of the (19) Wallesse Town
Who on (20) Taygetus his Crown
Themselves, (as is their Countries guise)
In (20) manly Pastimes exercise.
And those their limbs in (21) Dirce lave
Or in (22) Alphaeus sacred Wave.
To the (23) Aesonian Youth, for grace
And Form, shall (24) Bacchus self give place,
Who to the Yoke ^ierce Tigers chains,
Or he who over the (25) Trypods reigns,
Mild Brother, to the (26) sterner Maid.
The (26) Swan-got Twins fair Laedae laid,
Castor, with Pollux who for blow
Of weighty (27) Sledge, does all out-goe,
Yield to Jason.
Aesonides the day.
So, so Caelestiall powers we pray,
All wives excel the the beauteous Bride,
The Bridegroom pass all men beside.
When with the Virgin Quire The Bride.
she joins
Her look 'bove all with luster shines.
So when the Sun his Beams displayes,
The splendor of the Stars decays.
So fade the (28) Pleiads, scarcely seen,
When with her borrowed shine, night's Queen
Inorbs her Crescent, so to the eye
White blushes with (29) Phaenician Dye.
So when day dawnes, Sols ruddy light
Shows to the dew-wet Shepherds sight.
From (30) Phasis horrid bed releast,
Wont with unwilling hand, the Breast
To touch of such a barbarous Bride,
With Parents wills first ratified,
Now happy wed a Grecian dame.
Now Youths with Taunts permissive, game
And in loose Rimes chant sportive words,
Rare is this license against your Lords.
Fair (31) Issue of the God of Wine,
It Is time to light thy carved Pine:
(32) With Wine-wet fingers, then put out
The solemn Flame; whilst all the Rout
With mirthfull jollity does ring,
And the (33) Fescennine youths do ^ing
Their Festive Flouts; she want these Rites,
And grace of Hymeneall l^ghts,
Who as a fugitive shall wed
Her self unto a foreign Bed.

Act the Second.
Scene the first.
Enter MEDEA, and her NURSE. MEDEA. OH! I am slain; the The Marriage Song.
Hymeneall's sound
Has pierced my Ears, and given my Heart a wound.
The Ill I suffer, I scarce yet believe.
And thus could (1) Jason cause Medea grieve?
When from my Father, Country, Crown, and State
H' had brought me, thus, to leave me desolate
In a strange Land? could he our merits slight?
Cruel, and thanklesse wretch! whose powerful might
Seas rage, he saw, and force of Flames out-went?
Thinks he then all our stock of Mischief spent?
Perplexed and wavering, my unquiet Mind
Labors, which way she may her vengeance find.
Would Heavens he had a Brother! Stay; a Wife
He has; let us then attempt against her life,
Full Compensation for all injuries.
If Greek, or Barbarous Towns, (in villainies
Skilled) have known a mischief, such as thou
Media, yet never knew'st, or practid'st, now,
Now attempt the like. Let thy resolves find
Co^ncell from thy own Ills; call to thy mind
The signal (2) Glory of the C^lchian Crown
Made prize; thy Brothers Limbs dissected, thrown
About the seas; sad Funeral to his sire!
Think on old (3) Pelias boiling over the Fire.
How often have we spilt guil^lesse blood? yet n're
Did we act Ills in rage; Loves rage we bear.
Alas what could Jason do, at the dispose
Of a Superior power? -- His Breast oppose
TO a murdering sword. -- Ah! better words afford
My passionate Griefs; rather, so Fates accord,
May he live still my Jason as before.
If not, yet may he live; mindful of poor
Medea, to whose love his life's a debt.
The fault was wholly Creons: by whose great
O're-ruling power, our marriage-bands he brake;
He did the Mother from her Children take,
He cancelled our strict-plighted faith; He, he.
The Butt of our deserved vengeance be.
I Will bury his proud Palace in a high
Heap of Ashes, whilst the black Clouds that fly
Of Flame-driv'n smoke, (4) Malea shall amaze,
Which storme-beat Vessels puts to long delays.

NVRSE. For love of Heaven be silent, and restrain
Passion to recluse sorrow; "who sustain
"Wrongs that oppress 'em, with a quiet (...)
"And unmoved thoughts, know best the way to find
"How to repay 'em. Anger kills, concealed;
"Hates miss of their revenge, when once revealed.

MEDEA. "That griefs but small which Council can o're-sway;
I Will meet all opposites.

NVRSE. Thy ^ury stay
Dear Daughter; scarce a still retiredness
Secure thee can, open Attempts much less.

MEDEA. "Fortune the Valiant fears; but tramples on
"The coward soul.

NVRSE. "Then resoluti^
"Is good, when the Attempt is possible.

MEDEA. "What
"To courage, and a mind resolved, is not?

NVRSE. "No hope a Remedy to a lost affair
"Does show.

MEDEA. "Who naught can hope, should naught despair.


NVRSE. (5) The Colchi'ans hate thee, in thy spouse no Faith
There is; of all thy vast store, Fortune has
Not left thee ought.

MEDEA. Yes, here is Medea still,
Here Seas, Earth, Fire, Gods, Thunder, what can kill
As well as Steel behold.

NURSE. The Incensed Ire
Of The King yet's to be feared.

MEDEA. What was our As great a King as Creon.
Sire?


NVRSE. Fearst thou not force of Arms?


MEDEA. Not though from Earth
They sprung, and took from thence their hostile birth.

NVRSE. Thou Wilt suffer death.


MEDEA. It Is that we wish.


NVRSE. Be led
At my request to fly.

MEDEA. That I e're fled
I grieve; Medea fly?

NVRSE. Think what thou art,
A Mother.

MEDEA. Yes, by whom, you see.


NVRSE. To part
Hence doubtst thou?

MEDEA. No; we will go, but first revenge


NVRSE. Th'avenger will pursue.


MEDEA. It will be strange
If we not fin de him obstacles.

NVRSE. Suppress
These Menaces rash Woman, and redress
Thy pertinacious thoughts; with time comply.

MEDEA. Fortune m' Estate may ravish from me, my
Mind she never can rob me of. Hark! I hear
The Palace doors to creak; who is it draws near?
It Is Creon the proud Tyrant, Creon, high,
Elated with (2) Pelasgian Royalty.

Scene the Second.
Enter CREON. Yet does Medea.
Aeeta's noxious issue stay
Within our Confines? not yet gone away?
Something she machinates, whom all do brand
For Noted Fraud, and a nofarious hand.
Whom spares she? whom, suffers secure to rest?
T'extirpate by the sword this worst of Pest
We once resolved; the Entreaties of our Son-
In-law prevailed; and our Concession
Got, that she might live; on terms she quit
Our Realms from future fears: with looks that threat,
And truculent Aspect, she 'gins to bend
This way her steps, as though she did intend
Some speech with us; Our Guard there! Hence, Away
With her, nor suffer her to speak; to obey
A Kings Command, once let her learn; with speed
Dispatch, and send the Monster gone.

MEDEA. What deed?
What Crime of ours mulct you by flight?

CREON. A Cause
The Spoken Ironically.
Innocent soul demands!

MEDEA. "If by the Laws
"You govern, before you Judge first understand.
"If by your will alone you rule, command,

CREON. Dispute not; it is our pleasure, right, or wrong.
And thou shall suffer't.

MEDEA. "Unjust S^epters, long
"Continue not.

CREON. Away; to Colchos, hic
To your own home again.

MEDEA. Most willingly,
So he that brought me thence, return with me.

CREON. Your Wishes come too late to our Decree,


MEDEA. "Who ought decrees, nor hears both sides discust,
"Does but unjustly, though his Doom be just.

CREON. Old Pelias ru'd for lending thee an Ear,
But speak; and your egregious Cause let us hear.

MEDEA. (...). Eurip. Medea.
How ill appeased is the w^ath of Kings.
And what a pride in royal Fancy springs,
Their first-fix'd Resolutions to pursue,
From our own Princely thoughts we have learned too true,
For though with sad Calamity oppressed,
Scorned, supplyant, our-cast, every way distressed
We Are now, we once, in Royal State did shine,
And from bright Sol drew our Illustrious line.
What (5) Phasis in his winding Arms does close,
What 'ere behind the (6) Scythian Pontus shows,
Where the salt Waves grow fresh with floud-mixt stream^,
All that extent of Land, whose borders, hems
The silver (7) Thermodon; in trampled Fields,
Where (7) widdowed Troops display their luned shields,
My Father with Imperial Scepter swayes.
In joys of Royalty, and happy days
There flourished we; Our Marriage Bed those sought
Whom now, we seek: But Fortune, light as thought,
From us those Sceptred Glories having rent,
Has now exposed us to sad Banishment.
"In Crowns confide! whose wealth Chance does transfer
"At pleasure; But this yet, what no day e're
"Can take from them, Kings, great, and glorious have,
"To help the afflicted, and the suppliant save.
This only from our Colchian Realms, away
We brought, that by our favor, we can say
The flower of Greece and Princely Ornament,
Achaia's chiefest strength, the high descent
Of Gods, were saved from death. Orpheus whose song
Charms stony Rocks, and draws the Woods along
Is our free gift; that Led^'s Twins survive
Our double bounty is; by us do live
The sons of Boreas, (8) Lynceus, he whose sight
Extends cross Pontus its emitted light,
And all the (9) Minyae, by our Favor, were
Reserved from ruin: not to mention here
The Jason.
Chief of all those Chiefes; whose safety, we
Reckon no debt, to none imputed be.
To you the rest, to us, this one we brought
Away: Inveigh your worst then* count each fault
Of ours, of all this only can you blame,
Argos return: yet if our Virgin shame,
And love of Father, had not stooped to love
Of Jason, (whom before these we did approve)
The Chief of Greece had perished, and your son
To ruin, on Bulls flaming breaths had run.
Fortune our Cause m' oppress, (though undeserved)
Yet shall we never repent to have preserved
The offspring of so many Kings: With you,
Of all our Crimes is the reward, and due.
Condemn us so you please; but first the Crime
Declare: W' are guilty; true: So were, what time
Creon thy (10) knees we touched, and did implore
The (10) Faith of thy protecting hand. No more
Ask we at present, but some place obscure,
Where we our selves and sorrows may immure:
If from this City banished by your doom,
Within your Realms, afford us yet a room.

CREON. That we with rigor rule not, nor with high
Pride, trample upon humbled misery,
Sufficient Proof we seem ^n this to have shown
By such a As Jason.
Son-in-law electing; One
Exiled, afflicted, terrified with fears.
For thee the young Son of Pelia^.
Acastus, who now wears
Thessalia's Crown, seeks with death-threatning i^e,
T'avenge the Murder of his aged Sire,
And his dissected Parents Limbs; when by
Thy false suggestions led, too credulously,
The perpetration of so foul a fact,
The pious sisters impiously did act.
Wave thine, and Jason can his Cause maintain,
No guilt of blood his guiltless hands did stain
Nor touch of wicked steel; far from thy dire
Counsels, he still innocuous did retire.
But thou vile Machanatrix of all Ills,
Whom wom'anish spleen, and manly courage, steeles
For all attempts, regardlesse of thy fame,
Be gone, and purge our Realms of such a shame.
Hence your letiferous simples take; from fear
Free our perplexed subjects, and elsewhere
With thy Complaints vex Heaven.

MEDEA. To be gone
Compelly'us? or Ship, or a Companion
Afford; why us alone, command you hence?
Alone we came not; or if your pretense
Be fear of War, expel us both; why two
Equally guilty, thus distinguish you?
To Jason.
him, not us fell Pelias; add our flight,
Our Kingdom's Prize, our Sire deserted quite,
Our Brother peece-meale torn, or if beside
A Crime there be he teach to his new Bride
It Is his, not ours: and though so often pressed
To ill, 'twas never for our own interest.

CREON. It Is fit th'wert gone; why spin'st thou out delays
In talk?

MEDEA. Vouchsafe thy parting Suppliant prays,
This last request; Let not the Mothers fault
Be as a Guilt upon her Children brought.

CREON. Go, go, we will guard these with a Fathers care.


MEDEA. By these more happy Nuptials; by thy fair
Future hopes, and by this thy regal State,
Which Chance with various change does agitate
We pray; afford some small time e're we go,
Upon our dearest Children to bestow
Our last, and perhaps dying kisses.

CREON. Time,
Only for fraud thou ask'st.

MEDEA. What fraud, or Crime
Can in so short a space be feared?

CREON. "None can
"For mischief be too short.

MEDEA. Deny'st thou than
So small a moment to a Wretches tears?

CREON. Though thy entreaties by our ominous fears
Opposed are; one day thou shall obtain.

MEDEA. Thy Grant's too great; revoke some part again;
And hence we speed.

CREON. If before to morrowes Sun
Advance the cheerful day, thou art not gone,
Thou surely dy'st. But us the Time now calls
To prayers, and Rights of Hymen's Festivalls.

Exeunt. CHORUS. (11) Rash man was he, with ships frail Beak
Did first the trech'rous Billows break,
And his own Native Soil declined
Durst trust his life to trustlesse wind.
The Seas with doubtful Course divide,
And in a slender (12) Plank confide,
Drawn to too thin dimensions far
'Twixt life and death too poor a Bar:
Celestial Signs were yet unknown
And of those lights use was there none
Whose Fires bespangle all the Skies.
Nor yet were Pilots grown so wise
To shun the stormy (13) Hyads threat,
The Olenian (13) Goats bright star, not yet;
(14) Nor those which that old lazy Swain
Bo^tes drives, the Northern Waine.
Boreas and Zepbyre, yet to none
By names distinguished were known,
Typhys did first on Seas display
His Sails; and taught the Winds to obey
New Laws: Now before a quartering Gale
His Course to run with all his Sail.
Now bring the Tack aboard; now fast
His lowered Yards, bind to the Mast.
His Canvas then unfurled again,
Unto the Winds to hoise amain,
When the too greedy Mariners
Calls for a Gust; and th'red Drabler
Unto th'inlarged Sail made fast,
Trembles with the impulsive blast.
The Candid Age of Innocence,
Our Fathers saw; free from all sense
Of Fraud; Then in secured rest
Each man on his own ground, lived blessed
With length of Years; with little rich,
Nor of more wealth, then that with which
His Native Soil was stored, could tell.
The (15) Pine of Thessaly, the well-
Divided World's Partitions b^oak,
And caused Seas feel th'Oares lashing stroke;
And the secluded Ocean made
Part of our fears: yet sadly paid
For this so bold a wickedness;
Through tedious dangers, and distress
Long driven: when those (16) Rocks that bound
The Entrance to the Pontick Sound,
Tilting with Impetuous shocks,
Did Echo like loud Thunder knocks.
'Twixt whom, the Sea crush't, mounts, and laves
The Stars and Clouds with foaming waves.
Bold Tiphys then grew pale for fear
His faultt'ring hands forgot to steer;
Silent was Orpheus and his Lute;
And (17) Argos self was then struck mute,
What? when the (18) Maid whose waste surrounds
A Cincture of fierce rav'ning Hounds
Did all their Jaws at once extend!
What man with horror did not bend
At such a sight? who without fear
Could that still-barking Monster hear?
What? when with Magic of their strain
Those * dire Plagues charm, d the (19) Ausounian Maine! Sirens. vid. Annot.

'Till on his (20) Lyre Pierian, played
Orpheus, and even the (21) Siren made
Wont ships to captive while she sings
Follow the Music of his strings.
What was the Purchase of so bold
A Voyage? but a Fleece of Gold
And (21) greater Mischief then the Sea,
Medea: fit the Freight to be
Of the first Ship. The passive Maine
Now yields, and does all Laws sustain.
Nor the famed Argos, by the hand
Of (22) Pallas built, by Heroes Manned,
Does now alone complain she is s^rc't
To Sea; each petty Boat's now cours't
About the Deep; no Boundure stands,
New Walls by Towns in foreign Lands
Are raised; the pervious World, in't's old
Place, leaves nothing. Indians the cold
(23) Araxis drink, (24) Albis, and (24) Rhine
The Persians. The (25) Age shall come, in fine
Of many years, wherein the Maine
M'unclose the universal Chain;
More land may, and new worlds be found,
Nor (25) Thule be Earths farthest Bound.

Act the Third.
Scene the first.
Enter NURSE, following MEDEA running frantic over the Stage. NVRSE. AH
whither rapt with eager speed away!
Hold, Daughter! curb thy rage; thy Fury stay.
As when some frantic Froe, whom Bacc^us mads,
Trots her wild Entheou^ Dance, and raving, gads
On (1) Pindus snowy top, or (1) Nysa's Crown:
So here, now there, she hurries up and down,
As if with a (2) Lymphatick Rage possessed.
Her looks attracting fervor from her breast.
Cries, O you Gods! then weeps, now smiles again;
And all the Symptoms of a troubled brain
Discovers; Doubts, threatens, with anger boyles,
Laments, and sighs; Oh! to what Center toils
This weight of cares? these threats where will she wreak?
Or where will this high Sea of fury break?
Which like an Inundation swells: No low
Nor vulgaire mischief she intends; to out-goe
Her self she seeks: we know ^ull well, her old
Distempers signs; some Eminently-bold,
Horridly-impious Act, she plots: 't appears
In her fell looks; The Gods deceive our fears.

Scene the second.
Enter MEDEA. If wretch, a Rule thou would prescribe thy Hates,
Thy rash love imitate; Tamely (ye Fates*)
And unrevenged shall we these Nuptials bear?
Shall this day idly pass? sought with such care
And toil! with so much difficulty gained!
Whilst selfe-poiz'd Earth in amidst of Heaven's sustained,
And the bright Orbs their stated Changes run,
Whilst Sands no number know; whilst day the Sun,
And night the Stars attend; whilst 'bout the Pole
The (3) undrencht Arctos turns, and Rivers roll
Into the Maine; our deadly, vengefull Ire
Shall never have end, but grow, and still rise higher.
What wild Beasts Savagenesse? what chafed waves
Ingulf'd in (4) Scylla's, and (4) Charibdy's Caves?
What Aetna (under which (5) Typhaeus lies
Expiring Flames) our rage shall equallize?
Nor rapid streams, nor Torrents heady course,
Nor wrathful Euxine Seas, By (6) Corus force
Vexed into storms, nor flames blown up by wind,
Can stop the incensed Fury of my mind.
I Will down with all. -- Creon his seares did move
(Forsooth) and King Acastus Arms; -- "True love
"Can never stoop to fear of any? -- But,
Over powered he was enforced to yield: -- Could not
He yet, to his poor Wife have bid adieu!
My life! stout though he be, he feared this too.
Yet sure, being Creons son, he might a while
Have respited the time for our Exile.
But one short day, to take my last farewell
Of both my children! -- Yet, though short, it is well.
Much, much shall these few hours produce; that fact
Which all days else shall ring of, this, shall act.
We will invade the Gods, and shake the frame
Of the whole Universe.

NVRSE. Thy mind reclaim,
Thy Heart with griefs disturbed pacify.

MEDEA. "No thought of rest, 'till with our own, we see
"A general Ruin; perish if we shall,
"Perish all else; We will not singly fall.

NURSE. See how great Dangers, thy Attempt^ oppose!
"Against potent Opposites none safely goes.

Scaene the third.
Enter JASON. Still cruel Fates! Fortune severe alike!
Equally bad, or if she spare or strike:
So often Heaven, has for our desperate Woes,
Found Remedies more desperate then those.
Would we the Faith, to our Wives merits due,
Have kept? We must have died. Death to escheue,
We must be faithless. Not to this inclined
By abject fear, but a Paternall mind.
For in their Parents ruin, our poor Race
Would be involved. O Justice! if a Place
In Heaven thou have, by thy white Throne I swear,
The Children overcame their Sire. Nor e're
Shall I think other, but that Mede^.
she, (though fierce
Of heart, and beyond all Reclaim perverse,)
Her Childrens lives, would before my bed desire.
With Prayers we were resolved t'accoast her Ire,
But see! sh'hath spied us; Ill the sight she brooks:
Disdain and passion, printed in her looks.

MEDEA. We fly, Jason! we fly; For us to change
Seats, is not new; The Cause is new and strange.
For thee we used; but now from thee we fly.
Whom thus from your Aboads enforce you hic?
To whom do send us? shall we Phasis flood
Colchos and our Sires Realms, or fields with blood
Of slaught'red Brother stained, go seek? what lands,
What Seas must we find out at thy commands?
The Pontick Straits? through which that Princely Train
We safe brought home; when through the incensed Maine
And dangerous Symplegades, we fled Two Rocks in the mouth of the Pontick
Straits that were feigned to be loose, and justle one another.

With thee, now turned Adulterer to our bed?
Shall we for small (7) Iolcos make? or steer
Unto Thessalian (8) Tempe? what ways e're
To thee we opened against our selves we closed.
Then whither send ye us? to what Lands exposed?
To Exile an Exiled wretch is sent,
And yet no place assigned for banishment.
Yet go we must, so to command seems sit
To Creons Jason spoken in scorn.
Son-in law; And we submit.
Inflict on us the worst of cruelties,
We have deserved. Let Creon exercise
The bloudiest Tortures Tyranny e're bred,
To plague a Medea supposing her self to be so counted in the opinion of Creon.
Strumpet to his daughters bed.
Load us with Irons; and shut us from all light
In a dark Dungeon of eternal night:
Yet shall we suffer less then we deserve.
Ungrateful wretch! think, (if thy heart will serve
To let thee) of the Flame-breath'd Bulls; the Field
Which Armies of Arme-bearing Foes did yield.
When at our sole Command, those Earth-borne Bands,
Mutu'ally fell by their selfe-slaughtering Hands.
To these; add the Phryxaean Rams rich prize,
And steeplesse Dragon charmed; whose wakefull eyes
Obeyed sleeps unknown Power: our Brother slain,
Mischief, with mischiefs re-inforc'd again.
Fraud-blinded Daughters urged to divide
Their Parents Limbs, unto new life denied.
And our own Kingdoms, for a strangers Crown
Deserted; by what hopes soever you own
Of your dear children; by the certainty
Of thy new-fix't abodes; and victory
O're-vanquish't Monsters; by these hands of ours,
Never spared for thee t'imploy their utmost Powers.
By fore-past Fears; Heavens, (9) Seas, (the Witnesses
Of our wronged Nuptials) pity our distress.
And in thy happy state, to us that crave
Render that comfort thou would wish to have.
Of all the wealth by (9) Scythians rapt away
From Sun-scorch'd Dwellers of rich India,
To o narrow an Exchequer, for whose store
Our whole Court seems; with whose superf^uous Oar
W'adorne the Woods and Groves; no part brought we
But our slain Brothers limbs; And those, on thee
Impended; Country, Father, Brother, Shame.
We this Dowre wed; parting, restore the same.

JASON. When wrathful Creon sought thy life to have,
Moved by our tears for death, he Exile gave

MEDEA. We Exile thought a Punishment; but now
We find, that, for a Spokeni* derision.
favor you allow.

JASON. Whilst yet thou may, get thee from hence convay'd;
"The Wrath of Kings is heavy.

MEDEA. You persuade
This to endeare you in Creusa's love;
You seek a hated To wit, her self, ut supr^.
Strumpet to remove*

JASON. Objects Medea love?


MEDEA. And Treachery
And Murder too.

JASON. What Crime is there, against me
Thou can object, deserves so foul a blame?

MEDEA. All that we ever did.


JASON. Then it is your Aim
T'involve us in the guilt of your misdeeds,

MEDEA. Those, those are thine. "He to whose gain succeeds
"The Ill, is the Ills Author. Though our Fame
All should oppose, thou ought defend the same,
And say we are blameless: "He should guiltless be
"In thy Repute, is guilty made, for thee.

JASON. "That life's a burden, which enjoyed, brings shame.


MEDEA. That life discharge, enjoyed with loss of Fame.


JASON. Rather appease thy wrath incensed B reast,
For thy poor Childrens sakes;

MEDEA. No, We detest,
Abjure the thought; What? shall Creus^ live
And Brothers to Medea's Children give?

JASON. 'Twill be an honor when our Exiled race,
A Queen, shall with her kindred Issue, grace.

MEDEA. Come never so unfortunate a day
To the already wretched, with Allay
Of baser blood, to mix our noble line.
(10) Phoebus with Sisyphus his Nephews join.

JASON. Why seekst thou ruin on us both to bring?
Let me entreat thee to depart.

MEDEA. The Creon.
King
Could yet vouchsafe to hear us speak.

JASON. Declare
What Is in my power to do for thee.

MEDEA. Me! dare
Any mischief.

JASON. On either hand, see here
Two potent Kings.

DEA. Then those, a greater fear
Behold* Medea: let us exercise
Our Powers, and Jason be the Victors prize.

JASON. Wearied with Miseries, I yield; Forbear;
So often tried, the turn of Fortune fear.

MEDEA. Mistress of Fortune we have ever been.


JASON. Acastus there; here Creons nearer spleen
Threatens destruction.

MEDEA. Void thou either Harms:
Not against thy Father-i'-law to rise in Arms,
Or stain with kinreds blood thy Innocence,
Medea wills. Guiltless with her fly hence.

JASON. Who shall oppose, if they their powers combine,
And against us with united Forces join.

MEDEA. Add Colchians too; Aeeta General;
Scythians with Grecians join; we will foil them all.

JASON. I potent Scepters dread:


MEDEA. Rather take heed
Y'affect them not.

JASON. Left this our Conference breed
Suspect, here let us cut short our long discourse.

MEDEA. Now Jove over all the Heavens thy Thunder force,
Stretch forth thy Hand, thy vengefull Flames prepare,
And from cracked Clouds the world with horror scare.
Nor with deliberate aim level thy throw,
Take him, or me: which of us each, the blow
Shall sink, will guilty fall; if at us cast,
Thy Thunder cannot miss.

JASON. Resume at last
More sober thoughts, language more mild; if ought
In Creons Court, in Exile may be thought
Easefull to thee, ask, and the asked for have.

MEDEA. Thou know we can, and use with scorn to wave
The wealth of Kings; we only wish we might
Our Children have Companions in our flight;
That in their bosoms we our tears may shed.
More Sons thou may expect from thy new Bed.

JASON. I must confess me willing to comply
With thy desires; forbid by Pie^y.
Nor could I suffer this, though Creons Ire
Should force me to it. For this alone, desire
I life; of all my cares the only ^ase,
Sooner I could want Breath, Limbs, Light, then these.

MEDEA. Loves he his children so! it is well; we have it, Aside, to her self.
Now we know where to wound him. -- We hope yet
We may our last words in their mindful Breasts
Implant; embrace; seems this a just request?
This too, we with our latest speech entreat,
What our rash grief has uttered, youl'd forget*
And a more favorable Memory
Of us retain; all Passions buried be.

JASON. All, all is forgot by us; and here we pray
Thou may the Fervor of thy mind allay,
And gentle curb unto thy passions give.
"Patience is Miseries best lenitiv^.

Exit Jason. MEDEA. Gone! is it e'ne so? have thou forgotten me?
And all my Merits? slipped from thy Memory?
No; we will never slip thence. Now mind thy Part;
Summon together all thy strength and Art.
It Is thy best use of Ills, to think there is none.
Scarce will there opportunity be shown
To Effect our Treachery. Our Plots they fear.
Run then a Course from all suspicion clear.
Begin, Medea! to thy task prepare;
And what thou can, and what thou can not, dare.
O faithful Nurse! whom Chance, with us has made
Partner in woes; our wretched Counsels aid.
A Roab we have, our Kingdoms Ornament;
As Pledge of his Aetheriall descent,
By Sol to Aeeta given. A Carquanet
With Gold enchac'd, and a rich Coroner
Set with bright Gemmes; These to the new-wed Bride
My Sons shall bear; first, with dire Tinctures died.
Invoke we Hecate; our sad Rites frame
The Altars strew; now crack this Roof in flame.

E^eunt. CHORUS Nor force of Flames, nor strength of Wind,
Nor Thunder we such terror find^
As a (...). Euripid. Med.
divorced Wife; set on fire
With hate, and Ardor of desire.
Not Cloudy Auster where he powers
Forth Deluges of Winter showers,
When (11) Ister like a Torrent rolled,
Breaks Bridges down, runs uncontrowl'd.
Not (12) Rhodanus with rapid Course
Where he resisting Seas does force,
Nor (13) Haemus, when the Suns hot Beams
In mid Spring, thaw his Snowes to streams.
Love spurred with Passion's blind, disdaines
All rule, nor brooks imposed reins.
Fearelesse of death; covers upon
Drawn Swords with obvious steps to run.
Pardon you Gods! we Pardon sue,
Safe may he live, did Seas subdue.
Yet the Deeps Monarch storms, his Power
Next Jove's, should stoop t'a Conqueror.
Bold Phaeton, that durst aspire
To rule the Chariot of his Sire,
Whilst from prescribed Bounds he strayed,
He felt the Flames his rashness made.
None suffered in a known way; tread
In that safe Path where others lead.
Nor violate the sacred Bands
Imposed by Natures sacred hands.
Who e're those noble Planks, which made
Bold Argos, touched; spoiled of his shade
The sacred Grove which (14) Pelion Crowned;
Past The Cyana or Symplegades, Rocks in the mouth of the Pontick Straitus.
floating Rocks in the profound;
Did through so many perils wade
Of the vast deep; and Anchor weighed
From off a Barbarous Coast, possessed
Of foreign Gold; for home addressed,
With sad event the Breach he ru'd
Of the Seas Rites; with plagues pursued
And justice of the angry Maine*
Tiphys, who first the Ocean
Tamed, to an (15) unskilful Pilot, left
His charge, on foreign Shores bereft
Of life (16) far from his Native Land.
(16) Amongst unknown Ghosts lies tomb'd in sand.
(17) He from the vocal Muse that springs,
At sound of whose Harmonious strings,
The rapid streams their motions ceast,
Their Murmurs the rude winds suppressed,
While Birds their own Notes left, to his Song
Fled listening, and Woods danced along;
His Limbs over Thracian Acres spread
Dragged unto (18) Haebrus streaming Head,
To Styx descended, known before;
And Tart'^us, to return no more.
(18) Alcides Boreas Issue slew;
(19) He who could various shapes indue,
From (19) Neptune who derives his breath,
From Hercules received his death.
(20) He too, when Seas and Earth h' had Crowned
With Peace, and forced the Stygian Sound,
Alive on Aeta's Pyre reposed,
His Limbs to cruel Flames exposed.
While mingled Goares Infection, sent
By h's Wife, his flesh with Tortures rent:
A Boar (21) Ancaeus life ore-threw,
(22) His Unkles Meleager slew,
And by the vengefull hand does fall
Of his enraged Mother; All
Deserved; What Crime, did expiate
That tender (23) Ladds untimely Fate?
The (23) Boy by Hercules unfound.
In Waves of secure Waters drowned.
Go now bold Spirits; plow again
With like feared destiny the Maine.

Act the Fourth,
Scene the first.
Enter NURSE Sola. Horror my trembling soul invades, some great
Pernicious Mischief, present Ill does threat.
How vast a Rage her swelling grief dilates!
Its own Incendiary! Integrates
Her lapsed powers! with fury o^t possessed
I Have seen her charge the * Gods, attempt to wrest
Heaven with her Charms: some more prodigious Act
Then these yet works she; for as hence she packt
With frighted steps, and her dire Conclave entered
Forth all her Spells she powers, and what to have ventred
On her self long feared, there broaches; a* whole Hell
Of Ills let us loose, close kept in that dark Cell.
And whilst she with sinister hand, prepares
The Infaustous work, sh'invokes with Magic Prayers
What ever Poisons (1) Lybya's scalding sands
Create; what Taurus, (where cold Winter stands
Clothed with perpetual Snow,) in's frozen veins
Congeales; and every Monster. At whose strains
Craule scaly Multitudes from under ground,
And as officious Agents wait her round.
Thither an aged Serpent trailes along
His o're-growne Bulk, and darts his forked tongue;
Seeking on whom to inflict a death; at sound
Of her dire Charms, his poisonous length in round
And complicated Orbs he folds: She cries
Poor are the Ills, and base the Weapons, rise
From this low earth; I Will from the Heavens fetch down
Poyson's to serve my turn; This instant Crown
With Ills worthy thy self; Now, now is the time
Something to act above a vulgar crime.
Hither descend (3) the Snake that seems to lie
Like a huge Torrent rolling cross the ^kie,
In whose Immense folds either (3) Bear is tied,
(3) The great, to Achaians, less, Sydonians, guide.
His griping hands let (4) O phiuchus loose,
And the squeezed venom of his Snake infuse.
Hither repair, drawn by these Charms of ours,
(5) Python that durst assail two Heavenly Powers.
(6) Hydra, with all the Serpents were subdued
By Hercules in their own deaths renewed.
And thou the Colchians wakeful The sleeplesse Dragon, that kept the Golden
fleece
Spy, whose eyes
In drowzy sleep our Spells did first surprise.
Then, (having, called of Serpents all the kinds,)
Sh' in one Mass, all pernicious simples binds.
What ever on Impervious (7) Eryx grows,
What (8) Caucasus (where sit continual Snowes)
Stained with Promethian blood, brings forth; what e're
The Warlike (9) Medes in charged Quivers bear.
What flying (10) Parthians use; with what the points
Of his keen shafts the wealthy (11) Arab noints.
(...) Juices which the Noble (12) Swedes inclined
Near the cold North, in Groves (13) Hercynian find.
What e're the Earth in the procreating Spring
Bege^s, or in the Winter forth does bring,
When rigid Cold in Ice has all things bound,
And Forests of their Summers pride uncrown'd.
Those Herbs which bloome with a pestiferous flower,
She culls; the Juice indu'd with banefull power
From roots distorted wrings. From Pindus some,
Some Drugs from high Aemonian (14) Athos come.
These tender sprigs as on (15) Pangaeus top
They grew, did her bloud-cankred Sickle crop.
These (16) Tygris n^urish'd; whose swift streams oppress
His gulphy Channel; these O^ Danubius or Ister we have spoken in the Annot.
upon the Chorus to the third Act.
Danubius, these
The famed (17) Hydaspes* whose warm Current, Iaves
Dry India's Sands with Gem-inriched Waves.
And (18) Baetis whence its land a name did get,
Whose languid streams against Seas Hesperian beat.
These felt the Edge of knife at Birth of day,
In dead of drousie Night, this slender spray
Was from his stalk cut down. This ripened Blade
She did with her charme-tainted Nail invade.
The deadly weeds she takes, and forth does squeeze
Her Serpents putrid Venom, and with these
She mixes Birds of (19) inauspicious flight,
The Heart of the solitary Owl; th'hoarce Night-
Ravens Entrails whilst alive exsected.
These the Pernicious Artist, thus selected,
In parcells puts; flames ravenous force these hold,
Those the Icy chillness of benumming Cold.
Words to her Poisons adds of no less dread
Then poisons are; See! she begins to tread
Her frantic Dance, her Rites Infernal makes;
Now charms; the world at her first Accents quakes.

Scene the second.
Enter MEDEA. You silent People of the shades below!
Ye Gods infernal! and dark (20) Chaos; Ioe!
To you we bow; Thou gloomy Mansion
Where Vestit^ d'^a (...) af^ta; So Bo^hace describing Demogor. in Ge^al. del
Iddio.
sooty (21) Dis resides! seated upon
The lowest Hell; the den of squallid death!
We you invoke: Quit your Abodes beneath,
Leave your old task of torturing souls; and pack
To the new Nuptials. From his wheeling Rack
Released; a while rest let (22) Ixion have,
And (23) Tantalus sup free the fleeting Wave.
Whilst Creon feels more horrid pains then these.
Let (24) Sisyphus his Torments find no ease.
(25) You who in perforated Urnes, still vain
Successelesse toil deludes; cease from your pain
And thither high; this day your hands requires.
And thou the Empress of Nocturnall fires!
To these our Rites invoked, come. Put on
Thy worst of Looks, and with more * Fronts then one -- Heeate ternis variata
figuris, Claudiau.

Menacing, appearo! with loose hairs thus displayed,
(As thine becomes) We Have searched each secret shade,
With naked feet: called from dry clouds the Rain
And to it is Bottom forced the suffering Maine.
Whilst old Oceanus afrighted, hides
Within his waves recesse his vanquished tides.
Heavens Laws inverted, shown the World the light
Of Sun, and Stars, at once; the day and night.
(26) Drenched both the Bears in the forbidden deep.
And changed the course the constant Seasons keep.
Clothed Earth in Summer with a Spring newborn,
Made Ceres see, a Winter crop of Corn.
Swift Phasis turn his streams back to their source,
And Ister in sev'n mouths divided, force
His waters to a stand; his Spring confined.
And made floods roar, seas swell, without a wind.
An ancient Wood, whose leaves its Couvert made,
At our commanding voice has lost his shade.
Phoebus his course day left at noon, forbeares;
And when we (...) the stars drop from their Spheres.
It Is time drea (...), at these Rites of thine
Thou present were; To thee this Wreath of (27) nine-
Imbraided Serpents wrought with bloody hand
We offer. ^oe! his (28) biform'd ^imbes durst band
Against Jove's high Empire, bold (28) Typhaeus! this
The poisonous blood of treacherous (29) Nessus is.
Given by himself as he did life expire.
These Ashes raked we from the See the Antations upon the Chorus to the third
Act, at the number. (20)
O^tean Pyre,
Dryp't with Herculea^ Foame. See, in this hand,
The pious Sisters, impious Mothers Brand
Vengefull Vid. ibid. Number. (20)
Althaea! these Plumes found we cast
By rapefull (29) Harpies, as by (29) Zeres chased.
These are the wings the wounded (30) Stymphal'd bore,
Slain by the Shafts dipped in Lernaean gore.
(31) The Altars sound! and our own Trypods, moved
B'our favoring Goddess, show these Rites approved.
See (32) Trivia's whirling Carre! not as when bright,
With a full Orb illuminating night,
She drives; but such, when with a lured face,
Vex't with (33) Thessalian Charms, a nearer race
To Earth she runs: So shine thy tristfull light
With pallid Ray, and with strange (34) Horror, fright
The world: whilst thy extreame^ to ease, O great
(35) Dyctynna! rich, (36) Chorinthian Brass is beat.
Upon this Bloud-stain'd (37) Turfe our sacrifice
To thee we make; this Funeral (38) Torch, supplies
Nocturnall fires; snatched from the flaming Pile.
(39) To thee our Head we toss, with neck bowed, while
Our Charms we utter; our hairs loosely spread
A Fillet binds, as when we mourn the dead.
To thee this In the Original it is Tristis Ramus, which I have rendered
Withered, as moved by the Authority of B^n Johnson, whom see in his Notes upon
his Ma^ke of Witches.
withered bough thus wave we round,
Brought from the dark shades near the Stygian Sound.
To thee with bared breast true A frow of Bacchus or Bacchanall, so called of
the ^rantick Furv that possessed them.
Maenad-like
This In the Latin it is Sacro cultro: see the reason why I so render it in
B^n. Johnson his No es upon his Mask of Witches, ut supra.
rusty knife thus in our Arms we strike.
Our streaming blood down to the Altar flows;
Inure your selves my hands such wounds t'impose,
And learn the dearest Blood of thine to shed.
The ^ide qu^ ad (...) 37. Ann. t.
hallowed Flood our pierced veins have bled.
If thou complain'st thou art too often pressed
B'our Orisons, pardon a forced request.
That thus O (40) Persis we thy Powers implore,
The Cause is still the same as heretofore,
Stili Jason: now infect the Brides Attire;
That when put on, the close, Serpentine fire,
Her inmost marrow may consume within
The yellow gold, couched lies the flame unseen.
(41) Which he who rues his Heavenly Theft, with still-
Renewed Liver gave; and taught the skill
How to conceal its force: Mulciber did
Give us these fires, in subtle Sulphur hid.
This living flash of fatal lightning, we
From Phaeton our Cosen took; here be
The gifts the triple-shap'd (42) Chimaera gave.
The Flames breathed from the Bulls scortch'd throats we have,
Which mixed with (43) Medusa's Gall do serve,
So charged, the secret Mischief to conserve.
With Power these poisons Hecate inspire,
And guard the hidden seeds of the close fire
Lurkes in these gifts, let them deceive the Test
Of sight and touch; whilst in her veins, and breast
The subtle fervor spreads; and does calcine
Her melting Limbs, in smoke let her Bones pine,
And her inflamed tresses, beam-like blaze
And dim the light her Nuptial Tapers rays.
(44) -- Our Prayers are heard; (44) thrice Heca^ barked aloud
Thrice with sad flames, her sacred fires she showed.
All Is finished. Nurse! my Children call, that they
Unto Creusa may these gifts convey.
Go Children; issue of a hapless mother;
Go; by your prayers, and Presents, seek another
Less kind, to appease. Back hither quickly hie,
That we your last embraces may enjoy.

CHORUS. Wither runs bloody (45) Maenas drove
By the fierce fury of her love?
What Mischief with wild rage prepares?
Wrath with rough frowns her looks impaires;
Shaking her head she proudly jets,
And menaces the Creon.
King with threats.
Who her an Exile would suppose?
The flushing red in her cheeks glowes,
Now palenesse thence the red does chase,
No color long her changing face
Retains; now here she runs, now there,
Distracted as her passions bear.
As Tygresse of her young bereft,
With wild speed prosecutes the theft
Through (47) Ganges Forest; so, nor rage
Medea knows, nor love t'asswage.
Now wrath and love their Powers conjoyne;
What will she do? to which incline?
When from Pelasgian lands, away
Will she her cursed self convey?
And by her wished absence, clear
The Creon and Jason.
Kings, and Kingdom of their fear?
Now Phoebus drive with winged pace,
Nor curbing Reins retard thy Race.
In her dark shades let friendly night,
Now hide the luster of the light.
And Hesperus Night's usher steep
The feared day in the Western Deep.

Act the Fifth.
Scene the first.
NUNCIUS and CHORUS. NUNCIVS. All Is lost! our Kingdoms Glory sunk in fire;
The Creusa the new Bride, and Creon her Father.
Princely Daughter, and her Creusa the new Bride, and Creon her Father.
Royal Sir^
In blended Ashes lie.

CHORUS. Say how betrayed?


NVNCIVS. Even by those usual Trains for Kings are laid,
By Gifts.

CHORUS. In those what treachery could be?


NNNCIVS. Nay, that is my wonder: nor though the fact I see,
Can my belief receive't for possible.

CHORUS. The manner of so strange a ruin tell.


NUNCIVS. As 'twas By Medea.
commanded, the devouring flame,
Assaults each part oth' Palace: the whole frame
In pieces falls; and now we fear the Town.

CHORUS. The raging flames with throwne-on waters drown


NVNCIVS. Even that astonishment, and wonder breeds
In this disaster; Fire on Water feeds;
The more suppressed, the more it burns; and grows
By that which to extinguish we impose.

Scene the second.
Enter MEDEA, and NVRSE. NVRSE. Fly; fly Medea! quickly hence be gone,
And seek with speed some other Region.

MEDEA. How should we fly? -- No; were we fled, to see
This day, we would return again: to be
Spectatresse of these gallant Nuptials. -- Heart!
Do stopp? pursue thy happy rage; this part
Of thy enjoyed Revenge, what is it? -- Distraught!
Do thou yet love? is widdowed Jason, thought
Sufficient? Work Medea! work; invent
Some strange, unusual kind of punishment.
Hence with all right, expulsed shame be gone.
"That Is poor revenge which by weak hands is done:
By all intent on wrath; bravely excite
Thy drooping thoughts; and with more eager might
Rouse up the old sparks of rage, hid in thy breast.
What we have done already, to the rest
W' intend, may be called piety: now ply't;
Let the world know how vulgar, and how slight
Our former Ills were, but as Preludes, to
Ensuing rage. What could such rude hands do
Might be termed great? or by a Girl be shown?
We Are now Medea; our Invention grown,
As our Ills multiplied; Now, now we are joy'd
We lopt our Brothers head, and did divide
His bleeding Limbs; that we our Father spoiled
Of his Crowns sacred Treasure; and beguiled
Daughters to take up particidiall Arms.
Seek matter for thy Fury, for all harms
That brings a hand prepared. -- Wrath whither, oh!
Transported art thou? Against what treacherous Foe
Intend'st these weapons? -- Something my fierce mind,
But what I know not, has within designed,
Nor darest' her self disclos't. -- Fool I have been
Too fondly rash. Oh that I could have seen
Some Children of the Strumpet got! -- What Is thine
By Jason, think Creusa bore. This kind
Of vengeance likes; and likes deservedly.
The height of Ills, with a resolve as high
Attempt: you, we did once our Children call,
For your Sires Crimes a satisfaction fall.
-- Horror invades my heart; an Icy cold
Stiffens my limbs; my breast pants; wrath, his hold
Has left; and there, (a wive's stern Passions quit,)
A Mothers soft restored affections sit.
We in our Childrens blood our hands ^mbrue?
Ah! better thoughts distracted griefs pursue!
Far be it from Medea yet, to act
So soul a Sin, or so abhorred a fact.
What Crime, poor wretches! shall they suffer for?
-- Their Father's Crime enough; and greater far
Their Mother; let 'em dye; they are none of mine.
Hold! they are thine own: then perish because thine.
Alas! they are innocent; without a touch
Of Guilt? it is true; My Brother too was such.
Why stagger'st thou my soul? or why do tears
Water my Cheeks? whilst Passion this way bears
My wavering mind, now that way love divides;
Tossed in an eddy of uncertain Tides.
As when the Winds wage war the passive Waves
Are counter-rock't, the Sea a Neuter, ra^es.
So floats my wrackt heart, now Wrath wins the field,
Now Piety; to Piety wrath yield.
Oh you the only joy, and comfort left
Of our sad state; Now, of all else berest;
Come hither, my dear Children! and with mine
Your little Arms in close Embraces join.
May in your lives your Father yet delight,
Whilst I your Mother may. -- Exile, and flight
Enforce me on: Strait from my Arms with cries
Will they be torn; then perish from all joys
Of Father as of Mother. Grief again
Renewes; My hate boyles high; my heared brain
It Is old Rage fires, and stirs m' abhorred hand
Up to new mischief: On then, thy command
We follow. Would an issue from my womb
As numerous as (1) Niobes, had come.
And twice sev'n Children had from us derived
Their Births: our Barrenness has even deprived
Our Vengeance; yet w' have two: enough to expire
As victimes to our Brother, and our Sir e*
-- Whither does this dire Troop of Furies bend? Here her frantic fantsie
presents unto her the Furies, and her Brothers Ghost.

Whom seek they? where their fiery strokes intend?
Against whom shake they their bloody Brands? Snake, wound
In lashing whips with horrid hisses sound.
Whom does Megaera with infestive Post
Pursue? what yet unknown, dismembered Ghost,
Is this appears? 't's my Brothers; come to crave
Vengeance of us: And vengeance shall thou have.
But first, fix all these firebrarnds in my eyes;
Tear, burn; my Breast to furies open lies.
Hence these dread Ministers of vengeance send,
And bid these Spirits satisfied descend.
Leave me to my self, Brother; to employ
This Arm in thy revenge, that did destroy
Thy life; Stabs one of her Sons.
thus with this (2) victime we appease
Thy injured Ghost. -- What sudden sounds are these?
What means this none? -- Jason within, preparing a Guard to apprehend her.
Arms against my life are bent,
At these words by the Machine of the Scene she was immediately taken up to the
top of the house.
Up to the Houses Top force thy Ascent:
Finish thy Murder there. Come you with me
My small Companion: whilst this body we
Convey along. Now, soul! thy task intend.
Nor thy brave Mischief unregarded end
In secret; show't the People; let them stand
The amazed Spectators of thy Tragic hand.

Scene the Third.
Enter JASON cum Armatis. JASON. You whom the Murder of your Prince, does move
With sad Resentments of a loyal love,
The Author of that execrable deed
Help to surprise; hither with weapons speed
You armed Cohorts; here this House surround,
And lay the Fabric level with the ground.

MEDEA. I, now our Sceptor, Brother, Sire, again
W'enjoy; and Colchians their rich spoil retain.
Our Kingdom, and our lost Virginity
Are now restored: O long cross Destiny
At length grown kind! O festive Nuptials! On;
Give thy Revenge, as Crime, perfection.
Dispatch while thy hand's in. -- Why thus delays
My soul? what doubts? -- Our potent wrath decays;
Now of the Fact a shameful penitent.
What have I done? Wretch! such though I repent.
I Have don't. An ample joy m' unwilling Heart
Seizes: it grows upon me. Yet this part
Of Vengeance wanted, he not being here,
Nor a spectator; without whom, what e're
We Have done, is lost.

JASON. See where she sits! upon
Yon Houses shelving Top; hither some one
Bring burning Brands, and Fire impose on Fire;
That scorched in her own Flames she may expire.

MEDEA. Do; raise your Sons a Fun'rall Pile; your Bride,
And Father-i-law, our kindness did provide
With Rites of Sepulture; his Doom this Son
Has felt, the like shall this, whilst thou look on.

JASON. By all the Gods, by our Community
Of flight, and Bed, which, un-^nforced I
Never violated: spare this child; O spare
Me this: the Crime is mine, then let me share
The punishment; and let deserved death,
Seize on my guilty Head, and loathed Breath.

MEDEA. No; where thou would not have it; where thou do feel
Most sense of sorrow will we force our steel.
Go now, thou proud Insulter, go, and Wed
Young Virgins now, and leave a Mother's Bed,

JASON. Let one suffice to have suffered.


MEDEA. If our Rage
One death, or single slaughter could assuage
We none had sought; and though both dye, yet that
TO our wrongs is not revenge commensurate.
If in our womb a Pledge there be, even there
This steel shall searched, and thence the Embrion tear.

JASON. Dispatch thy Villainy; no more we pray:
Nor longer now, our punishment delay.

MEDEA. Haste not my Grief; but leisurely employ
Thy slow revenge. This daye's our own; w' enjoy
The accepted time.

JASON. Death, cruel! we implore.


MEDEA. Thou pity crav'st. So; Kills her o^ there Son.
now all is done; nor more
Had we (O sorrow) as a Sacrifice
To offer thee. Erect thy humid Eyes
Ungrateful Jason; here look up; do know
Thy Wife? thus use we to escape: Heavens show
Our flight clear way; See both our Dragons here!
Who freely stoop their scaly necks to bear
Their willing Yoke. Throws their bodies down.
Now take your Sons; whilst I
On wi^ged Wheels through airy Regions fly.

JASON. (4) Go, mount the skies; and by thy flight declare,
(If thou unpunished go) no Gods there are.

FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the first ACT.
(1) YOu Nuptial Powers] The Nuptial Powers were these; Jupiter and Juno,
whom they styled Iovem Adultum, and Iunonem Adultam, in regard (as conceived)
that it was not lawful for any one to marry, nisi Adulta Aetate, as likewise
(...), and (...), i. e. Nuptials by the Greeks, because (as Scaliger says)
Humanae vitae Perpetuatio Nuptiarum Merito perficeretur. The Perpetuation of
humane life was the effect or benefit of Marriage. The Goddess Suada Nuptiare
Consiliatrix, Diana President of Household Affairs, called at these Ceremonies
Cinxia (a Title likewise given to Juno) of the Girdle or Zone of the Bride,
which being unloosed by the Bridgroome, was her Votive or Offering; Genius, so
called quasi Generis Nostri Parens, Neptune called Genethliacus, Ut cui
liberorum quaerendorum Cura Venus Geriturae Domina, Hymen (of whom in the
Annotations upon the following Chorus) And (to omit diverse others added to the
Catalogue by the Romans)

(2) Lucina, Guardian of the Geniall bed, etc.] Being the same with Diana,
called likewise Illythia, President, chief Assistant at Women's Labors, in
regard that her Mother was delivered of her without Pain, the Etymology of
Lucina, Ovid would thus derive.

-- De dit haec tibi Nomina lucus,
Vel quia Principium tu dea lucis habes.
Goddess thy name from Groves derived should be,
Or, cause the Prime of Light's derived from thee.
(3) The Geniall bed was called as Scaliger supposes a Generando, or as others,
quia in honorem Genii sternebatur, it was by the Greeks called (...) in regard
it was covered over with a veil. Vid. Scal. Poet. l. 3.

(4) And thou who Typhis taught] Pallas or Minerva, of whom see more in the
Annotations upon the Chorus to the Second Act.

Typhis was the Pylot of Argos in the Expedition to Colchos, instructed by
Minerva, de quo vide ibid.

(5) To guide the first Ship, etc.] Argos, (according to the Poets) the first
Ship that ever sailed the Seas, and by them placed in the Heavens, as the Merit
of her Adventures. Embelish'd with 26 glittering Stars.

-- Tum nobilis Argo
In coelum sub ducta mari, quod prima cucurrit
Emeritum magnis mundum tenet acta Procellis,
Servando Dea facta deos. --
Manil. l. 1. -- The noble Argos to the Skies
From Sea translated, which she first did plow,
Once tossed with mighty storms, in heaven's fixed now,
And Deiefy'd, for saving Deieties.
(6) Dread Sovereign of the Seas] Neptune; who by the Greeks is sometimes
called (...) of the noise and roaring of the Seas, resembling the bellowing of
a Bull, which Beast they usually offered to him in Sacrifice.

(7) Three-formed Hecate] Hecate the same with the Moon, so called (as some
conceive) for that she was appeased with Hecatombs, or that she caused the
unburied to wander a hundred years, or for the multiplicitie of her Indowments
and virtues, or for the Centuple increase of Fruit, a Secret by her taught, and
received from her Mother; said to be triple-form'd, in regard in Heaven she is
called Luna, on Earth Diana, in Hell Proserpina; See more in the Annotations
upon the fourth Act, Scene the second.

(8) Ye Furies dread, etc.] The Furies are fained to be the Daughters of
Erebus and Night, in number three, their Names Megera, Tysiphone, and Alecto,
the Hellish Executioners of Celestial vengeance, armed with flaming Brands,
and Snakie Whips. The hairs of their heads being Serpents (if we believe the
Poets) the first that so described them (as Pausanias in Atticis witnesses,)
was the Poet Aeschylus.

(9) Phoebus the Radiant Author of our Race] Aeeta the Father of Medea was the
Son of Apollo, begotten on Persa the Daughter of Neptune: Who was Medeas
Mother is not certainly known: Since they reckon Iayia, Ephire, Hecate,
Eurylite, Neaera, Asterodia and Antiope, the most general received is Hecate.
Vid. Schol. Apolon. in l. 3.

(10) Corynth whose small Land, etc.] Corynth was seated upon the Neck of Land
or Isthmos, joining Peloponessus to Achaia, parting the Egaean and Ionian Seas.
What Medea here threatens in her fury, was once really attempted to have been
effected as Pausanias writes, by design, viz. to have made an Island of
Peloponessus: The Isthmos being but the Remainder of the unfinished Work, left
unperfected in that death prevented the undertaker; The Marks and Tracts of the
design being apparent in his days.

(11) The Ills once Colchos, etc.] Colchos (now called Mengrelia) was the
supposed Country of Medea, bounded on the North with part of Sarmatia, on the
West with so much of the Euxine Sea, as extends from the River Corax, to the
mouth of the River Phasis, on the South with part of Cappadocia, and on the
East with Iberra. Ptol. l. 4. Cosm. where Med^a betrayed her Fathers Kingdom,
made Jason Master of the Golden Fleece and her self, and slew her Brother
Absyrtus, whose Limbs she cut in pieces, and scattered abroad, so to retard her
pursuing Father, whilst he gathered together the dispersed Members.

On the CHORUS.
(12) You Gods, etc. These Princely Nuptials, etc. Whilst all due Rites, etc.]
It was the manner of the Ancients at Nuptials, to begin per Auspicia and
Sacra, and Invocation of the Deieties, to whom they offered a lock of the
Brides hair, tanquum Primitias; It was the Custom likewise for the People, at
the Inauguration or Marriages of Princes to stand by, and favere lingua, i. e.
to abstain from evil words, and to offer up their Vows and Acclamations as
the Omen of their future felicity. And (as Del Rius conjectures) to begin the
Celebration of the Nuptial Solemnities in these words, Quod bonum, foelix,
faustum, fortuna tumque sit.

(13) First to those Powers that thunder fling] Meaning Jupiter and Pluto; As
also the rest of the Deieties. For they likewise had their Thunder, yet such as
they at first received from Jupiter. And with this difference: First, the
lighting or Thunder which they darted, was of Color either white, or black.
That of Jupiters Ruddy. Theirs again was dull and heavy, and served only to
punish; Jupiters Propitious, and sent to admonish. I find, that of Jupiters
Thunder there were three sorts; The first small, and monitory; The second
bigger, and breaking forth with a loud noise, sent by Jove by the General
Advice, and upon the Votes of the Parliament of Gods. The last was greater then
the two first, and atttended with consuming Fire, which was sent by Jupiter
when in his Privy Counsel he determined, upon some urgent occasion, to reverse
any general Decree, or Act established by the rest of the Gods. The Romans (as
Pliny testifies, l. 2.) held, that but two of all the Deieties used to thunder,
viz. Jupiter, and Pluto, the first by day, the last by night. Unto these
Deieties in general, they usually offered a White Bull in sacrifice at
Nuptials, (yet it was the opinion of some of the Ancients, that it was a thing
Piacular to offer a Bull to Jupiter) as likewise, perticularly to

(14) Thee O Lucina, etc.] (the same with Juno as some will, as others the
daughters of Juno, Cui vincla I^galia curae) a white Heifer; but in the
sacrifice they threw the Gall behind the Altar in sign futurae inter Conjugas
tranquilitatis, the other Parts of the Beast were burnt.

(15) To her who Mars his bloody hands, etc. Shall fall a gentler Sacrifice]
The Goddess Venus; to whom they offered, a bowl of Wine and Frankincense; or
Concord, or Peace, the Conciliatrix of Differences, and Mother of Plenty,
signified by her still replenishing Horn. Alluding to the Story of the
Amalthaean Goat, which being Nurse to Jupiter, and having broken one of her
engaged Horns in a Ticket, the same was by Amalthea a Nymph (who owed the
Goat) taken up, and filled with various sorts of Fruits and Flowers, and brought
to the Infant Jupiter to smell on, of which benefit Jupiter being afterward
min^ful, granted this Boon to the Nymph, that whatever she should ask,
^should immediately spring from that Horn, called from thence Coruucopiae.
vid. Ovid. 5. Fastor.

(16) And thou who these Solemnities, etc. Thy head with Roses Crown'd] Hymen
(A pleasant search it were, to search for the Derivation of his Name; to which,
Scaliger in the third of his Poet. will direct you) is here crowned with Roses,
( Catullus crowns him with sweet Margerum) the reason why I find not; only
this I read, that the Rose was a flower dedicated to Venus, and sprung (as
Poets feign) from her blood, some Philosophers likewise were of opinion, that
the color and odor of the Rose proceeded from the Influence of her Planet,
whose Color and Prickles may perhaps allude to the Blushes and the Smarts of
wounded Lovers; Capella likewise terms the Wreaths or Garlands usually worn
at Nuptials, Conscia Veneris Serta.

Of Hymen, see more toward the end of this Chorus.

(17)

And thou bright Star with Silver Ray,]
Forerunner of the Night and Day, etc.]
Hesperus; the same with Lucifer, a Star consecrate to Venus, and beloved of
her;

-- Oceani perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios Astrorum diligit ignes,
Extulit os Sacrum.
Virg. l. 8. Aeneid. The Sea-bath'd Lucifer's bright Head aspires,
Whom Venus loves 'bove all Heaven's shining Fires.
Supposed to be one and the same Star, Lucifer being taken for the Globe or
body thereof, and Venus for that Power, (in the Metaphysics called the
Intelligence) by which the Rotation of it is Orb is perpetuated, Scal. l. 5.
Poet. usually invoked at Nuptials to bring on the Evening, the time wherein
the Bridal Solemnities were performed. Of which likewise thus Claudian.

Attollens Thalamis Idalium Iubar
Dilectus veneri nascitur Hesperus.
Claud. Nupt. Hon. and Mariae. To light the Nuptials, his Idalian Ray
Hesper beloved of Venus does display.
(18) Among the Cecropian Dames, etc.] Attick, or Athenian Virgins; from
Cecrops the first King of Attica, who founded and built the Tower or Castle of
Athens; hence it came that the Athenians were called Cecropians, and the Region
of Attica, Cecropia. He was contemporary with Moses (as Eusebius writes) and
flourished about the year of the World, 3645. and before the Flood of
Doucali^n. He was said to be by-form'd, and to have the shape of a man above,
and of a Dragon beneath. In regard of his Wisdom and Fortitude, or in that he
was skilled in two Languages, the Egyptian and Greek, or as Justin reports,
Quia primus Mar^m Foeminae Matrimonio junxit.

(19) The Virgins of the Wallesse Town, etc.] Spartan Virgins; That Town being
unwalled: The reason whereof being asked Agesilaus, he answered that Armed
Citizens, and at Concord and Unity among themselves, were the best defense of
a Town, whose safety he said consisted not in Bulwarks or Trenches, but in
the Valor and united Resolution of the Inhabitants. It is at this day held and
fortified by the Turks, being a Sanziackship, and by them called Mizithra.

(20)

Who on Taygetus his Crowne]
In manly Passe-times, etc.]
Taygetus is a Mountain of Laconiae, near to, and overlooking Sparta; On
whose Top, the Virgins of that Town and Country were wont to sport themselves
in Wrestling, Races, and other manly Exercises, (...) nudis femonibus (as Pelus
in Euripides his Andromack taxes them.) Which Custom Plutarke writes had it is
Original from Lycurgus his Institution. They used likewise Solemn Dances and
Songs, in which they recited the Praises of Bacchus and Venus: First practiced
among themselves only (as Scaliger observes 1. Poet.) afterward in the Company
of Youngmen, with whom they performed these kind of Exercises naked; commended
by Plato in his Republique, as a thing fit to be practiced by Women of all
sorts and Ages.

(21) And those their limbs in Dirce lave] Meaning the Theban Virgins, Dirce
being a Fountain in B^otia near Thebes, sacred to the Muses; with whom
likewise our Author may seem ^acitly to compare Creusa.

(22) Or in Alphaeus Sacred Wave.] Alphaeus is a River of Arcadia running along
by Elis and Pisa, called here Sacred, either in that as the Ancients supposed,
no River but was thought to contain a Deietie, (and therefore by the Poets
called the Sons of Gods) or that the Elean Games were performed to this
River, as to a God and friend of Jupiter; with whose Water alone it was lawful
to wash and cleanse the Altar of Olympic Jove, famous for the memoriz'd love
'twixt him and Ar^thusa. Of which see Ovid. Metam. l. 5.

(23) The Aesonian Youth, etc.] Jason; the Son of Aeson, the Son of
Cretaeus, the Son of Aeolus, who was his Mother is not certainly known. Some
say Theognis, other Polyphemes, some Eteoclymenes, and others Alcymides. Vid.
Apoll. Schol.

(24)

Shall Bacchus self give place]
Who to the yoke fierce Tigers chaines]
Bacchus was so called from the howling vociferation which the Bacchae or
Frowes, brought by him from conquered India, made. Said to be always young, in
that he had the Looks of a Youth or Boy; and always reputed, inter
Formosissimos. Drawn by yoaked Tigers, a kind of Beast of an untamed Feritie;
the Hieroglyphick, Emollitae, Ferociae.

(25)

Or he who over the Tripods reigns,]
Mild Brother to the Sterner Maid, etc.]
Apollo, who gave Oracles by the Tripod, which was a Seat or Stool of three
feet, made of Gold or Brass; On which the Priest being seated, was inspired
with the Spirit of Divination, and gave Answers. The Epithets of Aspera and
Ferox are often given by the Poets to Diana; which though they may seem in the
opinion of some unsuitable, and not fitly applied to such a Deietie; yet in
respect of her obstinate Vow of Perpetual Virginity, there be those that
think she justly deserved them.

(26)

The Swan-got Twins fair Laeda layd]
Castor, with Pollux who for blow]
Of Weighty Sledge, etc.]
Castor and Pollux were feigned to be begotten by Jupiter in the likeness of a
Swan, on Laeda; who conceiving, brought forth, or (if I may as properly say it)
laid two Eggs, of one came Hellena, of the other Castor and Pollux. Fained to
be borne of Eggs, in regard, (as Athenaeus says) by (...), which in the Greek
signifies an Egg, was understood likewise an upper Room or Chamber. Whence,
(they being born in the upper Part of the House) the Fable may seem to spring.
Pollux, (as Castor at Horse-man-ship) was famous at the Game or Exercise of the
Sledge or Cestus. In which Exercise at the first Original they encountered one
another with strokes of bare fists only; Afterward for the defense of the
Hand there was added a Lora or Thong fastened at the Elbow and shoulder; to
which Lora likewise, called Cestus or Cingulum (whence the Exercise took
Denomination) was ^owed a weighty Piece of Iron or Lead; In which cruel
Past-time they not seldom endangered the dashing out of one another Brains,
and therefore they usually wore a Helmet or Cap of defense, especially for
their ears: All the Art in this, was to avoid the blows, not by running back,
but by the dexterous motion of the Body. Scaliger seems to deride the opinion
of those who make this Cestus to be a Staff wound about with the Lora and
Plummet of Lead hung at the end. Vid. S^al. l. 1. Poet.

(27) So fade the Pleiads, etc.] The Pleiads are said by some to be the
Daughters of Lycurgus, who ruled in the Island of Naxos; who, for that they
were the Nurses of Bacchus, were said to be constellated by Jupiter. They were
seven in Number, their Names Celano, Sterope, Merope, Alcynoe, Maita, Taygeta,
and Electra, which last (as Aratus says) is scarce to be seen; And for that
reason by some thought to be so called, others fable that for shame she
obscures her self, for as much as all the rest of her Sisters were married to
Gods, and she alone had a Mortal to her husband. Proclus Diadochus upon
Hesiod, reports them to be the Daughters of Atlas, begotten on the Nymph
Pleione, from whence they are said to take their Denomination; who conceives
them to be no other then the assisting Angels or Intelligences of the Seven
Spheres, Allotting Celaeno to the Sphere of Saturn, S^erope to Jupiters,
Merope to that of Mars, Aclynoe to the Sphere of Venus, Maia to Mercuries,
Taygeta to the Moons, and Electra to the Suns; their Situation, according to
Ovid in Phaenomenis, and Servius in Virgil, ante genua tauri.

Pleiades ante genu septemradiare feruntur,
Sed tantum apparet sub opaca septima nube.
Seav'n Pleiads before the knees of Taurus shine;
Dark clouds the seventh, hardly seen, confine.
Pliny places them in Cauda Tauri, reprehended by Joseph Scaliger in his
Manilian Annotations, since the Bull is but half body'd, his upper parts (as
Ovid says) only appearring, as cut off in the middle, about which Caesure the
Pleiades are seated: So called, either from their plurality, or from the
Greek which signifies to sail, in regard that upon their rising was the
Season for Navigation, as in the Latin Vergiliae, from the Vernall Season, the
time wherein they arise. Plin. l. 2. c. 41.

(28) Phaenician Dye] Purple or Scarlet, the best being that of Tire a City of
Phaenicia, near which the Scarlet-fish (...) taken, that yields that dye. See
Salmuthius upon Panci^llus, de rebus Perditis and nuprime Inventis.

(29) From Phasis horrid Bed] Medea was called Phasis, Colchis of the River
Phasis and Region of Colchos, as being by some conceived to be there borne,
though Pindarus in the thirteenth Ode of his Olympicks, seems to make Corinth
the Country of Medea, and not Colchos, yet so may she justly be called in
regard that her Father Aeeta leaving his Principality of Corinth, or
exchanging it for Colchos, there reigned.

(30) Fair Issue of the God of Wi^e] Hymen was said to be the Son of Bacchus
and Venus ( Catullus makes the Muse Urania his Mother, and ^ome, Apollo his
Father.) The same with the Greeks (says Scaliger) as Thalassius with the
Romans. By the Indians (as Boccace in Geneolog. Deor. writes) styled the God of
the Night. Of all the Deieties chiefly invoked at Nuptials. Lactanti^s reports
that Hymen was a beautiful Youth of Athens, who (for the love of a young
Virgin, in the habit of one disguised, performing the Eleusinian Rites, was
with diverse other Maids of that City taken and carried away by Pirates, and by
them (supposing him a Maid) lodged with his Mistress. Who, when the Pirates
were asleep, cut their throats, and then running before to Athens, told the
Parents of the Maids, that if amongst the rest they would assure him of her
whom he affected, he would restore their Daughters. Which being granted him,
and the Marriage proving fortunate, it grew into a Custom afterward at
Nuptials to invoke the name of Hymen. Of whom, and of his several Duties, it
will not be amiss as a Corollary to add what is elegantly sung by Martianus
Capella in these following Verses;

Tu quem psallentem Thalamis, quem matre Camaena,
Progenitum perhibent; Cepula Sacra Deum
Semina qui arcanis stringens pugnantia vinclis,
Complexuque sacro, dissona nexa foves.
Namque Elementa ligas vicibus, mundumque maritas,
Atque auram mentis, corporibus socias.
Faedere complacito subquo natura jugatur,
Sexus concilias, and sub amore fidem:
O Hymenaee decens! Cypridis tu maxima Cura.
Hinc tibi nam flagrans ore cupido micat.
Seu tibi quod Bacchus Pater est, placuisse chore as,
Cantare ad Thalamos seu Genitricis habes;
Co^ere verniferis florentia lamina sertis,
Seu consanguineo Gratia trina dedit.
Thou Muse-borne: Who at Bridalls chant'st, whose hands
Do Link the Deieties in Sacred Bands.
Who jarring seeds in Mystic knots do chain,
Discordants knit, in concord do maintain.
Marry'st the World, the Elements do bind
In mutual ties; to Bodies wedd'st the Mind.
Whose pleasing Yoke Nature her self does prove,
Sexes unit'st, make Faith strike league with Love.
O Graceful Hymen! Joy of Erycine.
For in thy flagrant looks, hence love does shine.
Whether the measured Brawles, in that thy Sire
Was Bacchus, or to chant i'th'Nuptiall Quire,
In that a Muse thy Mother thou affect'st;
Or Gates with flowers, the Graces Kinsman, deck'st.
(31) It Is time to light thy carved Pine] After the Nuptial Supper was ended,
and the Dances done; the Pronuba, (which was usually the Mother of the Bride)
taking the Bride by the hand led her to the Geniall Bed, though others will
have this to be done by Youths, the nearest of Kin of the Fathers or Mothers
side. Before them (according to the manner of the Greeks) went a Youth in a
long Robe representing the Person of Hymen, bearing a Torch of Pine or
White-thorn by Pliny reported to be held omniu^ Auspicatissima. After followed
two others (according to the manner of the Romans) bearing a Distaffe and
Spindle (after the Custom of the Greeks) a Sive or Boulter, and a Pestle and
Mortar, signifying how the Bride was to employ her future time. And with these
Ceremonies brought to the Bride Chamber, she was there by the Bridegroom
unvailed. Vid. Plutarch. in Romulo. Scal. Scal. Poet. l. 3.

(32)

With Wine-wet-fingers then put out]
The Solemn Flame, etc.]
This Verse I have thus rendered, though contrary to the sense of Delrius, (who
would have excute, which Irender put out, or shake out, to toss or make to
blaze) as being induced by the more plausible Interpretation of M. Farnaby. Who
conceives it was the Office of Hymen at Nuptials to extinguish the Bridal
Taper, as well as light it. I find it was the Custom likewise before the
Torches were put out, for the Pronuba to light the Nuptial Lamp, which was to
be kept constantly burning by Night, and that done, all the Tapers were
extinguished; Which, that they were not laid under the Bed, or reserved to
light a Funeral Pile, was most Religiously observed. Scal. l. 3. Poet.

(33) And the Fessennine Youths do sing, etc.] It was the Custom at Marriages
(among the Ancients) the Bride, and Bridegroom being entered into Bed, and the
Doors of the Chamber being locked, to Sing an Epithalamium full of Lascivious
Wantonness, and not to be questioned Licenciousnesse (as the Verses
immediately before going intimate) that while that was Sung, Compressae
Virginis Clamor non audiretur. To which end they strowed Nuts likewise to be
trod on. Though there be a better reason rendered for it, to wit, That the
married Couple should renounce and abandon all Childish Sports, and Vanities of
Youth. These Verses, as the Youths that Sung them, were called Fescennine from
Fesce^num a Town of Etruria, from whence they first came; or as others will,
in regard that Facinum a^cere putabantur. They were held to drive away ill Luck
or Witchery, or the conceived Revenge which Nemesis might take for too great
Praises usually given to the Married pair in the Epithalamium or Marriage
Song, and therefore these Fescennine Youths and Derisory Verses were added to
the Music.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the second ACT.
(1) ANd thus could Jason cause Medea grieve!] The Name of Jason as Pindarus
intimates in (...) Pythicor. seems to be derived a Sanando, (...) in the
Greek signifying Sanitie, who, by reason that in his younger years he was
brought up under Chyron, and by him instructed in Chyrurgery and Physic, was
called Jason sive Sanator.

(2)

The Signal Glory of the Colchian Crowne]
Made Prize]
The Golden Fleece, brought to Colchos by Phryxus. The Fable of which is this:
^hryxus and his Sister Hell, flying from the Cruelty of their Father Athamas,
exasperated by his wife their Stepmother Ino. (For they were the Children of
repudiated Nephele) were by their Mother furnished with a Ram, whose Fleece was
of Gold which she had from Mercury. Mounted upon which, they were carried
through the Air, when they came to the Sea running 'twixt Sigaeum and
Chaersonessus, Affrighted Hell fell from his back into the Sea, which from her
took it is Name. Phryxus not withstanding, safely arrived at Cholcos, and there
in Memorial sacrificed the Ram to Jupiter of that called Phryxius, and hung
the Fleece in the Grove of Mars, which was afterward kept (as they fabled) by a
sleeplesse Dragon. Vid. Natal. Com. Mythol. l 6. Tacitus reports in the sixth
Book of his Annalls, that among the Colchians no man durst sacrifice a Ram,
because (as he says) Phryxus was once carried upon one, be it, that that Ram
was a beast or a Ship bearing that Enfigne. This Fleece Jason by the help of
Medea made his Prize. Vid. Ovid. Met. and Apoll. l. 4. l. 7.

(3) Think on old Pelias boiling over the Fire, etc.] Pelias was King of
Thessaly, which he by Power kept, though the right thereof belonged to his
Nephew Jason: Medea therefore to be revenged of him for the injury done her
husband, coming to Pelias his Court who was now very aged, pretends that she
would restore his Youth, as he had done old Aesons her husbands Father, and
persuaded his Credulous daughters to cut in Pieces his aged Limbs, and to boil
them in a Caldron of Water which she had prepared; which when the daughters had
done, she leaves them guilty of Particide and frustrate of their pious hopes,
and by flight avoid their vengeance.

(4) Malea shall amaze, etc.] Malea is a Promontory of Laconia, on the South of
P^loponessus, so called from Maleus one of the Argive Kings. By Ptolomy it is
called Omignaton, extending fifty miles into the Sea; no small hindrance to
the Mariner sailing along those Coasts.

(5) The Colchians hate thee] The Subjects of her Father Aeeta, and Inhabitants
of Colchos; These as Amianus, l. 12. and Strabo l. 11. conjecture, originally
sprung from the Egyptians, ovid. Vadianum in Pompon. Melam.

(z) Pelasgian Royaltie] Pelasgia was commonly taken for all Greece, but more
particularly for Thessaly and Angia; so called from Pelasgus, the Son of
Neptune, or Inachus, here applied to the Corinthian Monarchy.

(5) What Phasis in his winding Arms, etc.] Phasis is the greatest River of
Cholchos, taking his rise from the Mountains called Moschii (adjoining to a
part of the Mountain Caucasus, dividing Cholchos from Iberia) and falling into
the Euxine Sea, at this day called Fassa.

(6)

What e're behind the Scythian Pontus, etc.]
Where the salt Waves grow fresh, etc.]
The Scythian Pontus is that Sea, which beginning from the Thracian Bosphorus
or straits of Constantinople, extends in a large Plain of Waters, known by
several Names, by the Graecians called the Euxine Sea, or (as Ovid says) more
fitly termed Axenos, of the Inhospitalie of the Inhabitants along those Coasts,
or because so infested by Pirates; by the Turks at this day called the Black
Sea. And by our Author the Scythian Pontus, whose Waters are here said to be
fresh with the Admistion of Rivers falling into them, The like is reported
thereof by Pl^ny, which may well be in regard of the neighboring Palus Maeotis
running into it by the Straits of Bosphorus Cimmerius, The River Tanais, and
diverse other great Rivers discharging their fresh Streams likewise into the
same. It is observed by Naturallists, that the Northern Seas are less Salt
then the Southern: For, whereas the saltness of the Sea is conceived to
spring from a terrestrial addust matter, mixing with the Waters, when by the
Sunne-beames the thinner and fresher parts of the Water are exhaled, and the
grosser and lower are left to suffer adustion; It follows, that the Rays of
the Sun being weaker toward the North, the Exhalations should be less, and
so cons^quently the Saltness. Vid. Paul. Merulae. Dissertation do Maribus.

(7)

All that Exte^t of Land whose Borders hems]
The Silver Thermodon; In trampled Fields]
Where Widdowed Troops display their luned Shields]
Thermedon is a River of Cappadocia in the greater Asia, near which the
Amazons were said to live, Inhabiting (as I conceive here is to be meant) so
much of that Part of Cappadocia, by Ptolomy called Pontus Polemoniacus, as is
included between the said River and the Euxine Sea. These Warre-like Women
voluntarily divorced themselves from the Society of men, or rather expelled
them, never marrying, only once every year for Propagation of their Race
admitting of the Company of men. The Male Children, (when they were delivered)
they sent away to their Fathers; The Female they brought up, searing their
right Breasts (whence they took their Denomination) that they might not hinder
their Shooting. Of their Original, vide Isidorum. l. 11.

(8)

Lynceus he whose fight]
Extends cross Pontus it is emitted light]
Lynceus is reported to be the most quick-sighted of men, who from the Top of
Taygetus is said clearly to survay all Peloponessus, and to discover Castor and
Pollux lying hid in a hollow tree, with his sharp fight to pierce through the
bodies of Oaks, to penetrate the Earth, and Globe of the Moon as Pliny says,
l. 2. Not. Hist. c. 7. And as Plutarch writes, to discern Ships from Sicily,
weighing Anchor in some Parts of Africa, being no less then 1500 Stadia.
Though all Mathematicians deny any visible object upon Earth or at Sea to be
discerned the tenth part of such a distance, add beside the Gibbositie or
convexitie of the Sea or Earth, which in so great a distance must needs
intercept the sight. (If any thing yet might be said to hinder the penetrating
sight of Lynceus.) But the Fable of his wonderful Perspicacitie seems to
arise from his cunning in finding out of Gold Mines, which he discovered with
such certainty, that thereupon the ignorant vulgar reported he could see into
the Bowels of the Earth. See Hygin. de Poet. Fabul. l. 1. Here our Author
seems to adhere to the Opinion of the Stoics and Piatonists, who will have
Vision to be by Emission of Radii or Beams, from the sight to the Object;
oppugned by the Peripatetticks, and the best Masters of the Optics; who say.
That Vision is by Radii extrinsecally flowing from the visible Object to the
sight, the Object being illuminated by the light, and the Radii, or light
proceeding from that illuminated Body striking the Eye; whose Radii extending
in form of a Pyramid, whose Vertex or Point is in the Eye, and Basis in the
thing visible. Vid. quae Alhaz. c. 5. l. 1. As likewise, what that Ornament of
our Nation and Learning, the Viscount of S. Albons says of Vision in his
Nature. Hist. p. 65. 72. 144. etc.

(9) And all the Minyae] People of Thessaly, so called of Orcomenus a River of
that Country formerly called Minyeus, supposed to be the Son of Neptune: Or
as Apollonius writes, l. 5. from the Daughters of Minyas; (perhaps after the
manner of the Carians, who, as Herodotus report, took their Names from their
Mothers; The Minyae were likewise of Baeotia, called Minyae Orchomenii (as some
will) from Minyas, and Orchomenus his Son, inhabiting the City of Orcomenus
from him so called. But the Minyae, properly so termed, were those dwelling
about Iolcos.

(10)

Creon Thy knees we touched, and did implore]
The Faith of thy Protecting hand, etc.]
The Ancients made several Parts of man, the Seats of several moral
Virtues, and Vices; assigning modest shamefacenesse to the Forehead, the
contrary vice to the Mouth, Irrision and Sagacitie to the Nose, Judgment to
the Ear, Pride and disdain to the Eyebrows, Pity to the Knees, which
Suppliants used, when they made their requests with Reverence to touch and
embrace. The hand was the Pledge of Faith, as Cicero says in the second of his
Phillipp. [ Those hands which were the Pledges of Faith, are now violated with
perfidious Wickednesse] Which in the Act of Promise, or Paction, was held forth
and touched by the Suppliant; the reason (as Varro gives it) in that the
Authority of the Ancients consisted in the Power and strength of the hand.
Plutarch reports, That the Flamins were wont to perform divine Rites, Manu ad
digitos in^, symbolically signifying, That Faith is inviolably to be kept, and
that the hand was it is consecrated Seat.

Upon the CHORUS.
(11)

Rash man was he with Ships fraile-Beake]
Did first the treacherous Billows breake]
This suits with that of Horace, Illi Robur and as triplex, etc. to which may
be applied the Answer of Carfilides, Who being asked his Opinion what he
thought of the Sea, and Seamen; answered, That there was nothing more
treacherous then the first, and that the others were it is Comrades.

(12)

Drawn to too thin Dimensions farre]
'Twixt Life and Death too poor' a barre]
Alluding perhaps to that Apothegme of Anacharsis (in Laertius) That the
distance betwixt death and those in a ship at Sea, was no more then the
thickness of the Bark; Of which thus Iuvenall:

Inune and ventis animum commit, dolato
Confisus ligno, digitis a morte remotus
Quatuor, aut septem, sisit latissima T^da.
Satyr. 12. Go; trusting in a treacherous Plank; but four
Poor Inches distant, or but seav'n, if more,
From death; and to the winds thy life commit.
(13) The stormy Hyad's] A Constellation as Aratus writes of seven, according
to Proclus of six, and as Hesiod will, of five Stars in the forehead of the
Bull, whose rise and set was the Cause of Storms and Tempests. These were the
daughters of Atlas, who so excessively bewailed the death of their Brother
Hyas, torn in pieces by a Lion, that from him they took their Denomination,
and by the Commiserating Gods were converted into Stars. Vid. Higyn Astronom.
Poet.

(13) The Olenian Goats bright Star, etc.] The Amalthaean Goat, fained by
Poets to be the Nurse of Jupiter, so called from Olenum a Town of Achaia,
near which she gave him suck. For which benefit she was afterward by Jupiter
translated among the Stars; of her we have spoken already in the Annotations
upon the first Chorus.

(14)

Nor those which that old lazy Swaine]
Boots drives, the Northern Waine, etc.]
Boots is otherwise called Arctophylax; whose first name, as Manilius says,
is given him in that

-- Boots.
Quod stimulo junctis instat de more Iuvencis.
Manil. l. 1. seu Sphaera. He seems with goad t'incite his yoaked Steeres.

The Northern Waine consists of seven Stars in the Constellation of the
greater Bear, (which is in all made up of 24) four of which, on the side of
the Bear making by their Postures the Form of a Quadrangle, are called the
Waine the three on her Tail (if a Bear may be said to have one) the Oxen;
Near which Boots being placed, is styled the Waggoner or Driver; called here
lazy, in regard of his slow Motion, by reason of his Vicinitie to the Pole.

(15) The Pine of Thessaly, etc.] Argos; built of Thessalian Pines, Thessaly
being a Region of Greece, abounding in Mountains and Woods; of Argos see more
after.

(16) Argos self was then struck mute] Argos was said to be indu'd with voice,
and more then that, with Prophecy; being by Valerius Flaccus in the first of
his Argonauticks, called Fa^idicam ratem, but more peculiarly the Mid-Mast of
the Ship, which was placed by Pallas her self, and cut from the Dodonaean Oak
which gave Oracles.

(16)

-- When those Rocks that bound]
The Entrance to the Pontick Sound]
These are two Rocks in the Mouth of the Straits of the Thracian Bosphorus
called Cyanae and Symplegades. The first name given them in regard of their
black Color; and the other in that as the Poets faign'd they justly against
one another with violent concursions. The ground of that Fictionarising, for
that, to the Saylor in regard of their near distance and the Motion of the Ship
and Sea, they seemd now to part, and then again to close. Or as I^remias
Hoelzinus in his Notes upon Apol. l. 2. verse. 608. writes, In that the broken
Rocks lying in the Sea, in a manner close up the narrow straits, or in regard
of Pyarts possessing both sides of the passage and obstructing the same, until
overcome by Jason.

(18)

The Maid whose Waste surrounds]
A Cincture of fierce rav'ning hounds]
Scylla, the Daughter of Ph^rcui: the Cause and manner of whose transmutation
you may read in the 14 Book of Ovid's Metamorphosis, converted into a Rock in
the Sicilian Sea, near to the Promontory of Pelorus, so feigned according to
Salust, in that afar off it represents to the Beholders the Shape or Form of
a Woman, whose barking Dogs hemming her Waste are no other then the roaring
Waves dashing against it.

(19) The Ausonian Maine] The Italian Sea; running along the Coast of Italy, so
called from Auson the Son of Ulysses and Calypso. The Sicilians ( as Strabo
reports, lib. 2.) were wont to say of this Sea that it alone was sweet, when as
all others were salt; not truly, but jestingly, in regard of the sweet Cates
and delicacies usually transported to them by this Sea.

(20)

'Till on his Lyre Pierian, playd]
Orpheus]
The Reader may perchance think it strange to find two several Names applied
to one Instrument, being here termed a Lyre, and but immediately before a Lute.
Yet I may as well varyin the English, as the Author himself in the Original,
first calling it Lyram, and then Cytharam. The better therefore to inform the
Ordinary Reader, He may take Notice; That the Words Lyra, Cythara, Testudo,
Chelys, are by the Poets usually applied to one and the same Instrument. The
three first first so used by Statius in the first of his Achilleids, and the
tenth book of his Thebais: Yet are they several Instruments. The Lyra
(according to Pausanias) being the Invention of Mercury, and the Cythara of
Apollo. The Invention and form of Mercuries Lyra, is thus described by Lucian
(in Dialog^ Apoll. and Vulcani.) Mercury having found a dead Tortoyse, made an
Instrument thereof, applying to the hollow shell, a Neck extending with two
Horns; gluing Reeds, and over them straning a Cover, as the Belly of the
Instrument, and to that fastening a Bridge, and seven strings. From this (as
Joseph Scaliger observes in his Learned Annotations upon Manilius) proceeded
the Cythara or Chelys, likewise called (...), which is no other then the Lyre
of Mercury reformed; for whereas that had two Necks, this had but one, in whose
Top, Pegs were placed for the Winding up of the Strings, the very same with our
Lute at this day. And as from the Entyre Lyra proceeded the Chelys or Lute, so
from a Part therrof came the Latter Lyra usually attributed to Arion, Apollo,
and Hercules, which is no other then the Lyra of Mercury with the Testude or
Back taken away and is in fashion like to two Ss opposed, and an I transvers'd,
thus. SS played upon both with the Plectrumor Quil, and fingers alone.
Sometimes with both hands, as in our Harp, though Venantius Fortunatus by him
cited make the Harp and Lyra to be two different Instruments.

Romanus Lyra pla^dit tibi,
Barbarus Harpa.
The Roman to the Lyre thy Praises sings,
And the Barbarian to Harp's tuned strings.
This Lute or Lyre of Orpheus (which Scaliger will have to be after the Form
of Mercuries) is constellated for it is admirable Effects; studded with Nine
Stars here called Pi^rian, in that it was given him by his Mother the Muse
Calliope. Of which thus Manilius.

-- Lyra diductis in Caelum cornibus, inter
Sydera conspicitur, quaquondam caeperat Orpheus,
Omne quod attigerat cantu, manesque perimos
Fecit Iter; domnitque infernas Carmine leges.
Huic caelestis honos; similisque Potentia Causae.
Tunc sylvas and saxatrahens, nunc sydera ducit.
Manil. l. 1. seu Sphaera. The Lyre in Heaven with Horns distended among
The Stars is seen, with which his charming Song
Orpheus began once, made to Hell his Way,
And forced the Infernal Laws his Verse obey.
Caelestiall honor's added; the same cause
Remains; once Woods and Stones, now Stars it draws.
(21)

And even the Siren made]
Wont ships to Captive while she sings]
Follow the Music of his strings]
The Sirens are said to be the Daughters of the River Achellous, and the Muse
Calliope, Eur^pides in Helena makes them the Daughters of Tellus, (or as same
will, of Terpsichore, as others of Melpomen^, or Sterope) They were in number
three, their names Parthenope, Lygia, Leucosia, of whom, one played on the
Lyre, another on a Pipe, and the third was excellent at singing. Virgins above,
and Fishes beneath, once winged, but in a Contention with the Muses overcome,
they were by them unplum'd. Their manner was with their Music to allure the
Mariners, to stay and listen, to them, and having by their Melody charmed them
asleep, to devour them; Of whom, thus Claudian.

Dul^e malum pelago Siren, volucerque puellae,
Scyllaeos inter fremitus avidamque Charybdim
Musica saxa fretis habitabant dulcia Monstra.
Blanda Periclamaris; terror q^uoque gratus in undis:
Delatis licet huc incumberet aura Carinis,
Implessent que Sinus venti de Puppe ferentes,
Figebat vox una ratem: nec tendere certum
Delectabat iter reditus, odiumque juvabat.
Nec dol^r ullus ^rat, mortem dabat ipsa voluptas.
Claud. Epigr. In Syrenas. Sirens the allective Mischief of the waves,
Winged Virgins; 'twixt Charybdis greedy Caves,
And Scylla's barking Rocks, inhabited.
Seas flattering Perrils, and waves pleasing dread.
Ships' fore a fore-winde running, when their sails
Swelled with the forsive Breath of favoring Gales
Their voice alone did fix; who now no more
Think of returning to the wished shore,
But hate the thought; no sense of pain perceive
But life in the excess of pleasure leave.
They were twice overcome, once by Orpheus as is here intimated, and again by
Ulysses, (if yet, he may not rather be said, not to be vanquished by them, then
to have overcome them.) Our Orpheus his way of victory was the more noble; who,
(whereas Ulysses only stopped his Ears not to hear their Songs) chanting
aloud the Praises of the Gods, did with his voice drown their pernicious
Melody.

(22)

Greater mischief then the Sea,
Medea, etc.]
Perhaps alluding to that Adage, Ignis, Mare, Mulier, tria malae, Of which see
Erasmus Adag^ 8. Centure 2. Euripi^ brings in Medea, giving no better a
Character of her Sex, (and yet perhaps too good for her) then this,

-- (...)
-- (...)
Sumus quidem quales sumus nos Foemine, neque enim male ausim dicere. (23)
Araxis, etc.] Is a river of the greater Armenia taking his beginning from
Fountains near the Mountain Periardes, from whence, as Ptolomy describes it)
running Eastward almost as far as the Ca^pian Mountains, and then turning
Northward with two divided streams, discharges one into the Hyrcanian or
Caspian sea, and mingles the other with the River Cyrus or Thyras, falling
likewise into the same Sea.

(24) Albis and Rhine, etc.] Albis is a River of Germany taking his beginning
in the County of the Hermunduri in the ancient Province of Rhaetia, in times
past (as Taeitus says in his Book de Moribus Germaniae) a famous River and
well known, now only heard of. At this day called the Elbe.

Rhine or the Rhene is the most celebrated River of Germany, the Western
Boundure of that Country, having his beginning (according to the forenamed
Author) on the top of the inaccessible Rhaetian Alps; ^ whence running with a
Course winding somewhat Westward, he at length falls into the North or
German Ocean.

(25)

The time shall come, wherein the Marine]
M'unloose, etc.]
*N^r Thule be Earths farthest bound.]
Not a little do the Spaniards glory in this Prophecy of Seneca; as pointing
forth the discovery of America by them first found out. Sane non vana, si de
Hispanis Hispanus, says Delrius, Nor is it less admired by some of our own
Contrymen: I cannot but wonder at that bold Prophecy of Seneca, say^s Doctor
Hackwel (Apolog. etc.) yet my Lord Bacon in his Essay of Prophesies seems not
to allow of this for one. See Plato in Phoedone de Orb incogn^o, and Aelian in
his various History de Colloquio midae and Silen^. l. 3. c. 18. But
particularly concerning this Prophecy of Seneca, see Abrahamus Ortelus in his
Map of the West Indies.

Concerning Thule there is no small difference among Authors. The Poets
generally in their Expressions used it for a place far remote, and beyond
which there was no known land. Pliny makes it to be an Island six days sail
from Britain Northward; some have made it to be an Island in Britain, and
others Britain it self so called. Strabo confesses the Story of Thule to be
most obscure; And Petrarch, l. 3. Epist. 1, having said much, though nothing
positively, concludes at last thus, Vt nihil^ videatur occultior ipsa Insula,
quam veritas. Mercator makes it to be Izland, and Ortelius will have it to be
Tylemarke, a Tract of Norway. Our English Pausanias (the learned Cambden)
supposes it, (and most probably) to be Shetland or Hethland, an Island in the
Scottish Seas, lying between Norway and Scotland, and under the Dominion of
the latter; which his Conjecture he strengthens by the Authority of Pucerus who
(in his Book de d mensione Terrae) says that by Seamen it is called Thylensel.
To this, adding the site of the Island agreeable to that wherein Ptolomy places
it, he assures himself certainly to have found Thule, and pronounces the
matter to be at an end and questionless. Which opinion of his the much-knowing
Seldom seems likewise to approve of in his Mare Clausum. l. 2. c. 1. p. 121.
The name of this Island Suidas derives from Thules a King of Egypt; Isidore
from the Sun; and some from the Saxon Word Tell, which signifies a Limit, as
if it were a Bound of the North and West. Vide Cambden de Insulis Britanius. p.
8, ^.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the third ACT.
(1) ON Pindus snowy Top, or Nysa's Crowne] Pindus is a Mountain upon the
Borders of Thessaly near Thrace: Nysa, when alone without any other Attribute,
(for there are ten Places, Cities, and others of that Name) is taken for a
City of India, seated at the foot of the Mountain called Meros, (mentioned by
Quintus Curtius in the 8th Book of his History) in a Cave in which Bac^hus was
said to be nursed. The Scholiast of Apollonius makes it (as our Author here) a
Mountain (of India.) Delrius yet disassents from him, and conceives that he
confounds Nysa with Meros, and would have it to be one of the Tops of
P^rnassus: Pindus and Nysa were places consecrate to Bac^hus, where his
Frantic Solemnities were used to be celebrated.

(2) With a Lymphatick Rage possest] Those were said to be Lymphatick, who,
having by chance espied some Nymph or watery Deietie in the River, were by them
for that discovery dispossessed of their Senses. Or else so called, (as
conjectured) in that, from the abundance and superfluity of the Brains
moisture, proceeded their distraction. As Lunatic, in regard that the Moon is
predominant over the humors.

(3) The undrench'd Arctos turnes] By Arctos is meant the Constellation of the
Northern Bear, as likewise the Artick Circle, in which that Constellation is
included, called Arctos, as well as Arcticus. Of which see Joseph Scaliger his
Learned Annotations upon Manilius, p. 75. in l. 1. seu Sphaer. The reason of
that Epithet undrench'd, you shall find in the Annotations upon the fourth Act.

(4) Scylla's or Charybdis Caves] Of Scylla we have already spoken: Charibdis
was feigned to be an old greedy Hag, slain by Hercules for stealing away his
Oxen, and cast into Sea anciently called Euripus Taurominitanus, running 'twixt
Sicily and Italy, at this day by the Italians called Garo faro. ( Vid. Paul.
Merulae dissertac. de Mar.) Others ^aigne that she was by Jupiter struck dead
with Thunder, and converted into a Rock in that Sea bearing her name.
Concerning whom that noted Adage is in every man's Mouth, I^cidit in Scyllam
cupiens vitare Charybdim. Which yet, (as Sanctius upon Alciat, notes) is not
rightly understood by those, who apply it to such as avoiding a small mischief
fall into a Greater, but is meant by the Contrary; Scylla being a lesser Evil
then Charybdis, and therefore Cyrce in Homer advices Ulysses to steer his
Course rather near Scylla then Charybdis.

(5)

What Aetna under which Typhaeus lies]
Expiring flames, etc.]
Typhaeus was one of the Giants that invaded the Heavens, struck down by
Jupiter with Thunder; over whom, (according to Pindarus and Ovid) Aetna,
(according to Homer and Virgill) In^rime, Iovis Imperiis imposta. --

(6) Nor wrathful Euxine Seas by Corus force, etc.] Of the Euxi^e Sea we have
already spoken. Corus according to the opinion of some, is a Western wind
blowing toward the North; so likewise Luean makes it 5 Phars. though the
Censurer of him, and all Poets reprehend him for it, who will have it to arise
(and rightly) from a Point of the North, and from thence directly bowing
Southward. Vid. ejus Poet. l. 5 seu Critic.

(7) Shall we for small Jolcos make?] Iolcos was the Birth Place of Jason,
called likewise Larissa (as Pomponiu's Mela testifies, l. 2.) which gave a
Title to Achilles, who by Virgill is styled Larissaeus. The place, as Pindarus
in his fourth Pyth. writes, from whence Jason with his Argonanticks first set
sail for Colchos.

(8) Thessalian Tempe] Tempe was a most celebrated Grove of Thessaly, and
sacred to the Muses: Aelian, who at large descrbes this place in his various
Histories, l. 3. c. 1. writes, that the victors in the Pythian Games were used
to becrown'd with the Laurel of this Grove in Memorial of Apollo, who, after
he had slain Python, was there crowned with a Wreath of Bays; an Altar being
afterward erected to him in the Place where it was done.

(9)

-- Seas]
The witnesses of our wronged Nuptialls]
Our Author seems to follow the opinion of those who will have the Nuptials
of Jason and Medea performed at Sea. Apollonius will have them celebrated in
the Island Corcyra; Some at Byzantium, others in Colchis, and with the Privitie
of Aeeta; Valerius Flaccus makes them to be begun in the Island Peuce, and
interrupted by the coming of of Absyrtus.

(9)

Of all the Wealth by Scythians rapt away]
From Sun-scorch'd Dwellers of Rich India]
Meant by the Eastern Scythians; Scythia by Geographers being divided into
Scythia Europaea, and Asietica; Scythia, Europaea, (concerning which see
Pomponius Mela, l. 2. and Pliny l. 4.) extends from the Bank of Tanais, Palus
Maeotis, and the sh^ares of the Euxine Sea, to the mouth of Ister. Asiatica,
beginning from the limits of the opposite shores toward the East, as far as
the Seres on the North bounded with the Ocean, on the South stretching to the
Mountain Taurus, on the West to Cappadocia and Armenia. (Though those
Countries were likewise under the Subjection of the Scythians.) Ptolomy (l. 6.
Cosm.) divides this Scythia Asiatica, into Scythia intra Imaum Montem, and
Scythia extra Imaum Montem. That, intra Imaum, he terminates on the West by
Sarmatia Asiatica, on the East by the Mountain Ima^s, on the South by the
Nations beyond the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea, and on the North by the Land
called by him terra incognita; That Extra Imaum, has on the East the People
called Seres, on the North terra incognita, on the South India extra Gangem,
and on the West Scythia interior. Both of these are properly called Scythia,

(10) Phoebus with Sysiphus his Nephews joyne] Meaning the Issue of Medea,
Daughter of Aeeta, Son of Phoebus, with the Offspring of Crensa, Daughter of
Ceron, Son of Sysiphus.

Upon the CHORUS.
(11) When Ister like a Torrent r^w'ld] Ister is a part of Danubius, or the
Danow, a famous River of Germany, which, (as Pomponius Mela says) Maintaining
his course along while through diverse Lands, is called Danubius, after by the
Inhabitants of the Countries through which it passes Ister. Ptolomy more
particularly tells us, That when Danubius is come as far as the City of
Accium (a City of the Lower Mysia, near the Confines of Dacia, in the 47
degree, and of Northern latitude;) It loses it is name, and from thence, until
it falls into the Sea is called Ister. Which having received into it threescore
Navigable Rivers falls at length into the Euxine Sea, with as many streams as
Nilus into the Egyptian. It arises not far from the Hercynian Wood from a
clear Spring, now enclosed within the Castle of Donaweschingen, a House of the
Counts of Furst^nbergue. (Thuilius) of all the Rivers of Europ (as pliny says)
alone maintaining a continued course Eastward. Vid. Plin. l. 4. c. 2. and 12.

(12) Not Rhodanus with rapid course] Rhodanus or the Rh^ane, is a River of
Gallia Narbonensis arising from the Grison Alps, and from thence, as it were,
compassing the Country with his winding streams, falls at length into the
Galliek or Massilian Sea.

(13) Not Haemus when the Suns hot Beames] Haemus is a Mountain of Thrace,
upon the Borders of Mysia inferior by (...) reported to be of that eminent
Height, that a man from the Top thereof might behold both Egaean and Ionian
Seas; though Strabo seems not to allow of this for a truth. This mighty
Mountain (if we believe the Poets) was once a man, and the neighboring
Mountain (...), his Sister, of whose Transformation see Ovid's Metam. l. 6.

(14) The sacred Grove which Pelion crowned, etc.] Pelion is a most noted
Mountain of Thessaly; in a Cave or Grot, in which, Peleus marrying The^is
entertained (as the Poets Fable) and feasted all the Gods. ( Vid. Claudian. de
Nuptiis Honor. and Mar. and Euripides in Iphigenia.) From whence a great part
of the Timber that built Argos, was feld, and taken.

(15) To an unskilful Pylot, etc.] Who this should be that succeeded Typhis in
the Pylot-ship of Argos is not agreed on; some say An^aeus, others Euphemus,
but the most generally received opinion is, that it was Ergynus the Son of
Neptune, afterward slain by Hercules.

(16) ' Among unknown Ghosts lies tomb'd in sand] Typhis on a sudden as he
held the Helm fell dead, and was buried in Mariandinum a famous Cave in
Bythinia Acherusia, but whether before he came to Colchos or in the Return is
not known. Vid. Apollonii Scholiasten. l. 2.

(17) He from the Vocal Muse that springs] Orpheus; Who by general consent of
the ancients, was held to be the Son of Phoebus, begotten on the Muse
Calliope. de Orpheo vide Vic. Com. Santi. Albam. de Sapientia veter. c. 11. cui
Titulus Orpheus sive Philosophia. and Iereniam Hoelzlinum in Prolegomenis ad
Apollonium. p. 33. and F^lgent. Mytholog.

(18) Dragged unto Haebrus streaming head] Haebrus is a River of Thrace, famous
for the memoriz'd Tragedy of Orpheus, into which the furious Bacchanalls after
they ^ad torn his body in Pieces threw his head, it is now called Meritza.

(18) Alcides Boreas Issue slew, and] Calais and Zetes, the Son of Boreas
were slain by Hercules in the Island T^nos, who, (as Apollonius has it in the
first of his Argonauticks) in Memorial thereof erected upon their Sepulcher
two Pillars, the one whereof was said to move at the blowing of the North Wind.
The Cause of their death (as I find collected by the Scholiast of Apollonius)
is variously delivered. Some say, the reason of it was, in they that diswaded
the Return of Argos into Mysia to take in Hercules; some say, that Hercules
did it to revenge the injury he had received from their Father Boreas in the
Island of Cos, where he distressed him with a storm; Others, in that they
contended with Hercules about the Dividend of the Gifts given by Jason among
the Argonauticks; and some for that, having received Hercules as their Guest,
they treacherously conspired his Death.

(19)

He who could various shapes indue]
From Neptune who derives his Birth, etc.]
Periclimenus, who by the gift of his Father Neptune could change himself
into sundry shapes, slain by Hercules after he had transformed himself into
an Eagle.

(20) -- Forced the Stygian Sound] Hercules as the Poets faigne descended into
Hell on this occasion. Theseus and Perithous attempting to steal thence
Proserpina, were by Pl^to taken Prisoners. Whose Rescue Hercules undertook and
by force performed, and dragged from thence Cerberus. Vid. Ovid. Met. l. 9.

(20)

Alive on Aeta's Pyre repos'd]
His limbs to cruel Flames expos'd]
While mingled goares Infection, etc.]
Nessus, attempting to ravish Deianira, after he had transported her over the
River Evenus, was by Hercules (yet on this side the River) shot through with
one of his poisonous Arrows; He, to be revenged of Hercules, cunningly before
he dies, insinuates into Deianira, That a shirt dipped in his Blood, and sent to
her Husband to be put on, would reclaim his love from others, and regaine his
languishing Affection toward her. Which advice she believing presently puts in
execution, and sends a shirt dipped in his Blood, (not thinking of the poison
mixing withit) to her Husband, which, (when he had put it on) cleaving to his
flesh, consumed him with burning Tortures; He in this Agony causes a funeral
Pile to be built on the Mountain O Eta in Thessaly, and laying himself
thereon, commanded the same to be fired, and so burnt himself alive. Vid.
Ovid. Met. l. 9.

(21) A Boar Ancaeus life, etc.] Ancaeus was one of those who adventured with
Meleager in the hunting of the Chalidonian Boar, by whom he was slain. Vid.
Ovid. Met. l. 8. Of whom likewise it is said, that a Boar breaking into a
Vineyard where he was drinking, and now about to put the Cup to his lips, slew
him, from whence came the Proverb, Multa cadunt inter Calicem supremaque Labra.

(22)

His Unkles Meleager slew]
And by the vengefull hall'd does fall]
Of his enraged Mother, etc.]
Meleager having slain the Calydonian Boar, presented his Head to Atalanta (a
beautiful young Nymph, who first wounded him, and whom he affected) which
Meleagers Unckles ( Toxeus and Plexippus) envying at, took from Atalanta the
spoil, at which the enraged Lover slew them both; The News whereof is brought
to Althaea, Meleagers Mother, who to revenge her Brothers deaths, throws her
Sons fatal Brand, (the Fable of which see in the 8th Book of Ovid. Met.)
into the Fire, together with which his life consumed.

(23) The Boy by Hercules unfound, etc.] Hylas, the Son of Theodomas; a Youth
beloved of Hercules, who being sent into Mysia, to fetch fresh water from the
River Ascanius, was drowned in the same; or, as feigned, Rapt away by the
Nymphs of the Flood; in search of whom, Hercules and Polyphemus, went

-- Hylam -- quo font relictum
Clamantes, ut littus Hyla, Hyla omne sonaret.
Calling on Hylas in the River drowned
That all the Shores did Hylas, Hylas sound.
The following Verses, in the Original, beginning Idmonem quamvis, etc. in the
end of this Chorus, as likewise three others immediately following this Verse-
ignotas jacet inter umbras. In the middle thereof, I have omitted, as being by
Heinsius and some latter Critticks justly censured to be none of Seneca's, in
that they savor of many Illiterate absurdities, and confound times and
Stories. Conceiving it an Injustice to charge upon Seneca the defects of a
Poetaster.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the fourth ACT.
(1) WHat ever Poisons Libya's scalding s^nds, etc.] Libya is a Country of
Africa, taken sometimes for all Africa, that part thereof which borders upon
Egypt being fertile though a desert, in poisonous simples, and venomous
Serpents, which (as Ovid faignes in 4. Met.) first sprung from the drops of
Blood falling from Medusa's Head newly di^ected, as the same was transported by
winged Perseus over that Region, or as others, from the Blood of the slain
Giants; But Naturalists more truly report, that those Countries which are
infested with too much heat or cold, are ever fruitful in such hurtful
Productions.

(2) What Taurus, etc.] Taurus is a Mountain of Asia, or rather a continued
Ridge of Mountains linked together, and running from the Mountains Scord^sci,
and the Borders of Cappadocia, unto the uttermost Bounds of Cilicia.

(3)

Hither descend the Snake that seems to lie]
Like a huge Torrent Rolling cross the sk^e]
In whose Immense folds, etc.]
This was that Dragon which was slain by Cadmus in B^otia, when he was sent by
Agenor in search of his Sister, Made a Constellation, consisting of one and
thirty Stars, and placed between the two Bears, which, with his sinewy
f^exures, he seems to infold, the lesser with his head and Neck, the greater
with his Tail. By the one of which it is said, the Achaians, by the other the
Sydonians were used to sail. Of which likewise Ovid.

Magna Minorque Ferae, qua^rum regit altera Graias
Altera Sidonias, utraque sicca, rates.
Trist. l. 4. Great and less Bear, of which, through Seas rough Tides,
This Grecian Ships, that, (both dry) Sidon's guides.
(4) His griping Hands let Ophiucus loose] Ophiucus is a Constellation
consisting of 17 Stars (as the Scholiast of Aratus writes) so called, in that
in his hand he seems to hold or graspe a Serpent (which is likewise made up of
30 Sarres) conceived to be Aesculapius, Hercules, or Prometheus, converted into
that Constellation, commonly called Serpentarius. Vid. Hygini Poeticon
Astronomicon.

(5) Python that durst assail two Heavenly Powers] Python was sent by envious
Juno as a Plague to pursue Latona, when great with Child of Phoebus and Diana,
and afterward was slain by young Apollo.

(6) Hydra with all those Serpents, etc.] Hydra was a Serpent, feigned to have
many Heads which Hercules incountring with: And cutting off some of her heads,
in the room of each of those cut off, sprung two more, multiplying by their
own Ruin; the growth of which, Hercules at last, by cauterising the wound,
prevented, and so slew this Monster, which was afterward made a Celestial
sign, being a Southern Constellation, extending his head toward the sign
called the Great Dog, or Sirius, his middle under the Lion, and his Tail
toward the Centaure or Chiron. Vid. Arat. Scholiast.

(7) Whatever on impervious Eryx growes] Eryx is a Mountain of Sicilia, so
called from Eryx the Son of Butos and Venus sacred to her, of which she was
called Erycina. At this day it is called Monte di Trapani, as being not far
from Drepanum, now called Trapani, and betwixt that and Panormus, now called
Palermo.

(8) What Caucasus stained with Promethean blood] Cancasus is a Mountain of
Scythia, beginning from the Mountain Corax, and with one Ridge parting Colchos
from Iberia, with the other Iberia from Albania, and so running to the
Ceraunian Mountains. To this Hill was Prometheus, as the Poets fabled, bound
for stealing fire from Heaven. Of whom see more hereafter.

(9) The Warlike Medes.] There be some, who would charge our Author with an
Anacronisme, in that he brings in Medea's Nurse speaking of the Medes; who, as
they would have it, took their Denomination from Medius the Son of Medea by
Aegeus; but the Name of Media is more ancient, being so called from Madai the
Son of Iaphet, who as Sleyden writes, was sent thither by Nimrod to plant,
about 150 years after the Flood, where he laid the Foundations of that ancient
Empire called after his own Name. Vid. Iosephi Antiquit. Iudaic. l. 1.

(10) What flying Parthians use] Parthia is a Country of Asia, bounded, as
Ptolomy describes it, on the West by a part of Media, on the North by Hircania,
on the East by Aria, on the South by Carmenia deserta. Whose Inhabitants for
their manner of Fight were Notorious, who in a counterfeited flight discharged
their Arrows backward upon their pursuing Enemies.

(11) The Wealthy Arab] Those of Arabia faelix, Arabia being divided into three
Portion; viz. Petrea, Deserta, and Faelix. Arabia Petrea is on the West bounded
with part of Syria, on the North with Palestina, India, and part likewise of
Syria, on the South Sinu Arabico Interiori, on the East partly by Arabia
faelix, partly by Aarbia deserta: The last of which, on the North is terminated
by Mesopotamia, along the River Euphrates, ^on the East by Babilonia, and part
of the Persian Gulf, on the South by Mountains running along the Borders of
Arabia felix, on the West by part of Syria and Arabia Petrea. Arabia faelix
has on the North Arabia Petrea, and Deserta, and part of the Persian Gulf: On
the West Sinus Arabicus, on the South the Red Sea, and on the East part of the
Persian Gulf, as far as the Promontory Sagarus. Vid. Ptol. l. 5. Cosm.

(12) and (13)

Those juices which the Noble Sweves inclin'd]
Near the cold North in Groves Hercynian find]
The Sweves are a People of Germany, who although (as Tacitus reports de
moribus Germaniae) they are by one general Name called Suevi, yet are they not
one Nation. Of these the most ancient and noble (as he says) were the
Semnones, who accounted themselves as the head of the S^evians. The Posterity
of these, inhabited that Northern Tract of Germany, which is at this day
called Swaben. Peucerus is of opinion, that the Swedes and these were one
Nation, there being but one letters difference in their names; but others
think otherwise, and most make them the offspring of the Suiones, or Sueones,
the ancient Inhabitants of that Land, which is at this day called Swethland,
and not of the Suevi, or those of Swaben. Hercynia is the most celebrated
Forest of Germany (if not of the World) of which thus Pliny: In the Forest of
Hercynia, there are mighty Oaks which seem to be untouched with the Injury
of time, of equal Birth and Age with the World, with the encountering of whose
spreading Roots whole Hills are lifted up; And when they run above ground,
writhing themselves into such Arches, that Troops of Horse may pass under
them. Seated (according to Ptolomy) in the very amidst between Gabrita Sylva,
and the Sarmacian Mountains.

(14) Aemonian Athos] Athos is a mountain and Promontory of Thessaly, called
Aemonian, Aemonia being a name of Thessaly derived from Aemon the son of
Ducalion, as Thessaly from Thessalus the son of the said Aemon, at first
called Pyrrhaea, from Pyrrha the wife of Deucalion.

(15) Pangaeus Top,] Pangaeus is a Promontory of Thrace, respecting Macedonia.
So Pliny makes it. Others a Mountain of Macedonia near to the City of
Philippi. Ortelius says it was likewise called Pieria, and anciently Carmanius.

(16) These Tygris nourish'd] Tygris is a River arising in the greater Armenia
from a clear spring in a plain ground, whence running and passing through the
lake Arethusa, he meets with the Mountain Taurus in his way; at the foot
whereof in a Cave he sinkes under ground, and arises again on the other side
of the mountain, from whence maintaining his course through Thospita Palus, he
waters a great part of Asia; and at length with two divided streams, falls into
the Persian Golfe; a river of a most swift and violent Current, whence it takes
its name; which in the Persian Tongue signifies an Arrow. Now called Tigill.

(17) The fam^d Hydaspes] Hydaspes is a River of India, arising from the
Mountain ^aus, and falling into the great River Indus, celebrated for the
Treasure of his streams.

(18) And Baetis whence it is land a name did get.] Baetis (now by the Spaniards
called Gua^al quivir) is a River of Spain, running through that part thereof
which in ancient times was called Hispania Baetica from the River, now,
Granado; discharging his Streams into the Spanish Ocean.

(19) Birds of inauspicious flight.] In the Original it is obscaenas aves,
referring to the nature of the Fowls, as the Kite, Jay, Night-Raven, etc. (as
follows) which were Aves inauspicatae. And so the version may pass.

(20) Dark Chaos, etc.] Chaos by the Poets is diversely taken; sometimes for
the Air, sometimes (as here, and in the beginning of the first Act, is meant)
for the Infernal Mansion. Properly for that confused Mas^e, out of which, this
Mundaine Fabric, by the Act of Love, was educ'd, called by the Platonists the
undigested World. Some Philosophers (though otherwise famous) have dreamed that
this Chaos was companion with Demogorgon, and assistant to him, to the end that
if at any time he should have an intent to produce Creatures, he might not want
mat^er. As if he, that could give form to diverse things, could not as well
produce matter to inform. Boccace Geneolog. Deorum.

(21) Where sooty Dis resides] Dis with the Latins was the same as Pluto with
the Greeks, so called (as Cicero intimates in his second Book De Natura Deorum)
from the opulency and treasure of the earth, as from which all things take
their original, and into which at l^st they are again resolved; And therefore
(as he says) Omnis vis terrena atque Natura, Diti Patri dicata est. And may be
the same (for ought I know) with the Demogorgon of the Hermeticall Philosophers.

(22)

From his wheeling Rack]
A while releast, rest let Ixion have]
Ixion attempting to force the Chastity of Juno, Jupiter substituted a Cloud in
her likeness; of which, he was reported to beget the Centaures; when
afterward boasting that he had known the Queen of the Gods, he was for that
struck down to Hell with a Thunderbolt, and continually turned about upon a
restless wheel; to which he was bound fast with Snakes.

(23) And Tantalus sup free the fleeting Wave.] Tantalus either for that when
he feasted the Gods, he set before them the limbs of his Son Pelops, (in a
most inhumane manner) as part of the Banquet, or else in that being admitted to
the Council of the Celestialls he revealed their secrets, was thrust into
Hell, and set up to the Chin in the River Eridanus, where thirsting, and
hungry, he vainly catches at the flying streams, and dangling fruit which
avoids his reach.

(24) Let Sysiphus his Torments find no ease.] Sysiphus was the Son of
Aeolus, and Father of Creon, and therefore Medea wishes a continuation of his
Torments, who infesting Attica with Robberies, was at last slain by Theseus,
and feigned in Hell to roll a weighty stone up a steep Hill, which still when
at the top tumbles down again upon him.

(25)

You who in perforated Vrnes, still vaine]
Still vain successelesse Toil deludes, etc.]
These were the fifty daughters of Danaus, who of their. Grandfather B^lus were
called Belides; these by the appointment of their Father slew their Husbands
the sons of their Uncle Aegyptus, the first night they lay with them, (and
therefore here especially called upon by Medea) for which they are said to be
punished in Hell by pouring of Water into a vessel full of holes, which they
drew up likewise with Buckets pierced or bored through in the same manner.

(26) Drenched both the Bears in the forbidden Deep.] The greater Bear called
Holice, and the lesser Cynosura are two Constellations included within the
Artick Circle, into which the Poets feigned Calysto, and her son Arcas were
by the favor of Jupiter converted: which Juno maligning entreated Tethys and
Oceanus that they would not suffer them (as other stars) to set in their
Waters. (It being the opinion of the Ancients, that the setting stars did
descend into the Sea) upon which her request, they were interdicted the Ocean;
yet by Medea (as she here boalts) notwithstanding drenched in the forbidden
Waves, Vid. Ovid. Metam. l. 2.

(27)

To thee this Wreath of nine]
Embraided Serpents, etc.]
With a Wreath of Serpents the Witch Erictho Crowns her self in Lucan. l. 6.
The number Nine by the Pythagori^ns was held sacred, and the perfectest of all
Numbers, as consisting of three Ternaries, each of which is divided into three
Unities, and therefore in holy Ceremonies (as in Magic Rites) the ancients
superstitiously conceived that the Deity was affected with its imparitie. Of
the Magical virtue of Arithmeticall or Musical Numbers, see Del Rio,
Disquisic. Magic. l. 1. c. 2. Qu^sp. 2.

(28)

Lo his biform'd limbs, durst band]
Against Joves high Empire; bold Typhaeus.]
Of Typhaeus we have spoken already, here said to have biform'd Limbs, in that
the Giants that warred against the Gods (of whom Typhaeus was one) were feigned
to have the feet of Dragons. Pindarus in 4. Olym calls Typhon (...) i. e.
Centicipitem, hundred-headed.

(29)

These Plumes found we cast]
By rapefull Harpies as by Zetes chased.]
He siod makes the Harpies to be but two in number; Virgil three. Their names
Aello, Ocypete, and Caeleno, feigned to be winged, with Virgins faces, and
Vultures claws; the Mythologie of which, see in Gyraldus his Syntagma 6 Deorum
and Natal. Comes l. 7. c. 6. These were chased away from Phineus the old,
blind and needy King of Paphlagonia by Calais and Zetes the Sons of Boreas,
who were said to have wings, (the Fable of which read in the seventh of Ovids
Metamorphosis) Propter nimiam velocitatem little qui ad Boream habitant; and for
that reason, or their Celerity in Execution of designs may seem to be
invited by the Argonauticks in the expedition to Colchos. Nor do the names
given to those youths unaptly suit with the Sons of the Wind, Zetes being so
called (...) quod nimium flet, and Calais ut qui (...) quia leniter flet.
Tretzes in lycophron.

(30)

Those be the wings the wounded Stymphald Boar,]
Slain by the Shafts dipped in Lernean Goare.]
The Stymphalides were filthy Fowls, feeding upon man's flesh, taking their
name from a Lake in Arcadia; these Hercules chased away with the sound of a
Brazen Instrument, made by Vulcan, and given him by Pallas; here said to be
slain by his poisonous Arrows. Pausanias in Arcadicis reports that in the
Deserts of Arabia, there were such kind of Fowls no less terrible to
Travelers then Lions or Leopards, who with their Beak would strike through
Armor; from whence they found a means afterward to take them by inventing a
kind of Coverture for the body, through which when the Foul had struck their
Beaks, they were there as in a Ginne detayned.

(31) The Altars sound, etc.] This was a sign of Hecates approach (among
witches) and answering of their Magical Invocations, which was always
attended with Earthquakes, and the horrid noise of howling-Dogs. See after
what is said at the number 44.

(32) See Trivia's whirling Carre, etc.] Trivia is a name of Hecate, or Diana,
of whom we have already spoken: so called either in regard of her Triple
Course under the Zodiac, according to her Height, Latitude or Longitude, or
else in that she ia said to be President over Cross Ways or (...); The
Patroness of Witches; whose Chariot descending was another Sign likewise of
the Concession of their requests. Vide Ovid. Met. l. 7. de Medea.

(2^) Vexed with Thesalian charms, etc.] Thessaly was a Country famous (or
rather infamous) for Enchantments and Magic Arts; insomuch as Pliny notes,
lib. 30. c. 1. That the general practice of those Arts in that Country, gave
a more peculiar Name or Title to Magic, being styled Ars Thessalica.

(34)

With strange horror fright]
The World]
That the ancients were took with fear and terror, at the Eclipse of the
Moon is apparent in History, to omit others, I shall only give one memorable
Instance out of Cornelius Tacitus in the first of his Annalls, which for the
good effect it wrought is worthy the reciting: In the Rebellion stirred up by
Perceanius and Vib^lenus, against Blesus Lieutenant General of the Legions in
Pannonia, in the beginning of Tyberius his Reign, when the Soldiers were in
the Height of their disorder, and menaced the greatest outrage. The Moon on a
sudden began to be Eclipsed, which the Soldiers (ignorant of the Cause)
construed as a Presage of present Ill-Luck, and comparing their Attempts to the
Eclipse, were of Opinion, that their success should be prosperous, if the
Goddess should become bright again. Whereupon they began with Trumpets,
Cornets, and other Brazen Instruments, to make a loud Noise; now sad, now
joyful, as the Moon appeared clear or dark: but when the Clouds rising,
took from them the fight of the Moon, supposing she had been hid in
darkness, and utterly lost her light, they began to lament, complaining that
that portended their labors should have no End, and that the Gods turned their
Faces from their Wickedness. Whereupon Caesar Drusus, who was sent by the
Emperor to appease them, and whom in a hostile manner they had environed in
the Camp, thinking it fit to make his Advantage of their Fears, so wrought
that he composed the Sedition, and caused the Ringleaders to be put to death.
A Rebellion happily ended!

(35)

Whilst thy Extremes to ease, O Great]
Dictynna, rich Corinthian Brass is beat]
Dictynna is one of the names of Diana, so called as some conceive, in that she
first invented Toils and Nets for hunting; or as others think, aslum'd by her
in memorial of the Nymph Britomart, her belov d fellow Huntresse, who flying
from the Pursuit of her Lover Minos, to avoid his Surprise leapt into the Sea,
and fell into a fish-Net, whence she was called Dictynna, and by that name
after worshipped as a Goddess, which Diana likewise in memory of her,
vouchsafed to make one of her Attributes.

Of the beating of Kettles, Basins, and other Brazen Vessels used by the
Ancients when the Moon was Eclipsed (which they did to drown the Charms of
Witches, that the Moon might not hear them, and so be drawn from her Sphere
as they supposed) I shall not need to speak, being a thing so generally
known, a Custom continued among the Turks to this day; yet I cannot but add,
and wonder at, what Joseph Scaliger in his Annotations upon Manilius, reports
out of Bonincontrius, an Ancient Commentator upon the same Poet: Who affirms,
That in a Town of Italy where he lived (within these two Centuries of years)
he saw the same Piece of Paganism (...) upon the like Occasion.

(36) [And here our Author cannot be excused of an Ana^ronisme, since
Corinthian Brass in Medea's time, was of no more value then any other, until
(as Pliny writes, l. 34. c. 1.) The City of Corinth being taken and burnt by
the Romans in the 156 Olympiall, and 607 years after the building of the City
of Rome, diverse Brazen Statua's being melted, with other Vessels of Gold and
Silver in that general Conflagration, and mixing together, from thence arose
that celebrated vain of Brass, so much esteemed of by the Romans, that, (as
our forecited Author reports) they held it to be in value, ante argentum, ac
pene etiam ante Anrum.

(37)

Upon this blood-stai^'d Turfe our Sacrifice]
To thee We make]
It was the manner of the Ancient Witches to offer their ^ellish Sacrifices on
an Altar of Turfe, digging a Trench about it (which they commonly did with
their Nails) and therein to pour the blood of a Black Lamb, for, Nigra
Triformi Hostia mactatur Deae -- says Silius Ital. l. 1. Medea, to make her
Sacrifice more horrid, empties her own veins (as in the following Verses) to
supply that divellish Ceremony. But of the manner of these Sacrifices, hear
Apollonius, l. 3. Argonautic^n.

(...)
When humid Night just half her Course has run,
Go to the untroubled Brook, where washed, alone,
Clad in a sable Vesture, dig a Pit.
Then of a female Lamb the Throat strait slit,
And over the Pit a Pile erected, fire.
And, the crude victime lay thereon entire;
Then Perseus sole-borne Hecate appease
Wit poured on honey wrought by laboring Bees.
And (that thy Work may with success be signed)
With Prayers propitiate her sterner Mind;
Which done; Go from the flaming Pile; Nor let
The Noise of barking Dogs, or trampling Feet
Make thee on that revert thy look again,
If so, thy Sacrifice proves all in vain.
(38)

This funeral Torch supplyes]
Nocturnall fires, snatched from the flaming Pile]
The Lamiae of ancient times used to burn Lights in their Nefandous Mysteries,
observed likewise by those of latter times, in whose Conventions (as Delrius
reports) Ignis accensus erat ut plurimum Teter and horridus; Nor would any
Torch or Brand serve them so well in their infernal Rites, as that which was
snatched from a Funeral Pile. Remigius in his second Book of Daemonolatreia,
c. 3. relates a most Prodigious story of two modern Witches, who having dug
up two buried Carcases, and burnt them to Ashes all but the right Arm of one
of them; made thereof a Torch to give light to their Acts of darkness; The
fingers ends of the dissected Arm all the while they were about their
devilish Work burning with a blew and Sulphury flame: Which when the flame,
(their Ceremonies done) was extinguished, remained notwithstanding entire, and
as if untouched by the fire.

(39) To thee our head We toss with neck bowed, etc.] The Gestures, and
Actions which were used by the ancient Witches in their Ceremonies, Adorandi
gratia were most preposterous, perpetuated by the Maintainers of their abhorred
Arts at this day; who in their Conventions, when they adore the Devil
President of their meeting, do it as Del Rius reports, l. 2. Q. 16. with their
back toward him, not bowing their heads downward, but tossing them up, and
reclining them backward, so that their Chins respect the Heavens.

(40) That thus O Persis, etc. Hecate; so called, being the Daughter of
Perseus, and Niece of Jupiter; or as some will, the Daughter of Jupiter and
Asteria. Bacchylides says, she was -- (...). Daughter of Torch-bearing, large
bosomed Night.

(41)

He who rues his heavenly theft with still-]
Renewed liver]
Of Prometheus being bound to the Mountain Caucasus, where an Eagle still
tired upon his Liver we have in part already spoken, a Fable sufficiently
known, yet was he at length by Jupiter releast from thence, though the God to
save his oath caused one of his fingers to be bound with a hoope or Ring of
Iron made of a piece of his Chain, and in it a stone taken from the Mountain to
which he was bound. From hence (as Pliny writes in the Proem of his 38 book)
came the Custom of wearing Rings, in memory of Promethens, at the first made
of Iron, and so along time worn by the Romans afterward of gold. Vid. Salmuth.
Pancir. l. 1.

(42) The Triple-shap'd Chimaera etc.] Chimaera by Fulgentius, is thus
described: A Monster of a triple form, the fore-parts representing a Lion, the
midst a Goat, and the hinder parts a Dragon. Solinus writes that the Chimera
was not a Beast but a Mountain of Lycia, ejecting flames from the top thereof,
near which Lions were wont to harbor; in the midst were fields in which Goats
used to feed, and the bottom was infested with Serpents. Lycophrons
Paraphrastes says otherwise, who makes Chimera to be a woman of that name, the
Daughter of Amisodarns Governor of Lycia, who with her two Brothers Drace and
Leo, having seized upon certain Straits or Passages, spoiled and slew all that
traveled that way. These 3 in that they joined together unanimously to the
Ruin of others, gave occasion of the Fable of this triple-shap'd Monster, as
the usual ordering of their Forces, the positure of their shapes. For in the
Front, or Van, Leo still fought, in the midst or battle, Chimera, and in the
Rear Draco. Bellerophon having vanquished these in fight, was therefore
feigned to have slain this Monster. Vid. Plut. in l. de Virtutibus Mulier de
Bollerophonte et Chimaera.

(43) Medusa's Gall, etc.] Medusa was the daughter of Phorcus, who had besides
her two other Daughters, their names were Euriale and Sthenio, these inhabited
the Islands called Dorcades in the Aethiopick Sea opposite to Hesperides; they
were said to have but one eye in common amongst them, Snaky Tresses, Tuskes
like Boares, Brazen hands, and Golden wings. Some say they were all of
admirable and equal form, and beauty, and on whom who ever looked, were struck
with admiration, and stupisying astonishment; from whence sprung the Fable,
that the sight of them converted men into Stones. Called Gorgons (as some
think) of their nimblenesse and agility. There be who report (if this be not
the greater Fiction) that in Libya there is a kind of Beast called a Gorgon,
not much unlike to a Sheep, his head shaggy with hair hanging over his eyes,
when shaking his hair from his eyes, and erecting his head, he kills those
that see him, with his very look. The hair of Medusa (which was once her
greatest ornament) was by Pallas converted into Snakes, as a punishment
inflicted upon her for suffering her self to be abused by Neptune in her
Temple: Her Snake-hair'dhead was afterward cut off by Perseus, and by him in
the Constellation is held forth, called the Devils head, and Caput Algol. Vid.
Ovid. Met. l. 3. and 4. Natal. Comet, l. 7. c. 12.

(44) Our Prayers are heard; thrice Hecat' barked aloud]

Thrice with sad flames her sacred fires she showed.]

Medea's Prayers are ratified by the barking of Hecate, and her Hell Hounds,
(for no better attendance do the Poets allow her then a company of howling
Curres, one of the signalls of her approach, which is thus expressed by Virgil l.
6. Aeneidos.

-- Mugire solum and juga caepta moveri
Sylvarum; visaeque canes ululare per umbram
Adventante Dea --
The Center bellowed, the Woods bowed their Crown,
And Dogs were heard run howling up and down
At Hecates approach. --
As likewise by Fulguration, and the sad light of her Infernal Fires, which
was another token of her coming. Yet the Poets make the unusual and sudden
splendour of Flames to be a general signal of the Advention of any of the
Deities as well as of her. For so Claudian l. 1. de Rap. Pr^s designs the
approach of Phoebus: So likewise in his fourth of his Metam. Ovid ushers the
coming of Bacchus, and Plautus in Amphytrione the appearance of Jupiter

(45) Bloody Maenas] Meant by Medea, hurrying up and down like a frantic
Bacchanall.

(46) Through Ganges Forest.] Some Forests of India near Ganges, the
greatest River of that Country, which it divides in the amidst, taking his
rise from the Scythian Mountains, the Northern Boundures of India.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the fifth ACT.
(1)

Would an Issue from my Wombe]
As numerous as Niobe's had come, etc]
OF the number of Niobe's Children there be several reports, Homer reckons but
seven (sons and daughters) Euripides foureteen, Sappho eighteen, Bacchilides
and Pindarus twenty; others say they were but three in all. Tzetzes yet reckons
seven sons and seven daughters by their names; viz. the sons Sypilus, Agenor,
Phaedimus. Ismenes, Euphytus, Tantalus, Damasicthon. The Daughters Neaera,
Cleodoxe, Astioche, Phacta, Pelopia, Eugige, and Chloris. Of the death of her
and her children, and her conversion into Marble, see Ovid's Metam. l. 6.
Pausanias de Arcadicis. Palaephatus de non credendis fabulis.

(2)

Thus with this Victime, we appease]
Thy iujur'd Ghost.]
This said, s^e kills one of her Children, as a Sacrifice to her Brothers
Ghost. Alciat has a pretty Emblem taken from Archias the Greek Poet, upon the
Statue of Medea killing her Children, in whose Bosom a Bird built her nest.

Colchido^ in gremio nidum quid congeris? ^heu
Nescia cur pullos tam male credis avis?
Dira parens Medea, suos saevissima Natos
Predidit, and speras parcat ut illa tuos?
Embl. 54. Poor Bird, that know not where thou builst thy nest!
Trust'st thou thy young ones to Medea's breast?
Her cruel hands, shed her own Childrens blood,
And do thou hope that she will spare thy brood?
Yet Aelian in the fifth Book of his Various Histories, ca. 21.) seems to
assoile her of the murder of her children; there be some (says he) who report
that the rumor concerning Medea is false, and that not she but the Corinthians
made away her children, that Tragical Fable owing its original to Euripides,
who at the request of the Corinthians, transferred the murder of the Children
from them to their Mother; Truth in process of time giving place to Fiction;
who says further, that it was a common fame in his days, that the Corinthians
used to offer Expiatory Sacrifices as a Tribut to the Ghosts of the slain
Children.

(3)

Go, mount the skies, and by thy flight declare]
(If thou unpunished goe'st) no Gods there are.]
From Corinth, drawn by her winged Dragons, Medea flies to Athens, where she
married Aegeus, and had by him a son called Medus; whom likewise afterward,
(attempting to poison his Son Theseus, that so the Kingdom of Athens might
descend to her Son Medus, and being detected) she leaves, and by flight
returns to Colchos, which (her Father being dead) she recovered, and (as
Symonides writes) the Kingdom of Corinth likewise: who though in her life so
wicked, yet after her death was by the Colchians honored with Divine Rites,
who Dedicated a Temple to her Memory, into which, in regard of Iasons
Ingratitude) no men were permitted to enter.

FINIS.

