Imprimatur,

Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac Domest.
25th August. 1664.
The Mystery OF RHETORIQUE UNVEILED, Wherein above 130 The TROPES and FIGURES
are severally derived from the Greek into English; together with lively
Definitions and Variety Of Latin, English, Scriptural,
Examples, Pertinent to each of them apart. Conducing very much to the right
understanding of the Sense of the Letter of the Scripture, (the want whereof
occasions many dangerous Errors this day) Eminently delightful and profitable
for young Scholars, and others of all sorts, enabling them to discern and
imitate the Elegancy in any Author they read, etc.

By JOHN SMITH, Gent.

Ut hominis decus est ingenium:
Sic ingenii lumen est Eloquentia.
Cic. London, Printed by E. Cotes for George Eversden at the Mayden-head in St.
Pauls-Church-yard, 1665.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Martin Noell, Knight.
Honored Sir,
THE good Affection you bear unto all kinds of polite Literature, accompanied
with your genuine Inclination thereunto, and in particular to Elocution,
together with those manifold Obligements which your Noble Self, and Worthy
Stock ( viz. Mr. Edward Noell, and James Noell of Tottenham in the County of
Middlesex Esquire) have accumulated upon me, do incite and encourage me to employ
that breath which I would have spent in Expressions of Gratitude and
Observance, to beg your Worship to increase the Causes of it, and do thereupon
beseech you to accept the tender of my Duty in this small Present, to grant
that your Protection, and the Author your Pardon, with favorable Permission to
style himself

Your Worships faithful Humble Servitour, JOHN SMITH.

The Author to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WEre it absolutely necessary for him that would write of Eloquence to be
perfectly eloquent, I would easily confess myself too rash in this enterprise:
But having seen often those treat knowingly of painting that never held Pencil,
and Cicero remarking that Aratus, by the common consent of learned men, wrote
excellently of the Heavens and Stars, though he was no noted Astronomer; I Am
encouraged to say, why then may not I too discourse of Eloquence without being
an Orator? Galen, that great Master of Physic, who wrote so learnedly of
every part of that Science, was little seen in the Practick; Nor are those that
discourse best of the embattailing Armies, and differencing Military functions,
always the best Warriers, or the most daring. The like may happen in this
Subject, that he, who is able to set down the rules and laws which ought to be
observed in speech or style, may notwithstanding find himself defective in the
application; and so may be said to give that to others, which he has not
himself: But this Treatise indeed may not so properly be termed a Direction to
the Art of Rhetorique, as a Key to unlock and lay open those abstruse
difficulties which the Tropes and Figures have hitherto, not only been masked
with, but locked up under; I mean from such at least, as are altogether
unacquainted with the Greek tongue, and have not directed their studies to that
subject.

Object. But it may be you will say, there were several books extant before,
that much illustrate the Tropes and Figures of Rhetorique.

Answ. It is very true, that many learned Worthies have done exceeding well
herein; yet to use the expression of one of them: That a child upon a Giant
shoulders can see further then the Giant: So I, having the help of their
labors, and of other Books, have by Divine assistance (without ostentation be
it mentioned) used a more distinct and easy method throughout the whole
current of my Discourse, then any other upon this Subject yet extant; whereby
matters of high and excellent sublimity are bowed down to the weakest
capacities.

I render the English of each Trope and Figure, and likewise the English of the
words, from whence they are derived, whether from the Greek or Latin, then a
brief definition and lively character and representation of each Trope and
Figure, then choice Latin and The English Examples are most of them streams
from Sir Phillip Sidnyes fountain.
English Examples pertinent to each of them, as also a brief and plain
explanation of the terms used in Rhetorique, with an Alphabetical Table for the
ready finding each of the Tropes and Figures.

Lastly, For that the holy Scripture is not barren of, but abounds with Note
that Rhetorique sets forward the end of the discourse, to wit, to affect the
heart with the sense of the matter in hand: as Eccl. 1.2. Vanity of vanities,
says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity, where we may see that it
is no vanity to teach the vanity of the creatures in Rhetorical elegancies.
tropes and figures of all sorts, as containing the most excellent and
sublimest eloquence, and is like a pleasant garden, bedecked with flowers, or a
fruitful field, full of precious treasures, I apprehended it a work worthy the
undertaking, to dig into those sacred Minerals for the better finding out the
Metaphors, Metonymies, Synecdoches, etc. which lie hid there, and have given
Scriptural Examples pertinent to each of the Tropes and Figures: For the bare
reading of the Scripture, without searching into its heavenly mysteries and
meaning, is like the coming into a Treasury, wherein we see many costly things
folded up, and some ends appearing out, but when they be all unfolded, then
does their glory more affect us for the present, yea, and leave in us a deep
impression of their excellency: Besides, the ignorance of Rhetorique is one
ground (yea, and a great one) of many dangerous Errors this day; as upon
perusal of the Scriptural Examples of Synecdoche, Metonymie, etc. will
manifestly appear, where you have not only bare instances, but diverse Texts
cleared and explained; for though the Spirit of the Lord be indeed that Golden
Key, that opens the sealed mysteries of the Book of Truth, and inspires the
soul with the understanding of the hidden wisdom therein; and those men, whose
understandings are not opened by him who has the Key of David, Luke 24.45.
be they never so learned, Isa. 29.11, 12.
yet by reason of the blindness of their hearts, seeing, Rev. 3.7.
they see not, and hearing, Ephesians. 4.18.
they understand not the wonders in Gods law: yet, Luke 8.10.
all Science, and particularly, Rhetorique, where it is reduced to a blessed
subordination and conformity to the teachings of the Spirit of Truth, is a good
gift of God, proceeding from the Father of lights, and very conducent to the
unfolding and right understanding of the Figurative and Tropical Elegancies of
that blessed Book, which abounds with the most excellent and divinest eloquence:

Mat. 16.26, 27. This is my body, etc. take heed you take not the sign for that
whereof it is but a sign.
And herein we must beware that we take not those things literally which are to
be understood spiritually; that we go not out to a figurative acceptance of
any place of Scripture, Where there is a sentence in Scripture which has a
Tropical word, we may not think the whole place figurative: as Matthew. 26.28.
this is my blood which is shed for many, etc.
where we have not a sufficient reason (grounded upon some word of truth) why
the proper sense or signification of the words may not be adhered unto; for we
must never leave off the proper sense, unless the coherence of the Text, the
Analogy of faith, or some other place of Scripture require a figurative
Exposition. And it is very dangerous to make figures, where the Scripture makes
none; or to make the scope and sense bleed with straining it too hard. Origin
would sometimes take that literally, which ought to be understood mystically,
and thus mistaking that place, Matthew. 19.12. And there be Eunuchs, which have
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heavens sake: he gelt himself; And
he also sometimes would allegorize plain Scriptures, that is, such as are to be
taken literally, or in their proper signification: But the difference will
easily appear to the wise and observant Reader; The like in Joh. 1.10.4.35. and
4.13, 14
Mat. 26.29. I will not henceforth [drink] of this fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; where the first
word [drink] has a proper or literal signification; but the later a
Metaphorical, of their Communion, or partaking of the joys of heaven. This work
will also be very useful and advantageous to youth, and others, enabling them
to find out the elegancy in any Author, and likewise help the invention of
learners, who may beautify a speech, and adorn a discourse with elocution, by
drawing their discourse through the several Tropes or Figures, and taking what
may best befit their purpose: So I will detain thee no longer in the Porch, but
in^ite thee into the House, and such as I have, set before (...), i^ there be
no such varieties as were expected; yet, let it have acceptance with thee,
seeing it is according to my ability; Thus do, and thou will engage him, who is

Thy real welwisher, John Smith.
From my Chamber in Mountague Close, Southwark March 27. 1656.
The Contents of the Pre-ambular part of this Book, viz.
RHetorique, what, with the use thereof, page 1. A Trope, what, 2 The
Affections of Tropes, what; and how many. 3. A figure, what, ibid. The
difference between a Trope and a Figure. 4. A figure of a word, what, 5. A
figure of a Sentence, what 4, 5, 6. The d^fference between a figure of a word,
and a figure of a Sentence, 5, 6. Figures of a word, which, 5, 6. Figures of a
Sentence, which, 7.8.
The Alphabetical Table, or a Synopsis, whereby the Reader may on a sudden,
view all the Tropes and Figures, or find out which of them he principally aims
at; where, next after the Trope, or Figure, is the genuine Signification of the
word in English, then a brief description of each Trope and Figure, and lastly
a referring to the Pages, where they are largely Explained and Exemplified:
Note likewise that some words which are neither Tropes, nor Figures, yet being
abstruse words, and incident to the unveiling diverse of the Figures, are here
inserted, and the Reader referred to the pages, where they are also described
and exemplified.
A.
AENigma, a Riddle, or an obscure Allegory. page 72 Aetiologia, a rendering of a
reason: a figure when the reason of a thing is shown. 119 Allegoria, Inversion
or Changing: a Trope whereby a sentence must be understood otherwise then the
literal interpretation shows, 51 Anacoenosis, Communication: a figure whereby
we consult, and as it were argue the case with others 146 Anadiplosis,
Redoubling: a figure whereby the last word, or sound of the first clause, is
repeated in the beginning of the next. 80 Anamne^is, Remembrance: a figure
whereby we call to mind matters past, etc. 232 Anaphora, Rehearsal: a figure
when several clauses of a sentence are begun with the same word or sound. 84
Anastrophe, a proposterous placing of words or matter. 188 Antanaclasis, a
bearing back: a figure when the same word in likeness is repeated in a various
(if not in a contrary) signification. 104 Anthropopathia, a speaking after the
manner of men. 193 Anthypophora, a contrary illation, or inference: see it in
Prolepsis. 123 Antimetabole, a turning of the words in a sentence upside down.
113 Antiphrasis, a word or speech to be understood by the contrary. 64
Antiptosis, the putting of one case for another. 181 Antistoechon, a change of
letters: a figure whereby one letter is put for another. 134 Antithesis,
Opposition: a figure whereby one letter is put for another. 163 It is also a
Rhetorical Exornation when contraries are opposed to contraries in speech or a
sentence. 164 Antonomasia, a putting of one name for another: a figure when
another name, a common name, or a nick name is put instead of the proper name.
57 Aphaeresis, a taking away: a figure whereby a letter, or syllable is taken
away from the beginning of a word. 161 Apocope, a cutting off, a figure when
the last letter or syllable of a word is cut off. 162 Apodioxis, Rejection: a
figure when any argument or objection is with indignation rejected, as very
absurd, etc. 216 Apodixis, demonstration or evident proof. 215 Apophasis, a
denying; a kind of an Irony, whereby we deny that we say, or do, that which we
principa^y say or do. 156 Aporia, Doubting: a figure whereby we deliberate,
and as it were argue the case with our selves. 144 Aposiopesis, an holding ones
peace: a figure when through vehemence, the course of the sentence begun is so
stayed, as thereby some part of the sentence not being uttered, may be
understood. 142 Apostrophe, a turning away or dislike; a diversion of speech to
another person, then the speech appointed did require. 150 Astismus, a civil
and pleasant jest. 67 Asyndeton, without a copulative, 173 Auxesis, an
increasing; an Exornation when for amplification, a more grave and substantial
word, is put in stead of the proper word. 47
C.
CAtachresis, Abuse: it is the abuse of a trope, and is when words are too far
wrested from their native and genuine signification. 41 Charientismus,
Pleasantness: a trope whereby unpleasing matters are mitigated with pleasant
words. 66 Chronographia, a description of times and seasons. 209 Climax,
Gradation: a figure when the succeeding clauses of a sentence transcend each
other by diverse degrees. 82 Compar, even, equal; a Rhetorical Exornation
whereby the parts of a sentence do consist almost of the like number of
syllables, etc. 203
D.
DIaeresis, Division: a figure when one syllable is divided into two parts. 168
Dialogismus, a conference between two: a figure when as one discussing a thing
by himself, as it were talking with another, does move the question and make
the answer: see Prosopopoeia. 237 Dialyton, Disjoined: This figure and
Asyndeton are alike. 173 Diastole, Extension: a figure whereby a syllable,
short by nature* is made long. 167 Diatyposis, description or information of a
thing: a figure whereby we having spoken of a thing in general, descend unto
particulars, etc. 234 Dilemma, an horned or double argument: which every way
convinces, etc. 244 Dissimilitudo, Dissimilitude. 200
E.
ECphonesis, Exclamation. 134 Ecthlipsis, a striking out: a Grammatical figure
when the letter M, with his vowel is taken away, the next word beginning with a
vowel. 167 Ellipsis, Def^ct: a figure when in a sentence a word is wanting, to
make that sense which has been spoken. 1^8 Emphasis, efficacy of expression:
a figure whereby a tacit virtue and efficacy of signification is given to
words; etc. 138 Enallage, a change of order: a figure whereby the number or
gender, mood, etc. are put one for another. 185 Enantiosis, Contention: a
figure when we speak that by a contrary, which we would have to be understood
as it were by affirmation. 115 Enthymema, conception of the mind; an Euthymem
or imperfect syllogism, wherein the Major or Minor proposition being wanting,
is looked for. 242. Epanalepsis, a taking back: aes figure when a sentence is
begun and ended with the same word or sound. 99 Epanados, Regression, or
turning back: a figure when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the
middle, in the middle and end of a sentence. 100 Epanorthosis, Correction, or
amending: a figure when in our speech, something that went before, is called
back and corrected, etc. 139 Epenthesis, Interposition; it is the interposition
of a letter or syllable in the middle of a word. 162 Epimone, a tarrying long
upon one matter: a figure whereby we continue and persist in the same cause,
much after one form of speech, etc. 218 Epiphonema, Acclamation; an applause of
a thing approved, etc. 137 Epistrophe, a turning to the same sound: a figure
when diverse sentences end alike, etc. 86 Epitrope, Permission: a figure when we
seriously or Ironically permit a thing. etc. 126 Epizeuxis, a joining together:
a figure when the same word is doubled by way of Emphasis, etc. 78 Erotesis,
Interrogation: a figure whereby we either demand a question, earnestly affirm,
or vehemently deny a thing. 130 Evocatio, a calling forth: a figure when the
Nominative case to a Verb of the third person is set before a verb of first or
second person, etc. 180 Euphemismus, a fair or favorable kind of speech: a
figure whereby a word of a good and bad signification is interpreted to the
better part, etc. 211 Exegesis, Explication: a figure when that which was first
spoken more darkly, is afterward in the same sentence more manifestly
explained and confirmed. 194 Exergasia, a polishing or trimming: a figure when
we abide still in one place, and yet seem to speak diverse things. etc. 208
Expeditio, Expedition, or quick dispatch: a figure when many parts or reasons
of an argument being enumerated and touched; all are destroyed, save that only,
upon which the speaker intends to stand and rest upon. 233
G.
GNome, a sentence: a figure when we bring in a sentence or some remarkable
saying of another to the same purpose with the Author, he being not named. 228
H.
HEbraism, or a speech after the manner of the Hebrews, etc. 213 Hellenismus, a
Grecism or imitation of the Greeks in phrase or construction. 182 Hendiadys, a
dividing of one thing into two: a figure when one thing is expressed by more
words. 184 Hirmos, a bond or knot: a figure whereby a sudden entrance is made
into a confused heap of matter, etc. 155 Homoeoptoton, falling out alike: a
figure whereby diverse clauses end with the same letter or syllable. 200
Homoeoteleuton, ending alike: a fig. whereby diverse parts, or members of a
sentence end alike, etc. 202 Horismos, Definition: a figure whereby we declare
what a thing is, and is usually when we distinguish between two words by
defining both of them, etc. 220 Hypallage, a changing: a figure when the
natural order of the words is changed, etc. 189 Hyperbaton, a passing over: it
is a transposed order of words; a figure when words agreeing in sense, are in
place disjoined. 188 Hyperbole, Exuperation, or a passing of bounds; it is when
the Trope is exceedingly enlarged; or when in advancing or repressing one
speaks much more than is precisely true, yea, above all belief, etc. 46
Hypophora, an objection; it propounds an objection, and is, when the speaker
makes answer to his own demand: see Prolepsis. 123 Hypothesis, a supposition.
245 Hypotyposis, Representation: a figure when a whole matter is expressed so
particularly and in order, that it seems to be represented unto ocular
inspection, etc. 109 Hypozeugma, a joining together in the end: a figure when
the common word is put in the last clause: in Zeugma. 169 Hysterologia, a
preposterous speech; or a placing of that before which should succeed, and
contrarily, etc. 190
I.
INcrementum, an increasing: a figure when a speech ascends by degrees from the
lowest to the highest, etc. 128 Inversio, a turning upside down: a figure
whereby the speaker brings in a thing for himself, which was alleged against
him. 121 Ironia, mocking or counterfeiting: a trope whereby in derision, we
speak contrary to what we think or mean. 38
L.
LItotes, smallness, or extenuation: a figure when less is said then
signified: hereby sometimes a word is put d^wn with a sign of negation, when as
much is signified as if we had spoken affirmatively; if not more, etc. 60
M.
MArtyria, Testimony: a figure when the speaker confirms something by his own
experience. 218 Meiosis, extenuation, or diminution: It is when less is
spoken, yet more is understood, or when for extenuation sake we use a more
light and easy term then the matter requires, etc. see in Hyperbole. 48
Mesozeugma, a joining together in the middle: a figure when the common word
being placed in the middle clause, knits together the precedent and subsequent
words, etc. See this in Zeugma. 169 Metabasis, Transition: a figure when we are
briefly put in mind of what has been said, and what remains further to be
spoken, etc. 222 Metalepsis, Participation: it is the multiplying of a trope in
one word, and is when there are many tropes in one word, etc. 44 Metaphora,
Translation: it is a Translation of words from one species to another: a trope
when we express our selves by a word of like signification unto that which we
mean, etc. 8 Metaplasmus, Transformation, or a changing from one shape to
another: a figure when by reason of the verse, etc. something is necessarily
changed, etc. 161 Metathesis, Transposition, or an alteration of the order of a
thing: a figure whereby one letter is put for another. 166 Metonymia,
Transnomination, or change of names: a trope whereby the cause is put for the
effect, the subject for the adjunct, or contrarily, etc. 11 a Metonymie of the
Efficient. 13, 14 a Metonymie of the Effect. 15 a Metonymie of the Subject. 16
a Metonymie of the Adjunct. 22 a Metonymie of the Matter. 14 a Metonymie of the
Instrument. 17 a Metonymie of the Antecedent. 26 a Metonymie of the Consequent.
27 a Metonymie of things going together. 28 a Metonymie of the end. 28 a
Metonymie of the form. 29 M^mesis, Imitation: an imitating the language of
others, etc. 231 Mycterismus, a disdainful gibe or scoff, near a Sarcasm. 231
O.
ONomatopoeia, the feigning of a name: a figure whereby a word is made by a
certain sound, etc. 63 Oxymoron, subtly foolish: a figure when the same thing
is denied of it self, or when a contrary Epithet is added to any word. 117
P.
PArabola, a parable or similitude, a comparison made under some similitude.
205 Paradiastole, Distinction: a figure when we grant one thing, that we may
deny another, etc. 111 Paragoge, Production, or lengthening: a figure when a
letter or syllable is added to the end of a word 163 Paralipsis, Preterition,
or overpassing; it is a kind of an Ironie; and is when you say you pass by a
thing, which yet with a certain elegancy you touch at full. 157 Paralogismus,
false reasoning or a sophistical conclusion. 246 Parathesis, Apposition: a
figure of construction, whereby substantives are added in the same case, etc.
180 Parecbasis, Digression, or Excursion: a figure whereby something beyond the
purpose or intended matter, goes out from the appointed discourse. 225
Parechesis, Allusion: a figure when we bring in something of another to
another intent then his own. 227 Paregmenon, a derivative, or derived from: a
figure when words, whereof one is derived of another, are joined together. 229
Parelcon, Prolonging: a figure when a syllable or whole word is added to
another in the end of it, etc. 177 Parenthesis, Interposition; it is a clause
comprehended within another sentence, without which notwithstanding the
sentence is full, or the sense sound. 178 Paroemia, a Proverbial speech, etc.
It is the continuation of a trope in a speech when proper and peculiar respect
is had to the common use, etc. 70 Paronomasia, likeness of words: a figure
when by the change of one letter or syllable in a word, the signification also
is much altered, etc. 102 Parrhesia, liberty or boldness of speaking: a figure
when we speak freely and boldly concerning things displeasing, etc. 212
Pathopoeia, expression of the affections of the mind, or an exceeding stirring
up of the affections, etc. 247 Periphrasis, Circumlocution, or speaking of one
word by many; a figure when we shadow out a thing by some equivalent
expressions, etc. 158 Pleonasmus, Superfluity: a Gram. figure whereby some
superfluous word (though not without its sufficient importance) is added in a
sentence, etc. 176 Ploce, binding together, or a continuation without
interruption: a figure when a word is by way of emphasis so repeated, that it
denotes not only the thing signified, but the quality of the thing, etc. 106
Polyptoton, variation of cases, or a change of the termination, end, or case: a
figure when several cases of the same Noune, and Tenses of the same verb, are
used in conjoined clauses, etc. 107 Polysyndeton, diversely and many ways
coupled by Conjunctions: a figure signifying superfluity of conjunctions, etc.
175 Proecthesis, an exposition which is sent before: a figure when the speaker
does by his answer (containing a reason of what he, or some other has said or
done) defend himself or the other person as unblameable, etc. 236 Prolepsis,
Anticipation, or the prevention of an objection: a figure whereby that which
may be objected is anticipated, etc. 122 It is also a certain summary
pronunciation of things; and is made when the congregation of the whole does
aptly agree with the verb or adjective, etc. 125 Prosopopoeia, a feigning of
the person: a figure when in our speech we feign another person speaking, etc.
146 Prosthesis, a putting of one thing to another: a figure whereby a letter,
or syllable is added to the beginning of a word. 161 Protozeugma, a joining
together in the beginning; a figure when the common word is expressed in the
beginning of the clause or sentence, and omitted after: see in Zeugma. 169
S
SArcasmus, a biting scoff or taunt; near an Irony, but somewhat more bitter.
66 Similitudo, a similitude, etc. 198 Syllepsis, Comprehension: a figure of
construction, when a nominative plural is joined to a verb singular; or on the
contrary: Or it is a comprehension of the more unworthy under the more worthy,
etc. 171. Syllogismus, a reasoning, or rather a conclusion, which is made by
reasoning together in argument: a Rhetorical syllogism is a form of speech
whereby the matter is amplified by conjecture, that is, by expressing some
signs or circumstances thereof, etc. 240 A Logical syllogism is a perfect
argument consisting of three parts, viz. Major, Minor, end Conclusion, whereby
something is necessarily proved. 240 Symploce, Complication, or an agreement of
words in a sentence: a figure when all our beginnings and all our endings are
alike. 87 Synaeresis, Contraction: a contraction of two vowels or syllables
into one. 168 Synalaepha, a mingling together: a figure of Prosodia, whereby
two vowels are gathered into one syllable, etc. 167 Synchoresis, Concession: a
figure when an argument is Ironically yielded unto, and then marred with a
stinging retort upon the objector, etc. 192 Syncope, a cutting away, or a
rendering shorter: a figure of Prosodia, when a letter or syllable is taken away
from the midst of a word. 162 Syncrisis, Comparison: a form of speech, which by
apt Similitude shows that the example brought in is either like, unlike, or
contrary, etc. 196 Synecdoche, Comprehension: a trope where the more
comprehensive words are put for the less comprehensive, and contrarily, etc.
30 Synecdoche Speciei. 30 Synecdoche Partis. 32 Synecdoche Generis. 34
Synecdoche Totius. 35 Synecdoche Numeri. 33.36 It is also a Gram. figure when a
common word or name is restrained to a part, which is expressed by the
Accusative case, etc. Synoeceiosis, Reconciling: a figure teaching to reconcile
things that differ, and to repugn common opinion with reason, etc. 116
Synonymia, a partaking together of a name; or diverse words signifying one and
the same thing: a figure when by change of words that are of like
signification, one thing is reiterated diverse times, etc. 152 Synthesis,
Composition: a figure of construction, whereby a noune collective singular is
joined to a verb plural, etc. 186 Systole, a shortning: a figure of Prosodia,
whereby a long syllable is contrary to its nature made short. 167
T.
TMesis, Section, or dividing: a figure whereby the parts of a compound or
simple word are divided by the interposition of another. 183
Z.
ZEugma, a joining together: a figure of construction, whereby one Verb or
Adjective, answering the nearer to diverse Nominative cases, or Substantives, is
reduced to the one expressly, but to the other by a supplement, etc. 170
A brief Explication of the terms used in Rhetorique, some being borrowed from
Logic, and proposed in a Greek, and therefore to most in an unknown, ^resse.
1. A Cause, is that by which any thing has its being, as God, by whom the
world, etc. has its being.

2. The Caussate, is that which depends upon the Cause, as having its being
thence, as, the Artifice from the Artificer; Misery from Sin.

3. The Efficient, is that which brings a thing to pass: as Christ, the
Salvation of the world.

4. The Effect, is that which is brought to pass by the Cause: as, the World
by God; plenty by peace; penury by war.

5. The End, is the Cause for whose sake the thing is; or it is whatsoever is
intended by any that set upon a work: as, To speak well is the end of Grammar;
to grow rich, is a covetous man's end; to get learning, is intended by a scholar.

6. Finitum, or Medium, is whatsoever is helpful to bring to pass a purposed
end: as, industry and instruction, to get knowledge.

7. Materia, is the matter or substance, of which any thing is made: as, Gold,
of which a Ring; Silver, whereof a Cup is made.

8. Materiatum, is what is made of the matter; as, a Sword, of Steel; a Ring,
of Gold.

9. Forma, the Form is that inward principle, by which any thing has its
being, or is what it is; as, the Soul, whereby a man is a man.

10. Formatum, is that which has its being from the form: as, the man from his
soul.

11. Subjectum, the Subject is that to which any thing is adjoined or belongs:
as, the mind, to which knowledge, or ignorance; man, to whom riches, or
poverty, fame, or infamy, etc. belongs.

12. Adjunctum, the adjunct, is that which belongs to any thing: as, infamy to
villainy; light to the Sun; heat, to fire.

13. Genus, is a more general title attributed to some things more special
under it: as, Substance, to Metals. Living Creatures. Elements.


14. Species, is a more special title attributed to diverse particulars under
it: as, Man to William, Thomas, John.


15. Totum, is whatsoever has parts: as, man's body has head, heart, arms,
etc. and so parts are such as make up the whole.

16. Contraries, are qualities which mutually destroy one another: as heat and
cold: wisdom and folly, light and darkness.

17. Similia, are such as agree in some qualities: as, the good man is likened
to the Palm in greenness, a wise man to an Ant in Providence.

18. Abstractum, the abstract signifies some form with the exclusion of the
subject. The abstract is the substantive, as, whiteness: It is also called
Denominans, the thing denominating.

19. Concretum, the concrete signifies the same form with those qualities which
adhere to the subject: The concrete is the Adjective, as, albus, white: It is
also called Denominatum, the thing denominated.

THE MYSTERY OF RHETORIQUE UNVAILED.
RHetorica (...), Rhetorique, or the Art of eloquent and delightful speaking;
derived from (...), [ rheo] loquor, to speak, and (...), [ techninos]
artificialiter, artificially.

Rhetorique is a faculty by which we understand what will serve our turn
concerning any subject to win belief in the hearer: hereby likewise the end of
the discourse is set forward, to wit, the affecting of the heart with the sense
of the matter in hand.

It has two parts, viz.

1, Garnishing of speech, called Elocution.

2. Garnishing of the manner of utterance, called Pronunciation (which in this
Treatise is not principally aimed at.)

Elocution, or the garnishing of speech, is the first and principal part of
Rhetorique, whereby the speech it self is beautified and made fine: And this is
either

The fine manner of words called a Trope: or,

The fine shape or frame of speech, called a Figure.

The fine manner of words, in the Greek, (...), [ tropos] verborum imitatio, in
English, a change of words, derived from (...), [ trepo] muto, to change.

A Trope, A Trope is an in^^ ^u^ent of Elocution which adorns out Speech.
is when words are used for elegancy in a changed signification; or when a word
is drawn from its proper and genuine signification to another.

It is a garnishing of speech in one word, and is there only where the
signification is changed: as, Bellorum procellae. -- Magnes amoris.

1 Chronicles. 16.32, 33. The fields do laugh and sing: that is, look pleasantly and
delightfully.

Luke 13.32, 33. Herod that Fox: that is, that politic dissembler.

In a Trope there are two things to be considered: 1. The Species. 2. The
Affections.


The Species of Tropes are four, viz.

1. A Metonymie, Metonymie
which is when one meet or convenient reason or argument is put for another.
as, the Efficient for the Effect, the Subject for the Adjunct, etc.

2. An Irony, Irony.
which is when one contrary is put for another: as, Oh holy Gentiles, for
ungodly.

3. A Metaphor, Metaphor.
is a Trope which notes out comparison, and is when one like is put for another
like unto it: as, the tempest of war, etc.

4. A Synecdoche, Synecdoche.
which is when words more comprehensive are put for words less comprehensive,
and contrarily.

Secondly, The affections of Tropes; which are such qualities as may put
ornament upon any of the forementioned Tropes.

The affections are five, viz.

1. Catachresis, Catachresis.
which is when the Trope is abused, or the words too far wrested from their
native signification: as, Hos. 4.8. They eat up the sins of my people.

2. Hyperbole, Hyperbile.
which is when the Trope is exceedingly enlarged: as, Luke 10.15. Thou that art
lifted up to heaven.

3. Metalepsis, Me^alepsis,
which is when diverse Tropes are shut up in one word: as, 2 King. 2 9. I pray
thee let me have a double portion of thy spirit.

4. Litotes, Litotes.
which is when a word is put down with a sign of negation, yet as much is
signified, as if we had spoken affirmatively, if not more: as Job 31.17. Job by
this figure says he has not eaten his meat alone.

5. An Allegory, Allego^ie.
which is when the use of the same Trope is continued in a long discourse: as
Ephesians. 6. from the 11. to the 18. verse. Put on the whole Armor of God, etc.

Note likewise, That Antonomasia, Onomatopoeia, Antiphrasis, Charientismus,
Astismus, Sarcasmus, Paroemia, Aenigma, etc. are (though not so properly)
called Tropes.

Secondly, The fine shape or frame of speech; called a Figure.

A Figure in the Greek, A Figure*
(...), [ schema] (among other things) signifies principally habitum, vestitum,
and ornatum corporis; in English, the apparel and ornament of the body; which
by a Metaphor is transferred to signify the habit and ornament of words or
speech: it is derived from the Greek word (...), [ schematizo] effingo,
assimulo, to represent, fashion, or feign.

A Figure is an Ornament of elocution, which adornes our speech, or a
garnishing of speech when words are used for elegancy in their native
signification: as, Latet omnes hora, ut expectetur omnis hora.

If error delight us, if error seduce us, error will ruin us.

And as in a Trope, or the finenesse of words, words are considered asunder by
themselves; so in a Figure, the apt and pleasant joining together of many words
is noted: and as of words, some are proper, others changed from their proper
signification; so of speeches, some are right and proper as they are; others
are figurative, or serving for the representation of another thing.

The signification of a Figure in Scripture is twofold:

1. When the Scripture it self propounds an Allegorical signification: as, when
1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Peter by the Arc of Noah, signifies Baptism: And Paul in Heb.
11 s 29. by the Red Sea, signifies Baptism: And in Joh. 3.14 Christ his Cross
by the Serpent.

2. When a man's capacity or understanding induces or leads into a figure, and
by an apt limilitude agrees with some other clear sense or signification of
Scripture.

A Figure is twofold, viz. 1. Figura dictionis. 2. Figura sententiae.


1. A garnishing of speech in words.

2. A garnishing of the frame of speech in a sentence.

Whereof the former belongs to the matter, A note in the garnishing of speech
in words, and in garnishing the frame of speech in a sentence.
and as it were, to the body of speech; but the latter, to the form, and as it
were, to the soul, that is, to the sentence.

The garnishing of speech in words, is where the elegancy lies in the placing
of one word: as,

While the mind is inslaved to vanity, vanity will sour the Conversation.

A figure of a word is twofold; viz. 1. In the Dimension or measuring of sounds
or words. 2. In the Repetition of sounds or words.


A figure in Dimension, is that sweet and pleasant number of sounds or words in
a sentence.

The Figure Metaplasmus, Transformation, and all its kinds (being largely
described hereafter) are figures in Dimension: of this there are four kinds,
viz.

In striking out, two, viz. 1. Kind.
Synaloepha, a mingling of vowels. Ecthlipsis, a striking out of vowels.


In adding to and taking from, six Figures, 2. K^nde.
viz. Prosthesis, apposition. Aphaeresis, a taking away. Epenthesis,
interposition. Syncope, contraction. Paragoge, production. Apocope, a cutting
off.


In dividing and shortning two, viz. 5. Kind,
Diae^esis, division. Synerisis, a shortning.


4. Kind.
In changing there are five Figures, viz. Tmesis, section, or a dividing.
Metathesis: transposition. Antithesis, opposition. Diastole, extension, or
stretching forth. Systole, correption or shortning.


By the Table may he found each Figure, and where they are opened, illustrated
and exemplified.
Secondly, A Figure of a word in repetition of sounds of words in a sentence:

If in the same word, it is Epizenxis.

If in diverse, it is Anadiplosis.

If in the beginnings of sentences, Anaphora.

If in the endings it is Epistrophe.

If in beginnings and endings, Symploce.

If in the beginning and end of a sentence, Epanalepsis.

If repeated backward, Epanados.

If a little unlike, and of diverse originals and descents, it is Paronomasia.

And if of the same original, it is Polyptoton.

See the Table for each Figure.

There are likewise other figures of a word, viz. Climax, Antanaclasis,
Antithesis, Ploee, Paregmenon, Syroeceiosis, Oxymoron. Synthesis, Hendiadys,
Hypallage, Hyperbaton, Ellipsis, Pleonasmus, Asyndeton, Polysyndeton,
Hysterologia, Zeugma, Hellenismus, Antiptosis,


Secondly, Garnishing of the frame of speech, in a sentence, called Figura
Sententiae, is a figure, which for the forcible moving of affections, does
after a sort beautify the sense and very meaning if a sentence: because it
carries with it a certain manly majesty, which far surpasses the soft delicacy
of the former Figures, they being as it were effeminate and musical, these
virile and majestical. It is when the ornament lies in the whole sentence, or
where the elegancy is diffused through the structure of one, or more sentences:
as,

Isa. 1.2. Hear, Oh heavens! hearken oh earth! Figura Sententiae.
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

The Figures of a Sentence are called pathetical, or such as move affection and
passion; and are these, viz. Ecphonesis, Epiphonema, Parrhesia, Epanorthosis
Aposiopesis, Apostrophe, Periphrasis, Diatyposis, Horismos, Paradiastole,
Parechesis, Erotesis. Parenthesis, Parathesis, Synonymia, Hytotyposis,
Metabasis.


A Figure of a sentence is either in thought and musing, by the Greeks called in
Logismo, or in questioning and answering, called in Dialogismo.

Figures of a sentence in Logismo, are Apostrophe and Prosopoeopia. Logismus,
is when a sentence is made or fashioned without conference.

Those are figures in Dialogismo, or in questioning and answering, when a
sentence is made or fashioned in conference, which consists in question and
answer;

Of which kinds are, Aporia, Anacoenosis, Prolepsis, Hypophora, Epitrope,
Synchoresis.


Tropes and Figures (say the learned) are the virtues of speech and style, as
Barbarisms and Solecisms are the vices.

There is no other Trope more frequent, excellent, and beautiful, than a
Methapor, because that which is the light and star of speech, and tends to
richness, majesty, perspicuity and pleasantness, is a similitude brief and
contracted into one word.

I shall therefore (according to the learned Farnaby) begin with a Methapor.

MEtaphora, gr. (...), Translatio, translation, or a removing over; derived
from (...), [ metaphero] transfero, to translate.

Esteum nomen aut verbum ex prop^io loco, in ^^m transfertur, in quo aut
proprium d est, (...) sla^um prop^io melius est.
It is the artificial Translation of a word, from the proper signification, to
another not proper, but yet nigh and alike:

Or it is a Translation of words from one species t^ another:

O^ the friendly borrowing of a word to express a thing with more light and
better note, though not so directly and properly as the natural name of the
things meant would signify.

It is a Trope when we express our selves by a word of a like signification to
that which we mean: or when the property of one thing is translated to another:
as, Genesis 6.6. God is said to r^pent; where the property of man is translated to
the omnipotent and omniscient God.

A Metaphor is pleasant, for that is enriches our knowledge with two things at
once, with the Truth and a similitude:

And there is nothing in the whole universe, from whence the simile may not be
taken; Dat propriae similem translata Methapora vocem. Farnaby.


Laeta seges, Gemmant vites. Duo fulmina belli.
Iugenii flumen. Men's ferrea. Classis habenas.
Princeps caput Reipublicae. Virgilius Poetarum sol.
Invidiae flamma. Fulmen orationis. Flos nobilitatis.
Expolire orationem. Amicitiam dissuere. Si sic loqui liceat. Si verbis audacia
detur. Vivis coloribus virum depinxi.
Two necessary Rules to be observed, viz.

1. A Metaphor ought not to be so far fetched, as that the similitude may not
easily appear.

2. It ought to be drawn from the noblest things, as the Poets do, that choose
rather to say, rosie-fingerd, then red-finger'd Aurora; as appears by the first
English Example, where it is thought unfit to stoop to any Metaphor lower then
the Heaven.

English Examples of a Metaphor.
The sky of your virtue overcast with sorrow.

You are the most excellent star that shines in the bright Element of beauty.

The wounds of grief. -- flowers of Oratory.

Drops of dew are pearls.

Flowers in medows are stars.

The murmuring of the waters is music.

To divorce the fair marriage of the head and body; where besides the cutting
off of the head, we understand the conjunction of the head and body to resemble
marriage.

To keep love close prisoner; which is to conceal love.

There came through Cheapside a whole fleet of Coaches; for a great number.

Scriptural Examples.
1 King. 10.4. The Queen of Sheba saw the wisdom of Solomon; here saw,
Metaphoricically signifies, proved and understood.

Hagg. 1.9, You looked for much, and lo it came to little; here to look for
signifies to hope for.

Jer. 8.15. The neighing of horses is heard from Dan: that is, foreseen by the
Prophet.

Eccles. 1.8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing: we are in this place by the eye and ear to understand the desire of
the mind kindled by those senses.

Thus in Scripture Christ is called a Vine, a Rock, a Lamb, a Lion, etc. And
man, a shadow, a flower, grass, a wolf, a bear, a dog, etc.

Thus we read of Metaphors from leaven, salt, trees, seed, etc.

Besides many Hyperbolical Metaphors; as, in Hab. 2.11. The stone shall cry out
of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

Lam. 1.4. The ways of Sion lament or mourn, etc. So,

Mat. 3.11. Christ is said to baptize with fire, whereby we may understand,
that fire is there put for the power of the holy Ghost which purifies and
refines as fire.

Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods, etc. whereby is signified from whom
Magistrates have their authority, whose place they supply, whose person they
represent, and whose example they ought to follow both in executing justice,
and showing mercy.

MEtonymia, (...), Transnominatio, a change of names, or the putting of one
name for another; derived from (...) [ metonomazo] transnomino, to change one
name for another: or from (...), which in composition signifies change, and
(...), [ onoma] Aeolice pro (...) [onoma] nomen, a name.

A Metonymie is a Trope, or a form of speech whereby the orator or speaker puts
one thing for another, which by nature are nigh knit together.

This change of name is used principally four ways. 1. When the cause is put
for the effect. 2. When the effect is put for the cause. 3. When the subject is
put for the adjunct. 4. When the adjunct is put for the subject.
Or, as others define it,

It is an exchange of a name, when one word comes in lieu of another, not for a
similitude, but for other natural affinity and coherence.

Farnaby.
Atque Metonymia imponit nova nomina rebus:

1. Efficientis, ut Inventoris; Mart. Lyaeo. Autoris: Legitur Juvenalis.
Livius ingens. Materiae: Pinus, ferrum, aeris acervus, arundo. Aut instrumenti:
Gladius, lingua, arma manusque

2. Effecti: Clades Libyae. Mors frigida pallet.

3. Subjecti: a Curii. b Paterae. c Germania. d Rostra. e Vcalegon. f Cor, os.
g Patronus. h Nox. i Amaryllis.

4. Adjuncti: k Fasces. l Scelus. m aetas nulla. n Libelli.

1, A Metonymie of the Cause, is either when the cause is put for the effect,
which is called a Metonymie of the efficient, Met. Efficientis.
or when the name of the matter is put for the thing made of the same called a
Metonymie of the matter.

1. A Metonymie of the Efficient, is when the Efficient cause is put for its
effect; or when the name of the Inventor or Author is put for the thing
invented, or composed: as, in Farnabies inserted examples, Mart, pro praelio;
Mars being the feigned inventor of war. -- Lyaeo, pro vino; Lyaeus being one of
the names of Bacchus, who was the feigned inventor of making wine; where also
the names of Juvenal and famous Livius are put for the books or works, whereof
they were Authors.

Vulcanns pro igne. Neptunus pro mari. Ceres pro pane. Venus pro amore.

English Examples of a Metonymie of the Efficient.
Vulcan for fire. Neptune for the sea. Bacchus for wine. Venus so love. Mars
for war. Mercury for eloquence.

So Love is usually put for Liberality, the fruit and effect of love.

My blade is right Sebastian, for of Sebastians making.

He learned his Arguments of Aristotle, and his eloquence of Tully; (i. e) out
of Aristotle's and Tullies works.

Scriptural Examples.
Ezekiel. 7.15. The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within,
etc. by sword, pestilence, and famine, is signified death, the effect of those
causes.

Hag. 1.11. And I called for a drought upon the earth; ( i. e.) hunger and
famine caused by drought.

Numb. 32.23. And be sure your sin will find you out: where sin (the cause) is
put for punishment, its effect.

Luke 16.29, 31. They have Mosos and the Prophets, (i. e.) the writings of
Moses and the Prophets.

Thus in Genesis 35.18. The soul is put for life. See Lev. 20, 20. Psalm. 128. 2
Luke 24.27. Joh. 5.45, 46, etc.

A Metonymie of the Matter, Met materiae.
is when the name of the matter, is put for the thing made of the same: as,

Pinus pro navi, a Pine Tree being much used where it grows, for building of
ships.

Ferrum pro gladio, a sword being made partly of iron.

Aes pro nummo, brass and silver being the materials, whereof money is
commonly made.

Ferro facibusq. invasit Italiam.

Sylva, pro domibus.

English Examples of a Metonymie of the Matter.
I want silver; where by silver, money is to be understood.

Thus Seed is put for children, and Earth for man.

They eat the finest wheat, and drink the sweetest grapes; by Wheat is
understood bread, and by Grapes wine.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 115.4 Their Idols are silver and gold, ( i. e) made of those metals.

Psalm. 105.18. He was laid in iron, (i. e.) in fetters made of iron.

Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, ( i. e.) thou art formed out of the Dust.

Genesis 4.25. For God has appointed me another seed in stead of Abel, (i. e.)
another child.

Dan. 5.4. Worshipped wood and stone, ( i.e) Idols made of wood and stone.

In like manner also the instrument is put for the effect thereby: as, Met.
Instrument.
Gladius pro caede. Arma pro bello. Lingua pro sermon. Manus pro Scriptura.


English Examples.
The unlikely have worn the Crown; here the Crown being an instrument of royal
dignity, signifies a kingdom.

The sword (being the instrument of slaughter) is put for slaughter.

In like manner the Tongue, for speech; Arms, for war; the hand, for the
manuscript, or handwriting.

Scriptural Examples.
Jam. 3.8. But the tongue can no man tame, where the tongue (the instrument of
speech) is put for the speech.

2 Timothy 1.16. Was not ashamed of my Chain, ( i. e.) of my bonds or bondage.

See Prove. 10.20. and 25.15.

Job 31.6. Let God weigh me in an even balance; here Balance (the instrument
of equity) is put for equity it self.

See Exodus 5.3. 1 Samuel 22.17. 1 Cor. 16.21, etc.

2. A Metonymie of the Effect, Met Essecli.
is when the effect or thing caused, is put for its cause: As,

Clades Lybiae, pro Cladis effectoribus, qui cladem Lybiae intulerunt. Mors
^^igida pallet, (i. e.) pallidos reddit.

Victoria natura insolens and superba est, (i. e.) insolentes and superbos
redait.

English Examples.
Hereby we say, death is pale, 'fear sad, a^ger hasty, wine bold; by which is
signi^^ed, that death makes pale, etc.

Thus, Love is said to be bountiful, for that it renders one bountiful.

Scriptural Examples.
Exodus 15.2. He is become my salvation, ( i.e.) my savior.

Genesis 25 23. Two nations art in thy womb, ( i. e.) the fathers of two nations;
that is, Esau, the father of the Idumeans; and Jacob, the father of the
Israelites.

2 King. 4.40. There is death in the pot, ( i.e.) some deadly thing which
cause^h death.

Mark 9.17, 25. A dumb and deaf spirit, ( i.e.) making the possessed dumb and
deaf.

See Romans 7.7. Heb. 11.39. Joh. 3.19. and 17.3.

3. A Metonymie of the subject, Met. Subjecti.
is when the subject, or that to which any thing belongs is put for the
Adjunct, or that which belongs thereunto:

And it is made these nine ways, viz.

1. When the Subject is put for the Accident inherent: As,

a Curii, victory; Curious being the name of a certain victorious Captain.

2. When the container is put for the thing contained; as,

b Paterae, pro potu in eis contento, Crumena, pro nummis. Animosum pectus, pro
cord.

English Examples.
The Cup, for the wine contained in it.

The Purse, for the money therein, etc.

Scriptural Examples.
Mat. 26.27. Luke 22.20. By the Cup is signified the wine contained therein.
See Jer. 49.12, etc.

3. When the Place is put for the inhabitants of the same, or for the things it
contains: as,

c Germania, pro Germanis. Vrbs, pro Civibus. Carcer, pro vinctis. Anglia, pro
Anglis.

English Examples.
The City met the General; for the Citizens, etc.

It is difficult to overcome Italy by war, or Greece by learning; meaning the
Italians and Grecians.

We are to war against Spain, (i. e.) against the Spaniards.

Scriptural Examples.
Luke 13.14. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, etc. by
Jerusalem is meant the Rulers and people of that city.

Deuteronomy. 4.26. I call heaven and earth to record; here by heaven and earth, Moses
underderstands all in heaven and earth.

Genesis 39.4. He made him Ruler of his house, ( i. e.) of all his servants,
treasurers, and goods in the house.

Mat. 10.15. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah.

Mark 1.33. And the whole City was gathered together at the door; ( i. e.) the
inhabitants of the City. See Luke 19.9. Acts 26.31. Mat. 16.18.

4. When the place is put for the actions properly done in the place: as,

d Restrum, pro sermon. Academia, aut Scholae, pro doctrina. Sylve, pro
venandi studio.

English Examples.
The Hall is done, ( i. e.) the Action of that court of judicature.

Thus an Academy or School is put for learning.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 68.29. Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem; here by Temple is understood
the holy excercises and divine worship used in the Temple.

5. When the possessor is put for the thing possessed: as,

e Vcalegon, a noble sage of Troy, whose name is here put for nobility and
sagacity.

Sic dicitur hominem d^v^rari, cujus patrimonium devoratur.

Apud me (i. e.) domi meae.

English Examples.
Hereby, lands, houses, and ships, are often called by the owners names.

Thus, With me, is usually to be understood at my house.

So we say of some Guardians, They have devoured the Orphans, intimating the
orphans patrimony.

Scriptural Examples.
Joel 3.20. Judah shall be inhabited for ever; here Judah the son of Jacob, is
put for the land of Jewry, which was promised to his posterity, and by them
possessed.

Genesis 15.3. A servant with me; that is, in my house.

Genesis 18.3. Depart not I pray thee from thy servant, ( i e.) depart not from my
tent.

6. When the seat or place is put for the quality inherent to the same: as,

f Cor; os. Cor pro prudentia quae sedem habet in cord, (unde prudentes
Cordati dicuntur;) os, pro pud^^e; qui se ore, (i. e.) vul^u prodit. Aut
aliquando cor fortitudinem significat:

Non tibi plus cordis, sed minus oris inest.

English Examples.
Thus the heart is put for wisdom, because wisdom has its seat there. And
sometimes also, the heart is put for courage and fortitude by this Trope.

Scriptural Examples.
Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful, etc. the heart being the seat or place,
where the soul keeps it chief residence, is here and elsewhere, put for the
will, affections and whole soul, as the qualities inherent thereunto.

Prove. 6.32. Whose commits adultery with a woman, wants a heart; where by
the want of an heart, is understood foolishness. See Prove. 2.10.

7. When the Advocate or Counselor, who personates his Client, is put for him
whom he personates and represents: as,

g Patronus, procliente.

The Cause will go against the Attorney General, intimating against his Client,
whom he represents.

8. When the time it self is put for the things usually done in time: as,

h Nox, pro somno. Aestas, pro mess.

English Examples.
The night is frequently put for sleep, and summer for Harvest.

The days thought is the nights dream.

The mornings view corrects the evenings work.

In the two last examples, the day and the night, the morning and evening, do
signify the actions and accidents in them.

Scriptural Examples.
Job 32.7. I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom, ( i.e.) the aged, who have seen many days.

1 Chro. 12.32. And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times.

1 Cor. 4.3. Man's day, for man's Judgment. See Esth. 1.13. Joh. 12.27.

Or contrariwise, when the things which are done in time, are put for the time
it self, as,

Messis, pro aestate. Calor, pro aestate. Frigus, pro hyeme.

Ante focum si frigus erit; si Messis in umbra.

English Examples.
By this Metonymie, the Harvest is put for Summer, Cold for Winter, and Sleep
for the Night.

Scriptural Examples.
Exodus 23.10. Six years thou shall sow thy land, and gather the fruits thereof.
See Isa. 17.5. Exodus 23.10. Deuteronomy. 24.19.

9. When the name of the thing signified, is put for the sign: as,

i Amaryllis, pro carmine de eadem.

Jupiter, Apollo, Aencas, for the statutes or pictures of Apollo etc.

Scriptural Examples.
Thus in Genesis 17.10. Circumcision is called the Covenant, when 'twas only a
Seal of the Covenant, and of the righteou^nesse of faith; as appears in Romans
4.11.

So in Exodus 12.11. The Paschal Lamb is called the Lords Passover.

Mat. 26.26, 28. B^ead and w^ne are said to be Christ's body and blood; of which
they are only but signs.

Thus in Luke 22.20. This is the new Testament in my blood ( i. e.) a sign or
seal of the New Testament in my blood.

So in Titus 3.5. Baptism is called the new birth.

4. A Metonymie of the Adjunct, (...), Adjuncti.
is when the Adjunct, or that which belongs to any thing, is put for the
subject, or thing to which it belongs or is adjoined: as,

Genesis 31.53 Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, ( i. e.) by God, whom
Isaac feared.

2. King 20.1. Set thy house in order, ( i.e.) thy household affairs.

Thus the Captain General is often put for his Army; as, Hannibal was slain by
Scipio; here Hannabal is put for his Army which he had ^ed against the Romans,
and Scipio for the Romans who obtained the victory.

1 Samuel 18.7. Saul has slain his thousands, etc.

So in Act. 9 5. Christ is put for his members.

Psalm. 85.11. Righteousness shall look down from heaven, ( i. e.) God in whom
righteousness rests.

Hos. 4.1. There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land; by
which Adjuncts is signified, that there are none, or very few at most, in whom
those graces may be found.

This Metonymie is made these 9 ways, viz.

1. When the sign is put for the thing signified thereby: as,

k Fasces, pro Magistratu, Sceptrum, pro Regne, Toga, pro pace, Arma, pro bello.

Huic consilio palmam damus; (i. e.) victoriam.

English Examples.
Thus, weapons and arms sign^fie war, the keys power, and the palm victory, as
being signs of war, power, etc.

Scriptural Examples.
Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not dep^^^ from Juaah, (i. e.) the Kingdom,
in^im^^i^g that Kings should not cease from the house o^ Judah.

Romans 13.4. He bears not the swo^^ (...) vain, ( i. e.) Authority.

Jer. 24.10. Thus here the sword is put for war.

Thus also the name is often put for the thing it self: as,

Rev 3, 4 Thou have a few names.

Prove. 18.10. The name of the Lord, ( i. e.) the Lord himself.

Phil. 2.10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. Ephesians. 5,
20. Act. 1.15.

2. When the quality is put for the person subject thereunto: as,

l Scelus pro scelesto, villainy for a villain.

Deserts are preferred; ( i. e.) men deserving are, etc.

Give room to the Quoise, ( i. e.) to the Sergeant.

3. When the Adjunct of time is put for the persons, or things subject
thereunto: as,

m Aetas nulla, (i. e.) homines nullius aetatis.

Aspera tum positis mitescent secula bellis. (i. e.) homines, qui istis seculis
vixerunt.

Temeritas est florentis aetatis, prudentia senectutis, (i. e.) Juvenum and
senum: Juventus, (i e.) Juvenes; Senectus, (i. e.) Senes.

-- Oculisve aut pectore noctem
Accipit --
Noctem, pro somno qui noctus capitur.

English Examples.
Thus the night is put for sleep, which is usually taken in the night.

Take heed young idleness, ( i. e.) idle youth.

Scriptural Examples.
Ephesians. 5.16. The days are evil, ( i. e.) the hearts and conversations of the
men of these days are evil.

4. When the names of the virtues themselves are put for good men; and of the
vices, for evil men; and also when the names of diverse other things are used
for the persons, to whom they are adjoined, or appertain: as,

Ex hac part pudor pugnat, illic petulantia: ubi pudor pro pudicis; and
petulantia pro petulantibus ponitur, etc.

Virtutem praesentem odimus; (i. e.) viros bonos. Justitia pro Justo, etc.

English Examples.
Thus virtue is put for good men; and justice for a just man.

5. When the thing set in the place, is put for the place it self: as,

n Libelli pro libraria. Ludus pro Circo.

Te quaesivimus omnibus libellis, Bibliothecis.

English Examples.
Thus Books are put for a Library or Study. A play for a playhouse.

6. When the thing contained is put for the container, or the Abstract for the
Concrete: as,

Aen. Virg. i.

-- Vina coronant, (i. e.) pateram vina continentem. Wine is put for the cup
that contains it.

English Examples.
Psalm. 11.7. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, ( i. e.) righteous men.

1 Cor. 12.28. Helps, governments, for helpers and governors.

Phil. 3.3. Circumcision is put for the persons circumcised.

Tit. 1.12. Wickedness is put for wicked men. See Genesis 19.15. Prove. 11.5. Romans
4.9. Gal. 2.12.

It is very usual in Scripture to put the Abstract for the Concrete, to set
forth the excellency of the person or thing spoken of.

Thus God tells Abraham, that he shall not only be blessed, Sed erit ipsissima
benedictio, Genesis 12.2. ( i. e.) affluens omni benedictione; and non tam
benedictus, quam ipsa benedicto dicitur.

Thus in 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is not called righteous, but righteousness.

7. When the Antecedent, Met. An^eceden^is.
or that which goes before, is put for the consequent, or that which follows:
as,

Discumbere pro coenare. Audire vel auscultare pro obtemperare. Fuimus Troes,
pro non amplius sumus. Vixit, (i. e.) mortuus est. Strato discumbitur ostro,
(i.e.) cibum capiunt.

English Examples.
Thus, to hear, is to obey.

He has lived, ( i e.) he is dead.

They are set ( i. e) a^ s^pper.

The sword is drawn, whereby is signified the ensuing slaughter.

Scriptural Examples.
Exodus 19.9. Deuteronomy. 5.27. Hear, is put for obey.

So in Exodus 18, 19. Hearken unto my voice; for Obey my voice or commandment.

8. When the Consequent is put for the Antecedent: as, Met. Consequontis.


Sepultus est, pro mortuus est.
Evigilabit, pro dormitat.
English Examples.
The Guests are risen, ( i. e.) have supped.

He is buried, ( i. e.) he is dead.

Scriptural Examples.
Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, etc. here by
sweat following labor, is signified labor before meat.

Isa. 28.16. He that believes, shall not make haste: this Paul in Romans 9.33.
interprets, shall not be ashamed: shame and confusion being effects of making
haste, etc.

Met. Connext.
9. When all things going together, one is put for another: as,

Juxta Terentium castra posuerat Annibal, (i.e.) hujus and illius exercitus.

Annibal ibi moratur, pro exercitu Annibalis.

English Examples.
Thus Hannibal is put for his Army, or any Captain General for the Army under
his conduct and command.

Scriptural Examples.
Josh. 11.21.23. Joshua overcame the Canaanites, ( i. e.) he and his Army.

So in 1 Samuel 18.7. Saul has slain his thousands, etc.

So in Mat. 25.35. Christ is put for his Members.

A Metonymie of the End, Met. Finis
is when the end is put for the means conducing to the same: as,

Subeat virtus vestra experimenta majora, (i.e.) pericula. Aris imponit
honorem, (i.e.) sacrificium.

Dicitur and planstris vexisse po^mata Thespis, (i. e.) Scenas, in quibus
poemata fiebant.

An English Example.
Let your courage enterprise greater experiments ( i. e.) dangers.

He lays honor upon the altar ( i. e.) a sacrifice; for that in the old Law
none but such as were Priests unto God were admitted to sacrifice unto him,
which was a dignity importing honor.

Scriptural Examples.
Jude 7. Sodom and Gomorrah were set forth for examples, ( i. e.) were
punished for examples sake.

Psalm. 57.8. Awake my glory, ( i. e.) my tongue given to glorify God.

See 1 Cor. 10.6.

A Metonymie of the form, is when the Sea the explication of the Terms.
form is put for the thing, Met. Formae.
to which it gives a being: as,

Luxuries in flagitiis, Crudeli as in suppliciis, avaritia in rapinis, superbia
in contumeli^s, pro luxurioso, crudeli, avaro, superbo.

Ars mendicando quaerit honesta cibum, (i. e.) Artifices honesti.

English Examples.
Thus Art is put for an Artificer; pride for a proud man, and covetousness for
a covetous man, and the soul for man. Hear you modesty it self, ( i. e.) some
one very modest.

Scriptural Examples.
Exodus 1.5. Seventy souls went down into Egypt, ( i. e.) men. The like in Genesis
12.5. and 46.18.

SYnecdoche, es, f. (...), Comprehensio, Comprehen^^on, derived from (...), [
synecdechoma^] Comprehendo, aut, una excipio, seu recipio, to comprehen, or
take together.

It is a Trope, or a form of speech, whereby the more comp^ehensive wo^ds are
put for the less comprehen^ive; and contrarily: or when a part is understood
by the whole, or the whole by a part, the general by the special, and
contrarily: or, it is an exchange of the name of the part for the whole, or of
the name of the whole for the p^rt.

This figurative Exornation gives a grace unto spee^h, which otherwise it would
want, enforcing the understanding of the hearers to a deeper consideration of
the sense and meaning: and is chiefly fourfold, viz. 1. Synecdoche Speciei. 2.
Synecdoche Membri aut partis. 3. Syn^cdoche Generis. 4. Synecdoche Totius.


Farnaby.
Confundit totum cum part Synecdoche. Partis.

a Myrtoum: auster; b hyems, mucro. c Annibal; d Anglus.

2. Totius: e Orator; color. f Annus. g Vixit. h Atrides.

1 Synecdoche Speciei, is when the special or a particular sort implies a mo^e
general: as,

a Myrtoum, pro mari, the M^rtean se^, for the whole sea indefinitely. Auster
pro vento, indefinite. Aristides pro justo. Moecenas pro Patrono. Croesus pro
divite. Thraso pro glorioso.


Hosts tela parant, (i. e.) arma.

Ecce Aristidem, (i. e.) justum.

Sic infinitum numerum dicimus pro magno;

Sexcenta licet ejusmodi proferre; sexcenta, (i. e.) p'urima.

English Examples.
Caesar, for the King. Aristides, for a just man.

Craesus, for a rich man. Auster, for the wind.

It is not my sword that can help me* where by Sword is understood all kind of
weapons and manners of defense.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, etc ( i. e.) our Ancestors; where
fathers, the more special name, is put for ancestors, the more general.

Psalm. 44.6. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me. And in
46.9. He breaks the bow, and cuts the spear in sunder, etc. Where by bow, sword
and, spear, are understood all weapons of war. See 2 Samuel 8.18. Mat. 22.21.
Isa. 63.16.

Thus a certain number is put for an uncertain: as,

Zech. 3.9. Christ is said to have seven eyes, ( i. e.) many, to signify his
perfect and singular care of his Church. The like in Deuteronomy. 28, 7.

Psalm. 105.8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever: the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; where a great or infinite number is put
for an indefinite number, or such a number as is not determined.

Psalm. 119.64. The righteous m^n falls seven times a day; that is, often. So in
Prove. 24.16.

Thus the word [Many] is taken for all: as,

Dan. 12.11. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake.

Now that this word [many] signifies all, the Holy Ghost bears witness, in
Joh. 5.28. All that are in the grave shall hear his voice.

2. Synecdoche partis, or a Synecdoche of the part, that is, when a part is put
for the whole: as,

b Hyems, a storm of rain or hail for winter. Tectum. pro domo. Mucro pro
gladio.

c Annibal, pro exercitu cujus Dux erat, velut pars primaria.

d Anglus pro Anglis.

* Hostis habet muros, ruit alto a Culmine Troja; pro Hosts.

English Examples.
My name is tossed and censured by many tongues, (i. e.) by many men; where the
part of an entire body is put for the whole.

Thus the roof of the house is put for the whole house; the edge of the sword,
for the sword: and the soul, for the whole man.

Scriptural Examples.
Genesis 12.15. Then Abraham took Sahah his wife and the souls, etc. for the men
and women that were his Servants. The like see in Romans 13.1.

Romans 12.1. Present your bodies a living sacrifice; ( i. e.) the whole man.

In Prove. 1.16. and 6.18. Their feet run to evil: where by feet of men, the
men of such conversation are understood.

Mat. 8.8. I am not worthy that thou should come under my ^oof; where the
roof signifies the house.

In Isa. 7.2, 5, 89, and 9.9. The Tribe of Ephraim is put for the whole people
of Israel.

See Prove. 3.22. and 10.14. and 11.26. The hand is put for the whole man, etc.

Thus the singular number is put for the plural: as,

d Anglus, pro Anglis. Syn^c. Numeri See page 43.


The Roman was victor in battle, intimating the Army of the Romans.

The English man overcame the Hollander.

Scriptural Examples.
Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, etc. for
Oxen and Asses.

Jer 8.7. The Stork in the heaven knows her appointed time; for, the Sto^ks
know their appointed time.

Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, etc. for,
men are justified by faith.

Job. 14.1. Man that is born of a woman, ( i. e.) men that are born of women,
etc.

Synedoche Generis, is when a general word comprehends the particular, or when
the more general name is put for the more special: as,

e Orator, pro Demosthene aut Tullio. Color, pro forma.

g Vixit, pro mortuus est.

h Atrides, (i. e.) Agamemnon; quippe qui in expeditione Trojana rex regum
diceretur.

In exercitu militum virtus quam maxim juvat.
Virtus pro fortitudine. Poeta pro Homero aut Virgilio.

English Examples.
Put up your weapon, for your dagger.

He lived in such a Century, ( i. e.) he is now dead.

Thus living Creatures are put for beasts.

The Poet, (i. e.) Homer or Virgil.

Scriptural Examples.
Mark. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every creature: signifying to all men, and
not to any other creature.

Genesis 6.12. All flesh had corrupted his way, ( i. e.) all men.

Mat. 2.18. Rachel weeping for her children, would not be comforted, because
they are not; for, lived not.

Judges 19.3. Spoke to her heart: that is, comforted her.

Exodus 30.34. All sweet smelling spices, are put for spikenard.

See 1 Samuel 13.13. 1 King 2.4.

Synecdoche totius, A Synecdoche of the whole is when the whole is put for the
part; as,

f Annus, pro tempore praesenti.

Elephantus, pro dentibus. Sylvae pro arboribus.

Pontus, pro fluctu. Nos, pro ego.

Pabula gustassent Troje, Xanthumque bibissent: (i. e.) partem pabuli, partem
Xanthi flavii.

English Examples.
An Army so great as drank rivers dry: meaning a great part of the water in the
rivers.

He carries a Goldsmiths shop on his fingers, for Rings.

He fell into the water and swallowed the Thames, for the water.

Scriptural Examples.
1 Samuel 5.3. Behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground: though the
same verse declares that before its fall, the head of Dagon and both the palms
of his hands were cut off upon the threshold, etc. See Genesis 8.13.

The world is put for the earth, in 2 Pet. 3.6.

The man is put for the soul: as in Luke 16.23. and 23, 43.

So in Genesis 3.19. Till thou return to the ground; where the man is put for his
body.

It is also by this Synecdoche, when any thing is spoken concerning many
persons together, which yet appertains not to every one of them precisely: as,

Genesis 35.26. In this and the three precedent verses, you have a recital of the
twelve sons of Jacob, (which as this verse declares) were born unto him in
Padan-aram, and yet this appertains not unto Benjamin, who yet is reckoned with
the rest, as in verse. 24. for he was born in the way near Ephrath, as in verse.
16.

And in Heb. 11.13. The Apostle having enumerated many Saints, and among the
rest Enoch, (as in verse. 5.) generally adds, These all died in the faith, etc.
and yet Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him, as likewise appears by the 5. verse.

Synecd. Numeri. See p. 36.
Thus the plural Number is put for the singular: as,

Nos, pro ego.

Nos populo imposuimus and Oratores visi sumus; ubi de se tantum loquitur
Orator.

An English Example.
Cicero to Brutus: We deceived the people, and seemed Orators, speaking of
himself only.

Scriptural Examples.
Judge. 12.7. And Jephthah was buried in the cities of Gilead, (i. e) in one
City of that Region.

Mat. 27.44. The thieves also which were crucified with him upbraided him; ( i.
e.) one of the thieves, namely, the unbelieving and unconverted thief.

So also Genesis 21.7. and 46.7. (...) that (...) and ^is sons daughters, when it
appear by the 15, and 17. verses, that he had but an only daughter, by name
Dinah, and one of his sons daughters.
compared with the 15, and 17. verses.

But of the Grammarians it is called a Synecdoche, or Comprehension, Cum nomen
aut verbum universale restringitur ad partem vel aliquid saliem speciale, quod
per accusativum effertur.
when a common word or name is restrained to a part which is expressed by the
Accusative Case.

And they call it Comprehension, because the particular is comprehended of the
universal.

This Synecdoche is a figure of Construction, and is when that which is part is
attributed to the whole: as,

Aethiops albus dentes, an Ethiopian white in the teeth; here, white agreeing
to the teeth only, is attributed to the whole Ethiopian:

Pro toto positae parts, quam passio signat, Farnaby.
Quartum vel sextum casum Synecdoche tradit. Passivis, Neutris, adjectis,
participiisq: 1. Dentibus alba. 2. Caput doleo. 3. Spoliata lacertos.

1. Dentibus alba, White in the teeth. 2. Caput doleo, I am pained in my head.
3. Spoliata lacertos, Bereft of the strength of the body.
By this Synecdoche all Nouns Adjectives, signifying any property; also Verbs
Passives, and Neuters, signifying any passion, may govern an Accusative or an
Ablative Case, signifying the place wherein the property or passion is: as,

Aeger pedes, or pedibus, Diseased in the feet.

Rubet Capillos, His hairs are red.

Truncatus membra bipenni, Cut in the limbs with an axe.

Caetera similes, uno differunt, Like in other things, in one thing they differ.

IRonia, (...), Simulatio, irrisio, mocking or counterfeiting, derived from
(...), in loquendo dissimulatione utor, to dissemble in speaking; or from
(...), [ eiro] dico, from whence (...), [ eiron] Simulator, qui aliter dicit ac
sontit: from which Ironia is taken for dissimulation, whereby one thing is
thought and another spoken; it signifies also taunting speeches, or a speaking
by contraries; as if we should say black is whi^te.

It is called the mocking Trope, whereby in derision we speak contrary to what
we think or mean, or when one contrary is signified by another:

This Trope is not so well perceived by the words, as either by the contrariety
of the matter, or the manner of utterance, or both.

Antiphrasis and this are of very nigh affinity, only differing in this, that
Antiphrasis consists in the contrary sense of a word, and Ironia of a sentence.

Farnaby.
Contra quam sentit solet Ironia jocari.
Scilicet, a egregiam laudem; b pulchre; c bone custos.
a Egregiam laudem, (i. e.) turpe potius dedecus and infamiam.

b Pulchre, (i. e.) foediffime.

c Bone custos, (i. e.) male custos.

O salve a bone vir, curasti b prebe, (i. e.) a pessime, b negligenter: foede
neglexisti.

Si genus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma,
At 1 sperate deos memores fandi atque nefandi.
Alter erit maculis auro 2 squalentibus ardens.
Hunc ego si potui tantum 1 sperare dolorem.
1. Sperate, (i.e.) timete. Sperare (i. e.) timere. 2. Squalentibus, (i. e.)
splendentibus. Est in hic vocibus Catachresis.
English Examples of an Irony.
He was no notorious Malefactor, but he had been twice on the Pillory, and once
burnt in the hand for trifling oversights.

Milo had but a slender strength, who carried an ox a furlong on his back,
then killed him with his fist, and eat him to his breakfast.

So when the Persian army was at variance among themselves, Philip of Macedon
(their utter enemy) said, He would send his army to make them friends.

Thus Gnatho speaks Ironically to Thraso; What (quoth he) they knew you not
after I had shown them your good conditions, and made mention of your virtues?
Then answered Thraso, You did like an honest man, I heartily thank you: Here,
both the saying of Gnatho and Thrasoe's Answer have a contrary signification.

Scriptural Examples.
Genesis 3.22. And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us:
whereby the Lord declares his great disdain of their affectation o^ an
impossible pre-eminence, in being like to God; as if he had said, he is now by
his sin become most unlike unto us; I see how well Satan has performed his
promise to them; is he not become like one of us?

Judge. 10.14. Go cry to the gods which ye have cho^en.

So in Isa. 14.4, 8, 9. The Lord teaches his children to deride the proud
insulting King of Babylon.

Our Savior also to awaken his drousie Disciples out of their security, does
in Mat. 26.45. use this form of speech; Sleeep on now and take your rest, etc.
as if he had said, A perilous ^ime is at hand, wherein you shall have little
list or leisure to sleep, you have therefore now the more need to watch and pray.

So Micaiah in 1 King. 2^.15 bids Ahab go to battle against Ramoth-Gilead and
prosper, ( i. e.) go up and perish.

Thus in 1 King. 18.27. Elijah mocked the wors^ippers of Baal; Cry aloud, for
he is a god; either he is talking or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleeps and must be awak^ned.

Jo^ 1^.2 ^hus he taunts at his false friends: No ^o^bt but ^e ^^e the people,
and wisdom shall ^e wit^ yo^: as if he h^d s^id, In your own conceits there
are none wise but your selves. No doubt but reason has left us, and is gone
wholly unto you; yea wisdom is so tied to your persons, that her conversation
and ruin depends upon yours.

1 Cor. 4.8, 10. We are fools, ye are wise; we nothing, ye all, etc.

See Amos 4.4, 5. Eccles. 11.9.

CAtachresis, (...), abusio, abuse, derived from (...), [ catachraomai] abutor,
to abuse, or from the praeposition (...), [ cata] contra, against, and (...), [
chresis] usus, use.

It is a form of speech, whereby the speaker or writer, wanting a p^oper word,
borrows the next or the likest to the thing that he would signify.

It is an improper kind of speech, somewhat more desperate than a Metaphor,
and is the expressing of one matter by the name of another, which is
incompatible with, and sometimes clean contra^y to it: and is when the change
of spee^h is hard, strange* and unwonted: or,

It is the abuse of a Trope, when words are too fa^ wrested from their native
signification, or when one word is abusively put for another, for lack of the
proper word: Du^ior improp^iae est Catachresis abusio vocis:
Vir gregis; ultorem promisi; pulchra minatus. Farnaby.



Vir gregis (i.e.) Caper.
Vir gregis ipse caper, deerravit, -- (i. e.) Dux gregis.

Capitis nives, (i e.) Cani capilli.

Spera^e dolo^em, (i e.) time^e dolorem.

Facies simillima Lauro; nam facies proprie hominis est.

English Examples of Catachresis.
A voice beautiful to his ears.

He threatens me a good turn.

I promised him an executioner.

I gave order to some servants of mine, (whom I thought as apt for such
Charities as my self) to lead him out into a forest, and kill him; where
Charity is used, or rather abused for Cruelty.

They build a horse by Pallas are divine: here the Poet traduceth that to a
beast, which is proper to the making of a house.

And as he said that mislik'd a picture with a crooked nose: The elbow of his
nose is disproportionable.

By the license of this figure we give names to many things which lack names:
as when we say,

The water runs, which is improper; for to run, is proper to those creatures
which have feet and not unto water.

By this form also we attribute horns to a snail, and feet to a stool; and so
likewise to many other things which lack their proper names.

Scriptural Examples of Catachresis.
A Caution.
Note that though this Trope be to be found in diverse places of Scripture, yet
not as if the Scripture abused words, but because those words which are
Catachestical depart a little from the usual custom of figurative speaking,
and are spoken or hang together more roughly or hardly: as,

Heb. 11.5. Enoch was translated that he should not see death.

Hos. 4.8. They eat up the sins of my people.

Deuteronomy. 32.14. The blood of the grape did thou drink, ( i. e.) the juice of
the grape.

Prove. 30.15. By this form of speech Solomon names the two daughters of the
horseleech.

Psalm. 137.5. Let my right hand forget her cunning: here is forgetting applied
to the hand, which is proper to the mind.

Jer. 46.10. The sword shall devour; here to devour, (the property of a living
creature with teeth) is Catachrestically applied in the sword.

Lev. 26.30. And I will cut down your Images, and cast your carcasses upon the
carcasses of your Idols, etc. here pieces of Images are called carcasses.

Exodus 23.19. Thou shall not sees a Kid in his Mothers milk.

Thus in Psalm. 6.8. Prayers and tears are said to have a voice; the like of
tears in Psalm. 39.12. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.

Isa. 64.1. Oh that thou would rent the heavens, etc. The Prophet here speaks
of God after the manner of men; if a man we^e in heaven and should descend, he
having a body of gross substance, must divide and rend the heavens; but God
being a most pure Spirit, passes through all things without any dividing or
rending; yet is there in these divine condescensions of speech a singular
excellency.

Rev. 1.12. And I turned to see the voice, etc. So Exodus 20.22. Ye have seen
that I have talked, etc. (i. e.) ye have heard the Lord speak. See Exodus 5.21,
etc.

Est autem haec in Metalepsi natura, ut inter quod transfertur sit medius
quidam gradus, nihil ipse significans, sed praebens transitum; quem Tropum
magis affectamus, ut habere videamur, quam ut ullo in loco desideremus.
MEtalepsis, (...), Transumptio, participatio, Participation or a taking from
one another, derived from (...), [ metalambano] transumo, aut particeps sum, to
take of, or partake with another.

Metalepsis is a form of speech whereby the Orator or speaker in one word
expressed, signifies another word or thing removed from it by certain degrees.
Or,

It is the clothing of a Trope with excellency, or the multiplying of a Trope
in one word; to wit, first, when by one improper word another is signified,
then by that improper word perhaps another, and so one after another till it
comes to the proper word, a mean or middle degree, which affords a passing over
or change intervening.

It is the continuation of a Trope in one word through the succession of
significations.

This Trope is a kind of Metonymie, signifying by the Effect a Cause far off
by an effect nigh at hand; and it teaches the understanding to drive down to
the bottom of the sense, and instructs the eye of the wit to discern a meaning
afar off; for which properly it may be aptly compared to an high prospect,
which presents to the view of the beholder an object remote, by leading the eye
from one mark to another by a lineal direction, till it discerns the object
inquired.

Farnaby.
Transcendit mediis gradibus Metalepsis ad altum:

Hinc movet 1 Euphrates bellum. Mirabar 2 aristas.

1, Euphrates pro Mesopotamia, per Meton. Adjuncti. Mesopotamia pro
Orientalibus, per Synecdochen membri.

2. Aristas, pro spicis, per Synecdochen Membri: Spica, pro segete, per
Synecdochen i^em Membri: Seges, pro aestate, quo anni tempore in agris
luxuriatur, per Metonymiam subjecti pro Adjuncto: aestas pro anno rursum, per
Synechdochen Membri.

Invadunt Virg. Aenoid.
urbem somno vinoque sepultam.
(i. e.) Invadunt Trojanos somno vinoque sepultos.
Virg. Aenoid.
Vrbem, pro Troja, per Synecdochen Generis;
Troja, pro Trojanis, per Metonymiam Subjecti.
English Examples of Metalepsis.
Virgil by ears of corn signifies summers, by a Metonymie of the subject; and
by summers, years, by a Synecdoche of the part.

They invade and enter the City, drowned in sleep and wine, (i e,) they invade
Troy, or the Trojans buried in sleep and wine.

Scriptural Examples.
Lam. 4.4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth
for very thirst, etc. Here, by the extreme thirst of the sucking babes, the
Prophet signifies the mothers barren and dry beasts; and by the dry beasts, the
extreme hunger and famine; and by the famine, the woeful affliction and great
misery of the people.

Mat. 21.10. All the City was moved; where the City is put for Jerusalem; the
general word comprehending the particular by a Synecdoche Generis; and
Jerusalem, for its inhabitants, by a Metonymie of the subject.

Mal. 4.2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.

Where wings are put for beams by a Catachrestical Metaphor. And beams for
comfort and refreshing by a Metaphor. See Esth. 2.16. Exodus 27.20.

HYperbole, (...), Superlatio, Exuperatio, Alicujus ougendi minuendive causa
superat veritatem.
Exuporation or a passing of measure or bounds; derived from (...), [
hyperballo] supero, to exceed.

It is an eminent excess in advancing or repressing, and is when the Trope is
exceedingly enlarged, or when the change of signification is very high and
lofty, or when in advancing or repressing one speaks much more then is
precisely true, yea above all belief.

Hyperbole sometimes expresses a thing in the highest degree of possibility
beyond the truth, that in descending thence we may find the truth and
sometimes in flat impossibilities, that we may rather conceive the
unspeakablenesse then the untruth of the relation.

But though an Hyperbole may be beyond belief, yet ought it not to be beyond
measure or rule; let it suffice to advertise, that an Hyperbole feigns or
resembles, not that it would by a fiction or untruth deceive; but then is the
virtue and property of an Hyperbole, when the thing it self, of which we speak,
exceeds the natural rule or measure, therefore it is granted to speak more
largely, because as much as the thing is, can not be reached unto.

Hyperbole is twofold, viz.

1. Auxesis, when we increase or advance the signification of a speech.

2. Meiosis, When we diminish or repress the signification of a speech.

Extenuans augensve excedit Hyperbole verum.

Astra ferit. Pluma levior. Volat ocyor Euro.

Merita vestra caelum contingunt.
Candidior Cygnis. Hedera formosior alba.
Jam jam tacturos Tartara nigra putes.
Auxesis, (...), augmentum, an increasing.

It is when for the increasing, and amplifying we put a word more grave and
substantial in stead of the proper word being less: as,

Cum liberalem, magnificum; severum, saevum; improbum, sacrilegum dicimus.

English Examples.
In dispraise.

Thus a proud man is called Lucifer, a drunkard a swine, an angry man mad.

In praise.

Thus a fair virgin is called an Angel; good music celestial harmony; and
flowers in meadows, stars.

Scriptural Examples of Auxesis.
Isa. 4.1. Wars are put for some strife.

Jer. 15.20. And I will make thee unto this people a strong brazen wall, etc.

Genesis 11.4. Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto the
heaven, etc.

See Mic. 9, 7. Job 39.19. Genesis 41.47. Exodus 8.17. Judge. 5.4, etc.

Meiosis, (...), diminutio, extenuatio, Diminution, or lessening.

It is when less is spoken, yet more is understood; or when for extenuation
sake we us^ a lighter and more easy word or term t^en the matter requires; or
when we put a less word for a greater: as,

Cum adulator^m blandum and affabilem, prodigum aut audacem, liberalem aut
fortem nuncupamus. Of this further at the end of Hyperbole.

But the Hyperbolical Meiosis or Dimunition, is that which increases defect: as,

Cum homunculum, Pygmaeum; stupidum, stipitem; qui non resp^ndet, mutum
appellamus.

English Examples of Meiosis.
Thus a great wound is called a scratch; a flat fall, a foil, and a raging
railer, a testy fellow, etc.

As Auxesis of small things makes great matters, so Meiosis of great matters
makes but trifles.

In Meiosis, the speaker ought to take care that he fall not into that fault of
speech, called Tapinosis, humility, that is when the dignity or majesty of a
high matter is much defaced by the baseness of a word; as to call the Ocean a
stream, or the Thames a brook, a foughten field a fray, great wisdom pretty
wit; or as if one should say to a King, May it please your Mastership.

Scriptural Examples of Meiosis.
1 Samuel 24.15. After whom is the King of Israel come out? after a dead dog, and
after a flea? See Psalm. 22.7. 1 King. 16.2.

Thus in 1 Cor. 5.1. less is put that more may be gathered from it.

Jam. 4.17. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin,
( i. e.) a great sin.

1 Cor. 10.5. But with many of them God was not well pleased, ( i. e.) was
highly displeased.

Thus in Genesis 18.27. Abraham calls himself but dust and ashes.

And in Job 25.6. He calls man but a worm.

English Examples of an Hyperbole.
Streams of tears gushed out of her eyes, and the greatness of her grief rent
her heart in sunder: where by these incredible tokens of sorrow, her incredible
lamentation and grief is signified.

This form of speech is either simple, or compared: viz.

1. Simple, as to call the belly of a great glutton, bottomless: him that is
most hasty in his fury, brainlesse; a notable coward, heartlesse.

2. An Hyperbole is compared two manner of ways:

1 By equality of comparison: as, to call a beautiful virgin an Angel; a shrew,
a devil; a drunkard, a swine; an extortioner, a wolf.

2. By the comparative degree, etc.

Harder then a Diamond. Swifter then thought The worst that ever eye saw, or
heart could imagine.

But in the frontiers of impossibility: as,

Though a thousand deaths followed it, and every death were followed with a
hundred dishonours.

The world sooner wanted occasions, then he valor to go through them.

Words and blows came so thick together, as the one seemed a lightning to the
others thunder.

Beyond the bounds of conceit, much more of utterance.

Scriptural Examples of Hyperbole.
Judge. 20.16. There are 700 men spoken of, every one of which could sling a
stone at an hairs breadth and not miss.

2 Samuel ^^.2.3. Saul and Jonathan were swifter then eagles and stronger then
Lions.

Genesis 32.12 Thy seed shall be as the sand of the sea. See Psalm. 78.27. So in
Heb. 11, 12. So many as the stars of heaven.

Deuteronomy. 9.4. Cities fenced up to heaven.

Psalm. 107.26. The waves of the sea mount up to heaven, and go down to the
depths, (i.e.) they are sorely tossed up and down when the Lord commands and
raises the stormy wind.

Joh. 21.25. The whole world could not contain the books, if they were written,
etc. (i.e.) they would be very many.

Luke 10.15. Thou Capernaum which art lifted up to heaven, ( i.e.) highly
exalted.

Luke 10.18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.

See Psalm 42.3. and 69.4. Prove. 13.24.

Joel 3.18. The Hills shall flow with milk, and the mountains with wine, etc.

1 Samuel 25.37. Nabals heart died in his breast, and he was made into a stone:
This carries a far greater and more emphatical energie of signification with
it, then our manner of speech, he was very much affrighted and astonished.

ALLegoria, (...), Inversio, permutatio, inversion or changing; It is an
inversion when one thing is propounded in the words, and another in the sense,
the word is derived from (...), [ allegoreo] aliis verbis allegorice significo,
to a signify a thing allegorically under other words.

Observe, that in a Metaphor there is a translation of one word only; in an
Allegory, of many; and for that cause an Allegory is called a continued
Metaphor.

And as a Metaphor may be compared to a star in respect of beauty, brightness
and direction; so an Allegory may be likened to a constellation, or a company
of many stars.

An Allegory is a sentence that must be understood otherwise then the literal
interpretation shows.

It is the continuation of Tropes in diverse words, as a Metalepsis is the
continuation of a Trope in one word through the succession of significations;
and these are sometimes confused or distinct; or,

It is the continual prosecution of a Metaphor and that proportionably through
the whole sentence, or through diverse sentences, or as others say,

It is the continuation of a Trope, and of the same Allusion in the same
discourse; and is, when one kind of Trope is so continued, as look with what
kind of matter it be begun, with the same it be ended.

Continuare Tropos allegoria adsolet: a Absque Et Cerere and Baccho Venus
alget. Farnaby.
Claudite rivos. a (i. e.) Sine pane and vino friget amor.

In Reipublicae corpore omnia membra, manus, pedes, caput, in totius salutem
conspirare debent.

Quoniam ex vadis jam evasisse videor, and scopulos praetervecta videtur
oration, perfacilis mihi reliquus cursus ostenditur.

O Naves, referent in mare te novi
Fluctus: O quid agis? sortiler occupa
Portum, etc.
In qua, Navem pro Republica, fluctuum tempestates pro bellis Civilibus; and
portum pro pace and concordia intelligi voluit Horatius; lib. 1. Od. 14.

English Examples of an Allegory.
Shall we suffer the monstrous Crocodile to come out of Nilus and to break into
our fold, to overcome our Shepherd, to rent off our skins with his griping
paws, to crush our carcasses with his venomous teeth, to fill his insatiable
paunch with our flesh, and to wallow a^ h^s pleasure in our wool?

By this Allegory our enemies are described, who either by open force or secret
conspiracy are prepared and fully bent to captivate, infringe and destroy the
people with their liberties, and to possess their dwelling places and enjoy
their wealth.

Rub not the scar, lest you open again the wound that is healed, and so cause
it to bleed afresh.

Though this be sense and a real truth in the letter, yet it has an
Allegorical signification, ( i. e.) Renew not by rehearsal that sorrow which
time has buried in the grave of oblivion, or made forgot.

Philoclea was so environed with sweet rivers of virtue, that she could neither
be battered nor undermined.

Where Philoclea is expressed by the similitude of a Castle; her natural
defense, by the natural fortification of rivers about a Castle; and the
Metaphor continues in the attempting her by force or craft, expressed by
battering or undermining.

But when she had once his Ensign in her mind: then followed whole squadrons
of longings, that so it might be with a main battle of mislikings and repinings
aginst their creation.

Where you have Ensigns, squadrons, main-battles, Metaphors still derived from
the same thing, to wit, war.

The world's a Theater of theft; great rivers rob the smaller brooks, and they
the Ocean.

Sometimes an Allegory is mixed with some words retaining their proper and
genuine signification, whereof this may be an Example:

Why covetest thou the fruit, and considerest not the height of the tree
whereon it grows? thou do not forethink of the difficulty in climbing, nor
danger in reaching, whereby it comes to pass, that while thou endeavourest to
climb to the top, thou fallest with the bough which thou embracest.

This Allegory describes, though somewhat obscurely, yet very aptly the danger,
vanity, and common reward of ambition: And the words which retain their proper
signification are these, covetest, considerest, and forethink; which words do
make it a mixed Allegory.

Scriptural Examples of an Allegory.
A Scriptural Allegory is such as contains an abstruse and hidden sentence, and
other then the native signification of the words will bear; and it is, when
under a dark and hidden saying, the literal sense contains another, to wit, a
spiritual or mystical meaning.

It is the representation of some mystical or spiritual thing by another,
mentioned in Scripture, and is, when by the things done under the old Law, the
mysteries of the New Testament are signified: from whence an Allegorical sense
of the Scripture has its ^i^e.

A Scriptural Allegory is twofold, viz. 1. Natural. 2. Inferred.


A natural Allegory is such as is expressly delivered in the Scriptures
themselves; and this properly is the mystical sense of the Scripture: as,

Gal. 4.25. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answeteth to Jerusalem
which now is, etc.

The Apostles meaning here is, that in a mystical sense, Agar has some
proportion unto Jerusalem, that is unto the Jews, whose Metropolis or chief
City Jerusalem was: for, as Agar the bondwoman obtained a place in Abraham's
house, and was at length cast forth thence; so the Jews were in the Apostles
time under the servitude of the Law, and for that they would be justified by
the works of the Law, were ejected the house of God.

Exodus 34.29. The face of Moses shined, etc.

This contains an Allegorical sense which the Apostle explains in 2 Cor. 3.7.,
13, 14. But if the ministration of death, etc. was glorious, so that the
Israelites could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance, The Glory of the odl Testament.
etc. how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? verse.
14. but their minds were blinded: for until this day remains the same vail.
etc. in the reading of the old Testament: which vail is done away in Christ.

The like Allegory you may find if you compare Exodus 12.15, 17. with 1 Cor.
5.7, 8.

2. An Allegory inferred, is such as the Scripture it self shows not, nor
makes manifest, but is brought in by interpreters.

Allegories of this kind are like unto pictures; but their literal expositions
like to stone-wals; the house has its strength from the stone-wals, the
pictures afford not the least strength either to the house or walls.

This Allegory is either offered, or enforced and wrested:

1. That inferred Allegory from Scripture which is offered, has a probable
ground and foundation in the literal sense, and a proportionable agreeableness
of things, and is likewise agreeable to the Analogy of faith: as,

Genesis 6.14. The description there of the Arc of Noah does allegorically
represent Gods spiritual house or Church, which in 1 Pet. 2.5. is said to be
built up of living stones; and also denotes the Lords miraculous preservation
of that Church of his, so that neither the waves, or strange and pernicious
doctrines, or tentations or persecutions can break in upon or drown it.

Genesis 8.11. The Olive leaf represents the Gospel; for in Luke 10.34 it is
evident that oil signifies mercy and peace.

Luke 15. The prodigal, when absent from his f^thers house, sound nothing but
misery and perplexity; which does Allegorically represent unto us, That rest is
to be found in the Creator only, and not in the creature.

So in the whole book of Canticles, the sweet conference between Christ and his
Church, is set down in the words and expressions proper to husband and wife.

Thus old age is most elegantly deciphered in Eccles. 12.5, 6.

2. An Allegory enforced and wrested, is such as is lest destitute of a
probable ground or foundation in the literal sense; either it differs too much
from the thing, from which it is taken, or it is agreeable to another and
thwart object; or otherwise it is too far remote from the Analogy of the
Scriptures: as, such are,

Mat. 13, 8. And other seeds fell into good ground and brought forth fruit,
some an hundred fold, etc. See Psalm. 110.1. Mat. 15.11.

Other Allegories.
Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto a
David a righteous branch, etc.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel dwell safely, so in Zech. 3.10.

Which Allegorically represents the glorious peace and tranquillity of all
Saints, when Christ shall have set up his Kingdom, and reign from the River to
the end of the land.

See Hos. 13, 14, 15. Job. 29.6. Prove. 23.29.

ANtonomasia (...), nominis unius pro alio positio, A putting of one name for
another, or the exchanging or a name; derived from (...), pro, for, and (...),
[ onomazo] nomino, to name:

Antonomasia is a form of speech, whereby the orator or speaker, for a proper
name puts another, and some name of dignity, office, profession, science, or
trade.

It is a kind of a Metonymie and Synecdoche Generis, and is when another name,
a nickname or common name is put instead of the proper name, or when a word
being put without a name, supplies the place of the name.

Antonomasia imponit cognomen, ut; a Irus; Impius; Farnaby.
b Aeacides; c Poenus; d Cytherea; e Poeta.

a Irus being a poor Messenger of Penelopes woers, is here put for any poor man.

Impius, wicked, the wicked fellow is put for any man notoriously wicked.

b Achilles, the Nephew of Aeacus.

c Carthaginian for Hannibal who was the eminent man of Carthage.

d Any remarkable person of Cythera, but here it signifies Venus, who was
carried to Cythera in a cockle-shell, and was the goddess of that place.

e Poeta the Poet; for Virgil or Homer.

Arma virumque cano; -- ubi intelligitur Aeneas. English Examples.
This Rhetorical Exornation is used five ways, viz.

1. Hereby the Orator speaking to high dignities, boweth (as it were) the knee
of his speech, and lifts up the eye of his phrase to the bright beams of
earthly glory, thereby declaring his reverence and their dignity: thus when he
speaks to a King or a Prince, he says your Majesty, your Highness: to a
Nobleman your Lordship, your Honor.

2. In stead of name or title, he uses a decent and due Epithet, thus,
Honorable Judge, Honored Sir.

3. The Author by the name of his profession or science, as when we say, the
Philosopher for Aristotle: The Roman Orator for Cicero: The Psalmograph for
David.

4. A man by the name of his Country: as, the Persian the Germane, the Britain.

5. When we give to one man the name of another, for the affinities sake of
their manners or conditions. In praise thus, As when we call a grave man a
Cato, a just dealer an A^istides, a wise man a Solomon. In dispraise, To call
an envious detractor a Zoilus, a captious reprehender a Momus, a tyrant a Nero,
a voluptuous liver an Epicure.

Scriptural Examples of Antonomasia.
Prove. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, etc.

Joel 2.11. He is strong that executes his word.

Genesis 21.33 The everlasting God, where the common attributes, strong and
everlasting are put for Jehovah, the more proper name of God.

So in Mat. 21.3. Joh. 11, 3, 12. Christ is called Lo^d: and in Joh. 11.28.
Master: and in Mat 8.20. and 9.6. The son of man: in Genesis 48.16: The Angel: in
Exodus 3.2 The Angel of the Lord: and in Isai. 63.9. the Angel of the Lords
presence: and Euphrates is in Genesis 31.21. called the River: and Christ in Dan.
11.22. is called the Prince often he Covenant. and in Genesis 3.15. the seed of the
woman: and in Heb. 12.24. the Mediator of the New Covenant.

Thus Christ also calls his Church, his Sister, his Love, and his Dove; and the
Church in like manner, him her Beloved.

LItotes, (...), tenuitas, tenuity, smalness or finenesse, derived from (...),
[ litos] tenuis, small or fine.

It is a kind of Synecdoche.

A Trope when a word is put down with a sign of negation, Negatio contrarii
auget vim affirmationis.
and yet as much is signified as if we spoke affirmatively, if not more: and by
others it is called a Figure.

When less is said then signified, and whereby the orator or speaker for
modesties sake seems to extenuate that which he expresses.

Non equidem laudo, est Litotes; nec munera Farn^by.
sperno. Farn^by.
Non sperno. (i. e.) diligo.

Rhodi Romany haud infesti, (i. e.) amicissimi.

Et Gens illa quidem sumptis non tarda pharetris, (i. e.) velocissima.

Me non spernitis, (i. e.) di igitis.

English Examples.
It is no small account that he makes of his own wit, or he sets not a
little by himself.

Here by the negations of small and little, or much, are both signified and
properly amplified.

Also by denying the Superlative it takes the Positive degree thus:

He is not the wisest man in the world, or he is none of the wisest, ( i e.) he
is not wise at all.

This and such like forms of speaking are used for modesties sake; for it were
not so seemly to say, that he lacks wit, or that he is a fool.

So, if a man had some good occasion or just cause to commend himself, he
cannot by any means do it in more modest manner then by this form of speech, as
if he should say:

I was not the last in the field to engage the enemies of my Country.

Here, if he should have said, I was first, or one of the foremost in the
field, although he had spoken never so truly, it would have savoured of
arrogance and boasting.

Scriptural Examples of Litotes.
Psalm. 51.17. A broken heart God will not despise, ( i. e.) he will highly
prize it.

1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Despise not prophesying, ( i. e) see that you highly prize it.
The like in Romans 2.4.

Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed, etc. (i. e.) hurt them not, take heed
you be not found among the persecutors of my anointed ones.

Job. 10.3. Despise not the work of thine hands, ( i. e.) do thou graciously
take notice of the work, etc.

Psalm. 9.12. He will not forget the cry of the humble, ( i. e.) he will surely
remember their cry, etc.

Thus when the Scripture would strongly affirm, it does it oftentimes by
denying the contrary: as,

Isai. 38.1. Thou shall die, and not live, ( i.e.) thou shall certainly die.

The like in Ezekiel. 18.21. Deuteronomy. 28, 33. Joh. 1.20. Isa. 39.4. Jer. 42.4. 1 John
1.5.

Job. 31.17. Job says that he has not eaten his meat alone, and that he has
not seen any man perish for want of clothing, or any poor for lack of covering.

Here if Job had said, that he had feasted many, that he had clothed every
poor body that should otherwise have perished, he had not spoken so modestly,
albeit he had said as truly.

It is very familiar with the Hebrews, by affirming and denying to express
the same thing for stronger confirmation of 10: as,

Deuteronomy. 33 6. Let Reuben live and nor die. The like in 1 Samuel 1.11. Prove. 36.11.

ONomatopoeia, (...), Nominis seu nominum fictio, the feigning of a name or
names; derived from (...), [ onomatopoieo] nomen seu nomina fingo, fingo
vocabula, a sono ea deducens; to feign a name from the sound.

Nominis fictio, is a form of speech, whereby the orator or speaker makes and
feigns a name to some thing, imitating the sound or voice of that which it
signifies, or else whereby he affects a word derived from the name of a
person, or from the original of the thing which it expresses: or,

It is a kind of Metonymie, and it is properly said of words so feigned, that
they resemble or represent the sound of the thing signified.

A sonitu voces Onomatopoeia fingit; Farnaby.


1 Bambalio, 2 Clangor, 3 Stridor, 4 Taratantara, 5 Murmur.

1. A stammerer. 2. The sound of a Trumpet. 3. A crashing noise, or the craking
of a door. 4. The sound of the Trumpet. 5. The noise of water running, a
running or buzzing noise.

Teucria, a Teucro. Dardania a Dardano.

English Examples of Onomatopeia.
This form of feigning and framing names is used 6. ways, viz.

1. By imitation of sound, as to say, a hurliburly signifying a tumult or
uproar: likewise, rushing, lumbering, rattling, blustering, etc.

2. By imitation of voices, as, the roaring of Lions, the bellowing of bulls,
the bleating of sheep, the grunting of swine, the croaking of frogs, etc.

3. By the derivation from the original; the city Troy was so called by
derivation from King Tros, and before that, it was called Teucria from Teucrus,
and first of all Dardania from Dardanus; so Ninivie of Ninus.

4. By composition, as when we put two words together and make of them but one,
as Orator-like, Sholar-like: thus also we call a churl, thick-skin; a niggard,
pinch penny; a flatterer, pick-thank.

5. By reviving antiquity; touching this I refer the reader to Chaucer, and to
the shepherds Calendar.

6. When we signify the imitation of another man's property in speaking or
w^iting; this form of speaking is more usual in the Greek tongue, and sometimes
used in the Latin: as,

Patrissare, Matrissare, Platonissare, (i. e.) to imitate his father, to
imitate his mother, to imitate Plato, which form our English tongue can scarce
imitate, except we say he does satherize, Platonize, temporize, which is not
much in use; yet we more usually follow this form, thus; I can not Court it, I
can not Italian it, ( i. e.) I can not pe^form the duty or manners of a
Courtier, I cannot imitate the fashion of an Italian.

ANtiphrasis, (...), Sermo per contrarium intelligendus, a word or speech to be
understood by the contrary, or contrarily; derived from (...), Antiphrazo, per
contrarium loquor, to speak by contraries.

Antiphrasis is a form of speech which by a word expressed does signify the
contrary.

It is a kind of an Irony, and is,

When one and the same word has a contrary signification, or a meaning
contrary to the original sense.

Antiphrasis voces tibi per contraria signat; Farnaby.


a Lucus; b Sacra fames; c Euxinus; d Symphora; e Parcae.

a Lucus, signifies a lightsome place or lightning, according to the original
of the word, but here it signifies a grove or thick wood, for that it takes in
no light at all.

b Sacra fames, literally signifies holy famine or hunge^; bue here, a covetous
desire.

c Euxinus, originally Hospitable, but here it signifies a part of the sea near
Thrace, which is nothing less.

d Symphora, congestion or heaping up; but it is sometimes taken for
prosperity, and sometimes for adversity.

e Parcae, originally signifies sparing or favoring, but here by Autiphrasis
it signifies the three feigned Goddesses of destiny: viz.

Clotho, which puts the wool on the Distaffe.

Laehesis, which draws the thread of our life.

Atropos, which cuts it off and favors none.

English Examples of Antiphrasis.
It is when the speaker says, wisely or wittily, meaning the contrary.

You are always my friend; meaning mine enemy.

You are a man of great judgment, signifying him to be unapt and unable to
judge.

Scriptural Examples.
The word (to bless) used in Genesis 12.3.24, 35. 2 Samuel 2.10. Psalm. 34.2. does
also by an Antiphrasis signify (to curse) as appears by 1 King. 21.10. where
the same word that is used in the precedent Scriptures to bless, is used in a
contrary signification; as, Thou did blaspheme or curse God and the King; as
also in Job. 1.5. It may be that my sons have sinned and cursed God in their
hearts; and likewise concerning what Jobs wife said unto him in Job. 2.9. Curse
God and dye. See another in Isa. 64.11. etc. Thus in Rev. 5.5. etc. a Lion
signifies Christ, and in 1 Pet. 5.8. the Devil.

CHarientismus, (...), urbanitas, pleasantness, good grace in speaking;
derived from (...), [ charientizomai] jocor, to jest:

Charientismus is a Trope, or form of speech which mitigates hard matters with
pleasant words.

It is a kind of an Irony, and is,

When for rough and unpleasing words, sweet and smooth words are returned:
Farnaby.
Dat Charientismus pro duris mollia verba.
At bona verba precor. Ne saevi magna sacerdos.


English Examples.
A certain man being apprehended, and brought before Alexander the Great, King
of Macedonia, for railing against him, and being demanded by Alexander why he
and his company had so done, he made this answer, Had not the wine failed, we
had spoken much worse, whereby he signified that those words proceeded rather
from wine then malice; by which free and pleasant confession, he assuaged
Alexanders great displeasure, and obtained remission.

Prove. 15.1. Solomon commends that answer which turns away displeasure and
pacifies Wrath.

AStismus, (...), Vrbanitas sine iracundia, a kind of civil jest without
prejudice or anger; derived from (...), [ asteios] urbanus festivus, civil or
pleasant.

It is a kind of an Irony consisting of a pleasant and harmless jest: it is
taken for any mirth or pleasant speech void of rustical simpli^ity and
rudeness.

Astismus jocus urbanus, seu scomma facetum est: Farn^by.

Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua carmina Maevi:
Atque idem jungat vulpes, and mulgeat hircos.
English Examples.
The merry and pleasant sayings incident hereunto are called Facetia (i.e.) the
pleasures and delights of speech which are taken from diverse places.

1. From Equivocation, as when a word having two significations, is expressed in
the one, and understood in the other, either contrary or at least much
differing, which as it is witty, so very pleasant.

2. The occasion of mirth may be taken from a fallacy in sophistry, that is,
when a saying is captiously taken and turned to another sense, contrrary or
much different from the speakers meaning r as,

To one demanding of Diogenes what he would take for a knock upon his pate, he
made this answer, that he would take an helmet.

Now he that made the demand, meant what hire, and not what defense.

To one that said, he knew not if he should be ejected his house, where to hide
his head: another made him answer, that he might hide it in his cap.

SArcasmus, (...), irrisio quaedam amarulenta, a biting scoff or taunt; derived
from (...), Sarkazo, carnes detraho, to draw away the flesh. Quod in (...)
dentes nudan^ur carne.


A Sarcasme is a bitter kind of derision, most frequently used of an enemy; it
is near an Irony, but somewhat more bitter.

Insultans hosti illudit Sarcasmus amare:
En agros metire jacens, Et nuncius ibis
Farn^by.
Pelidae reserens. Satia te sanguine, Cyre.
Vendidit and coelum Romanus and astra sacerdos:
Ad Stygias igitur cogitur ire domus.
English Examples.
When M. Appius in his Proeme declared that he was ea^nestly entreated of a
friend to use his diligence, eloquence and fidelity in the cause of his Client:
after all the plea ended, Cicero coming to Appius, said thus unto him, Are you
so hard a man (says he) that of so many things which your friend requested,
you will perform none?

The Pope in this life sells heaven; hell therefore he reserveth to himself in
the life to come.

Scriptural Examples of a Sarcasme.
Psalm. 137.3. Sing us one of the Songs of Sion: This was uttered in scornful
and insulting manner over the poor Israelites being captives in Babylon.

Genesis 37.19. Behold, the dreamer comes.

Thus Michael spits out bitter reproaches against David, in 2 Samuel 6.20. How
glorious was the King of Israel to day, etc. ( i. e.) how contemptible and
inglorious! etc.

Thus Shimei reviled him in 2 Samuel 16.7.

Thus in Exodus 14.11. the children of Israel taunt at Moses, Because there were
no grave^ in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the wilde^nesse?

Mark. 15.29, 30, 31. And they that passed by, rayled on him, wagging their
heads, and saying,

Ah, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy
self and come down from the cross.

Likewise also the chief Priests, mocking said among themselves with the
Scribes,

He save others, himself he cannot save.

The like Sa^c^sme you shall find in Nahum, 3.1, 14. and Mat. 27.29, 42.

PAroemia, (...), [paroimia] proverbium, adagium, vulgar dictum: A Proverbial
speech or Proverb, applied to things and times; derived from (...) [
paroimiazomai] proverbialiter loquor, to speak Proverbially or in Proverbs.

This form of speech is a kind of an Allegory, or the continuation of a Trope
in a speech in specie, wherein a respect is had to the common use, and so it is
called a Proverb: or as others define it,

It is a comparative speech or similitude which is wont to be in Proverbs, or
(as it were) a sentence bearing rule, as having the chief pl^ce in a sentence,
and by its gravity rendering the same more illustrious, clear and excellent.

a Aethiopem lateremve lavare: Paeroemia dicta est. Farnaby.

a Aethiopem ant laterem lavare (i.e.) frustrae laborare.
Contra stimulum calcas; thou kickst against the pricks; i.e. repugnando tibi
ipsi, non adversario noces, ut facit qui contra stimulum calcat.

Lupum auribus teneo: Note that he that will understand proverbs, must mark
their opposition.
I hold a wolf by the ears, ( i. e.) dubious sum utrum inceptum peragam, an eo
desistam, veluti qui lupum auribus tenet.

English Examples of Paroemia.
He that makes his fire with hay, has much smoke and little heat:

Whereby is intimated, That many words and little matter render men weary, but
never the wiser.

All are not thieves that dogs bark at:

Declaring that ill tongues do as well slander good men, as speak truth of the
evil.

The sweetest Rose has his Thorn:

Whereby is signified that the best man is not without his fault.

Many drops pierce the Marble stone:

Declaring the excellency of constancy and perseverance in a good matter.

Scriptural Examples.
Exodus 11.7. But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his
tongue, against man or beast, etc. Which proverb denotes their great peace and
tranquillity.

Prove. 14.4. Where no Oxen are, the crib is clean; but much increase is by the
strength of the Ox.

Ezekiel. 16.44. Behold every one that uses Proverbs, shall use this Proverb
against thee, saying, As is the Mother, so is her daughter, etc.

A Proverb is a Comparative speech; as in Genesis 10.9. He was a mighty Hunter
before the Lord; wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod the mighty Hunter before
the Lord, etc.

Jer. 31.29. They shall say, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge.

2 Pet. 2.22. The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Esth. 1.22. Every man should bear rule in his own house.

See Luke 4.23, etc. P^ov. 19.15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep; Prove.
21.17.
and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

AENigma, (...) [ainigma] oration verborum involucris tecta: A riddle or dark
saying, derived from (...), [ ainitto] obscure loquor, aut rem involucris tego,
to speak obscurely, or to hide a thing in dark sayings: But it is rather
derived from (...), [ ainos] which ( inter alia) denotes a saying worthy of
praise and admiration.

Aenigma is a kind of an Allegory, differing only in obscurity, and may not
unfitly be compared to a deep mine, the obtaining of the metal whereof
requires deep digging; or to a dark night, whose stars are hid with thick
clouds.

If there be a singular obscurity in a Trope continued, it is called an
Ae^igma, for that it renders a question obscure, or a speech knotty, and as it
were wrapped in: or,

It is a sentence or form of speech, whereof for the darkness, the sense may
hardly be gathered.

Aenigma obscuris latitur sentencia verbis.
Filiolas Cadmi profert Nilotis arundo, Farnaby.

Quas serit e Cnidio distillans sepia nodo.
In English thus.

Cadmus his daughters framed Nilotis quill,
Whilst Sepia does from Cnidian knot distill. (i. e.) he writes love letters in
Greek.
Explained thus:

Cadmus being the first finder out of diverse of the Greek Letters, they are by
a Metonymie of the Efficient called his Daughters: And Cadmus his daughters
here by a Catachrestical Metaphor signify the Greek Letters.

Nilotis Quill framed Greek letters; for Nilotis Pen, etc. by a Metonymie of
the Matter.

Nilus is the name of a River in Egypt; by the side whereof Reeds grow; which
are here called Nilotis Quill by a Catachrestical Metaphor: also Sepia a fish,
whose blood is as black as ink, also black liquor, etc. here put for ink by
Synecdoche Speceii or a Metaphor.

Cnidus a City where Venus the Goddess of Love was worshipped; here put for
Venus by Antonomasia, or Synecdoche Generis, and Venus for Love, by a Metonymie
of the Efficient. Mitto tibi
Lunam,
Solemn simul and ^.
canis iram,
Quae reddas a te, dulcis amice, precor.
id est, ex Cord te saluto.

Auri b Sacra c fames mortalia d pector a perdit.

a Aurum pro aureis nummis, per Metonymiam Materiae.

b Sacrum pro exsecrando, per Ironiam seu Antiphrasin.

c Fames pro desiderio, per Metaphoram.

d Pectus pro homine, per Synecdochen partis.

Quid hoc esse censes?
Non ego de toto mihi corpore vendico vires,
At Capitis pugna nulli certare recuso;
Grande mihi Caput est, totum quoque pondus in ipso.
Malleus est Fabrilis.
Dic quibus in terris and eris mihi magnus Apollo,
Tres pateat Coeli spacium non amplius ulnas.
Quid hoc esse existimas?
Sum nondum dira confectus morte, sepultus
Haud urna, haud saxum, non humus ulla tegit:
Et loquor, and supio, and vitalibus abdicor auris,
Meque capit vivus m^que vehit tumulus.
Hic modus nihil nobis facesset negotii amplius
si Jonae historiam diligenter excusserimus, and cum
hoc Aenigmate contulerimus: Is enim ex ventre
Orcae (piscis) seu, ut ipse existimavit, ex medio
Orci hoc sibi epitaphium vere ponere potuisset.
English Examples of Aenigma.
I consume my mother that bare me, I eat up my nurse that fed me, then I die,
leaving them all blind that saw me.

This is meant of the flame of a Candle, which when it has consumed both wax
and wicke, goes out, leaving them in the dark that saw by it.

Ten thousand children beautiful of this my body bred,
Both sons and daughters finely decked; I live, and they are dead.
My sons were put to extreme death by such as loved them well,
My daughters died in extreme age, but where I cannot tell.
By the Mother, understand a Tree, by the sons and daughters understand the
fruit, and leaves; by the sons being put to death by such as loved them well,
understand those that gathered and eat the fruit; by the daughters death in
age, understand the leaves falling off by the returning of the sap to the Root
in Autumn, etc.

Anatomy of wonders great I speak, and yet am dead;
Men suck sweet juice from these black veins which Mother Wisdom bread.
By Anatomy of wonders, etc. understand a book; by the sweet juice,
instruction; and by the black veins, the letters and lines in the book.

An Arithmetical Aenigma.
Suppose 30 Malefactors, viz. 15 English men, and 15 Turks are adjudged to be
executed for Piracie, and that the Sheriff has (after this sentence) power
given him to save one half of these Malefactors, but must execute every ninth
man, I demand how he may place them in such order and rank, as that he may
execute all the Turks, and (...) ^erve the English men?

Let him place them by this verse following; and for that he would save the
English, let him begin with them; for that o is the first vowel mentioned here,
let him place or rank four of the English men, it being the fourth vowel, etc.

Let o signify the English man, and 1 the Turk.

Populeam Virgam matter Regina tenebat. 45.2.1. 3. 1. 1.2. 2.3.1. 2 2.1.

But if the Sheriff had been to have executed every tenth man:

He should place them by this verse, Rex Paphi cum Gente bona dat signa Serena.
2. 1. 3. 5. 2.2.4.1. 1. 3. 1. 2.2.1.

But if the Sheriff were to execute every 2.3. or any number of the men between
two and sixteen, I shall (since Art is silent herein) insert a Mechanical way
for the ready performing the same: and shall give one President; which followed
(mutatis mutandis) will lead to the accomplishment of your desire in any the
rest of these questions: viz. Suppose the Sheriff had been to have executed
every fifth man: first represent the 30 Malefactors by 30 ciphers, or what
characters you please, then cancel with your pen every fifth of them, till you
have cancelled half of them, then have you the direct order of placing the men
before your eye; for the ciphers or characters c^ncelled represent the Turks to
be executed, and the other uncancelled those that are to escape.

Scriptural Examples of Aenigma.
Genesis 40. and 41. chap. The dreams and visions there of Pharaohs chief Butler
and chief Baker, as likewise Pharaohs own dreams were Aenigmatical; The
significations whereof were expounded by the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation
in Joseph, as appears by Genesis 40.12, 13.18, 19. Genesis 41.26, 27. etc.

Dan. 4.10, 11. etc. We have Nebuchadnizzars vision, which is also Aenigmatical.

Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed: I saw, and behold a Tree in the
midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great, the tree grew and was
strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to
the ends of the earth; the leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof
much, and it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and
the sowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, etc. which Daniel by the
Spirit of the Lord opens in the same chapter.

In Judge. 14.14. we have Sampsons Riddle, Out of the eater came forth meat, and
out of the strong, sweetness.

Isa. 11.1, 2. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his roots: and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the Spirit of wisdom, and might, etc.

See Ezekiel, 17.2. and 26. chap. of the Proverbs, and diverse other chapters in
that Book, you shall find diverse riddles and dark sayings, and the same opened
and explained, in the demonstration of the same Spirit of wisdom they were
proposed.

Figures of a word: see page 5. and 6.

EPizeuxis, (...), Adjunctio, a joining together of the same word or sound:
derived from (...), [ epizeugnumi] conjungo, to join together.

Epizeuxis is a figure of a word, whereby a word, is geminated and repeated by
way of Emphasis, and usually without interposition of any other word: or it is
the repetition of the same word or sound likewise when one or more words
intervene by Parenthesis.

This figure serves to the Emphatical setting forth of the vehemence of the
affections and passions of the mind.

Farnaby.
Ejusdem sit Epizexuis repe^itio vocis:
Ah Corydon, Corydon; me, me; bella, horrida bella.
Talis amor Daphnim (qualis cum fessa juvencam
Per nemora atq, altos quaerendo bucula lucos, etc.)
Talis amor teneat, nec sit mihi cura mederi.
This figure is twofold: viz.

1. In part of a word, which is 1. in the beginning of a Sentence. 2. in the
end. of a Sentence.


1. In part of a word in the beginning of a Sentence: as, O utinam possem
populos reparare paternis
Artibus, atque animos formatae iufundere terrae!


2. In a part of a word in the end of a sentence: as,

Titus Annius ad illam pestem comprimendam, extinguendam, fund itus delendam
natus esse videtur.

2. In a whole word, as, Ipsa sonant arbusta, Deus, Deus ille, Menalca.
Si, nisi quae facio poterit te digna videri,
Nulla futura tua est, nulla futura tua est.
Excitate, excitate cum, fi potestis, ab inferis.


English Examples of Epizeuxis.
Thus Cicero to Anthony.

Thou, thou, Anthony gave cause of civil war to Caesar, willing to turn all
upside down. Thus Virgil,

Ah Corydon, Corydon, what madness has thee moved?

O let not, let not from you be poured upon me destruction.

It is not (believe me) it is not wisdom to hazard our salvation upon so weak
a ground as man's opinion.

Terrors, terrors, upon terrors laid hold on me.

Scriptural Examples.
Isa. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength. Oh arm of the Lord, etc.

Matthew. 23.37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc.
here the wo^d is geminated to express the ardency of the speakers affections.

Isa. 52.1. Awake, awake, put on thy strength O Zion, etc. See Isa. 51.17, 12,
38, 19, 40, 1. Judge. 5.12.

Ezekiel. 21.9.27. A sword, a sword, is sharpened, etc.

I will overturn, overtu^n, overturn it, etc. ( i.e.) I will certainly overturn
it.

Thus David bewaileth the death of his son Absalom, in 2 Samuel 18.33. O my son
Absalom: my son, my son Absalom; would God I had dyed thee, O Absalom my son,
my son.

This you may find sometimes by way of Amplification, as Psalm. 145.18. The Lord
is nigh to all that call upon him, even to all that call upon him in truth, so
Psalm. 68.12. and Joel 3.14.

And sometimes also by way of Transition; as, Hos. 2.21. I will hear, says the
Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn, etc.

ANadiplosis, (...), Reduplicatio, Reduplication, or redoubling, derived from
(...), re, again, et (...), (diploo) duplico to double.

A figure whereby the last word or sound of the first clause is repeated in the
beginning of the next.

Est Anadiplosis quoties ex fine prioris Farnaby.

Membri, Principium fit dictio prima sequentis.
Pierides, vos haec facietis maxima Gallo:
Gallo, cujus amor tantum mihi crescit in horas.
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsi.
English Examples.
With death, death must be recompensed.

On mischief, mischief must be heapt.

Let us at any rate buy the truth; Truth will make us no losers.

Prize wisdom, wisdom is a jewel too precious to be slighted.

Scriptural Examples of Anadiplosis.
Isa. 30.9. This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not
hear the law of the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 8.7. For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, etc.

Romans 14.8. If we live, we live unto the Lord; if we die, we die unto the Lord,
etc.

P^al. 48.8. As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God, God will
establish it, etc.

See Psalm. 122.2, 3. Our feet shall I stand within thy gates oh Jerusalem:
Jerusalem is builded, as a City; see the 5. verse of the same Psalm. Psalm.
145.18. Jer. 2.13.12.11. Luke 7.31, 32. Psalm. 9.8. etc.

CLimax, (...), Gradatio; Gradation, or a climbing by steps; derived from
(...), [ clino] reclino, acclino, to bend toward or incline to, for that its
ascending is rising upwards; and its descending, declining or turning away.

Gradation is a kind of Anadiplosis, by degrees making the last word a step to
a further meaning:

It is a figure when a gradual progress is used in the site or placing of the
same word; or

When the succeeding clauses of a sentece transcend each other by diverse
degrees, or steps of the same sound.

Farnaby.
Continua serie est repetita Gradatio Climax:
Quod libet, id licet his; et quod licet, id satis andent:
Quodque audent faciunt; faciunt quodcunque molestum est.
Mars videt hanc, visamque cupit potiturque cupita.
Nec vero se populo solum, sed Senatui commisit: nec Senatui modo, sed etiam
publicis praesidiis et armis: nec his tantum, sed ejus potestati, cui Senatus
totam Rempub. commisit.

Pulchrum est been dicere, pulchrius been sentire, pulch^rrimum been facere.

English Examples of Gradation.
His Arm no oftener gave blows, then the blows gave wounds, then the wounds gave
death.

Your words are full of cunning, your cunning of promises, your promises of
wind.

A young man of great beauty, beautified with great honor, honored with great
valor.

You could not enjoy your goods without Government, no Government without a
Magistrate, no Magistrate without obedience, and no obedience, where every one
upon his private passion interprets the rulers actions.

Out of idleness comes lust; out of lust, impudence; out of impudence, a
contempt of whatsoever is good.

Scriptural Examples.
Matthew. 10.40. He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me;

Romans 5, 3, 4, 5. Knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, etc.

2 Pet. 1.5, 7. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly-kindnesse, and to brotherly-kindnesse love.

1 Cor. 11.3. The head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the
man, and the head of Christ is God, etc.

Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them also he called; and whom he called,
them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

See Romans 10, 14, 15.

1 Cor. 3.23, 22. All are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

ANaphora (...), Relatio, Relation, or a bringing of the same again, derived
from (...), [ anaphero] refero, to bring again or rehearse.

It is the repetition of a word of importance and effectual signification; or,

It is a figure when several clauses of a sentence are begun with the same word
or sound.

Farnaby.
Diversis membris frontem dat Anaphora eandem.
Ter conatus ibi collo dare brachia circum;
Ter frustra c^mprehensa manus effugit imago.
Tu pugnare potes, mici sacri est consilii vis:
Tu vires sine mente geris, mihi cura futuri est.
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora movebat.
English Examples.
You whom virtue has made the Princess of felicity, be not the Minister of
ruin; you whom my choice has made the Load-star of all my sublunary comfort,
be not the rock of my shipwreck.

An Example of Cicero in the praise of Pompey.
A witness is Italy, which Lucius Sylla being Victor confessed, was by this
man's counsel delivered; A wi^nesse is Africa, which being oppressed with great
Armies of enemies, flowed with the blood of slain men: A witness is France,
through which a way was made with great slaughter of Frenchmen for our Armies
into Spain: A witness is Spain: which has very often seen, that by this man
many enemies have been overcome and vanquished.

Scriptural Examples of Anaphora.
Psalm. 29.4, 5. The voice of the Lord is powerful, The Voice of the Lord is
full of Majesty; The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, etc.

Jer. 8.2. Whom they loved, whom they served, whom they ran after, whom they
sought, whom they worshipped, etc.

1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of
this world, etc.

Psalm. 118, 8, 9. Better it is to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in
man; better it is to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes, etc.

Jer. 50.35, 36, 37. A sword is upon the Caldeans, etc. a sword is upon the
Liars, etc. a sword is upon her mighty men, etc.

See Romans 8.38. Psalm. 27.1.118.2, 4.124.1, 2.148, 1.2, 3.150. 1. Ezekiel. 27.12,
15. Romans 1.22, 23. Amos 1.3.6.9.

EPISTROPHE, (...), Conversio. Conversion, or a turning to the same sound, or a
changing of course, derived from (...), [ epi] prope, near to, and (...), [
strepho] verto, to turn or change

It is a repetition of the same word or sound in the ends of diverse members of
a sentence.

See Homo^teleuton.
A figure when diverse sentences end alike, or when diverse clauses end with the
same word or words.

Farnaby.
Complures clausus concludit Epistrophe eodem
Dicto: Creed mihi, si te quoq pontus haberet:
Te sequerer cenjux, et me quoq: pontus haberet.
Surgamus, solet esse gravis cantantibus umbra:
Juniperi gravis umbra: nocent and frugibus umbrae.
English Examples.
Ambition seeks to be next to the best; after that, to be equal with the best:
then, to be chief and above the best.

Where the richness did invite the eyes, the fashion did entertain the eyes,
and the device did teach the eyes.

We are born to sorrow, pass our time in sorrow, end our days in sorrow.

Either arm their lives, or take away their lives.

Since the time that concord was taken from the city, liberty was taken away,
fidelity was taken away, friendship was taken away.

Scriptural Examples of Epistrophe.
1 Cor. 13.11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I thought as a child.

Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. Oh Israel, trust in the Lord, he is their help and their
shield: O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord, he is their help and their shield:
Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their help and their shield.

Matthew. 7.22. Have we not prophesied in thy name; have we not cast out Devils
in thy name, and done miracles in thy name?

2 Cor. 11.22. Are they Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? so am I: are
they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

See Joel 2.26, 27. Ezekiel. 33.25, 26, 27. Ezekiel. 36.23, 24, ^5, etc. Amos 4.6, 8.
etc. Hag. 2, 8, 9. Lam. 3.41, etc.

SYMPLOCE, (...), Complexio, Complicatio, an agreement of words in a sentence,
or Complication or folding together, derived from (...), [ symplico] Complico,
Connecto, to wrap or couple together.

Symploce is the joining together of Anaphora and Epistrophe.

A figure when several sentences or clauses of sentences have the same
beginning, and the same ending; or when all our beginnings and all our endings
are like.

Symploce eas jungit complexa utramque figuram. Farnaby.

Quam been, Caune, tuo poteram nurus esse parenti?
Quam been, Caune, meo poteras gener esse parenti?
English Examples.
An Example of Cicero.

Him would you pardon and acquit by your sentence, whom the Senate has
condemned, whom the people of Rome have condemned, whom all men have condemned.

O cruel death, why have thou taken away my choice, my dear choice, my dearest
and most beloved choice, and hid her in the dark, where I cannot find her?

Can the Host of Heaven help me? can Angels help me? can these inefriour
creatures help me?

Scriptural Examples of Symploce.
Psalm. 47.6. Sing praises to our God, sing praises: Sing praises to our King,
sing praises.

Psalm. 118.2, 3, 4. Let Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever; let
the house of Aa^on now say, that his mercy endures for ever, etc.

Romans 14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; whether we die, we die unto
the Lord; whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

See Psalm. 136.1, 2, 3. Jer. 9.23. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.6. 1 Cor. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 9.6,
etc.

EPANALEPSIS, (...), Resumptio, a taking back: derived from (...) [ epi] after
(...), [ ana] again; and (...), [ lambano, accipio, to take, from whence (...),
[ lepsis] acceptio a taking.

Ep^nalesis is the same in one sentence, which Symploce is in several.

A figure, when (for elegancies sake) a sentence is begun and ended with the
same word, or sound.

Incipit and voce exit Epanalepsis eadem:
Pauper amet caut^: timeat maledicere pauper. Farnaby.

Vna dies aperit, conficit una dies.
Vidimus tuam victoriam praeliorum exitu terminatam, gladium vagina vacuum non
vid^mus.

English Examples.
Severe to his Servants, to his children severe.

His superior in means, in place his superior.

In sorrow was I born, and must die in sorrow.

Unkindness moved me, and what can so throuble me, or wrack my thoughts are
unkindness?

At midnight thou wentst out of the house, and returnedst against at midnight.

Scriptural Examples of Epanalepsis.
Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.

2 King. 18.33. My Son Absalom, my son, etc.

1 Cor. 3.21, 22. All things are yours, etc. whether things present, or things
to come, all are yours.

See 2 Cor. 4.3. Psalm. 8.1, 9. Psalm. 46.1 and ult.

EPANODOS, (...), Cumter eadem recurrimus, verba inverso ordine relegentes.
When we return back again by the same words, reading again the words in a clean
contrary order.
Regressio, regression, or turning back: derived from (...) [ epi] again, and
(...), [ anodos] ascensus, an ascending or climbing up; which is derived from
(...), [ ano] sursum upwards, and (...), [ hodos] via, a way.

Epanodos is a figure whereby the like sound is repeated in the beginning and
ending of diverse sentences, (an Anadiplosis intervening) or,

When the words of a sentence are turned upside down, or as I may say, repeated
backward: the same sound being repeated in the beginning and middle, in the
middle and end.

Farnaby.
Prima velut mediis, mediis ita Epanodos ima
Consona dat repetens: Crudelis tu quoque matter;
Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter.
Thus in English, Whether the worst, the child accursed,
or else the cruel mother?
The mother worst, the child accursed,
as bad the one as the other.
Nec sine sole suo lux, nec sine luce sua Sol.
Eloquentia non ex Artificio, sed Artificium ex
Eloquentia natum.
Hermogenes inter pueros Senex, inter Senes puer.


English Examples of Epanodos.
Men venture lives to conquer; she conquers lives without venturing, etc.

Parthenia desired above all things to have Argalus: Argalus feared nothing but
to miss Parthenia.

I never saw a fray more unequally made then that, which was between us this
day, Terence,
I with bearing the blows, and he with giving them, till we were both weary.

Account it not a purse for treasure, but as a treasure it self worthy to be
pursed up, etc.

Unlawful desires are punished after the effect of enjoying; but impossible
desires are punis^ed in the desire it self.

Showed such fury in his force, such stay in his fury.

Scriptural Examples.
Isa. 5.20. Woe unto them, who call good evil, and evil good; who put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, etc.

2 Cor. 2.15, 16. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that
are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are the savor of death unto
death; and to the other, the savor of life unto life.

Joh. 8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods Word; ye therefore hear it not,
because ye are not of God.

Ezekiel. 35.6. I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee;
except thou hate blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

See Romans 7.19. Gal. 2.16. Ezekiel. 7.6, 7, 2 Cor 2.10. Psalm. 114.3, 4, 5, 6.
Ezekiel. 32.16. 2 These. 2.4, etc.

PARONOMASIA, (...), agnominatio, Agnomination, or likeness of words: derived
from (...) [ para] which in composition signifies amiss, or with some
alteration, and (...), [ onoma] nomen, a name: or from (...) [ paronomazo]
agnominio, to change, or allude to a name or word.

Agnomination is a pleasant sound of words, or a small change of names; or it
is a present touch of the same letter, syllable, or word with a different
meaning.

A figure when by the change of one letter, or syllable of a word, the
signification thereof is also changed.

Farnaby.
Voce parum mutata alludit significatum
Paronomasia; tu praedo, non praet ^. --
Agnomitatio dicitur quae fiat similitudine aliqua vocum and vicinitate quasi
verborum:

That is Agnomination which is made by any resemblance, and as it were by the
neighborhood and nighness of words.

Quis Locus aut Lacus? -- Ab aratore orator.
Non emissus ex urbe, sed immissus in urbem esse videatur.
Video me a te circumveniri, non conveniri.
Inceptio est amentium, haud amantium.
Tibi parata erunt verba, huic verbera.
Nata salo, suscepta solo, patre edita coelo.
In stadio and studio virtutis. -- ab Exordio ad Exodium.
English Examples of Agnomination.
Be sure of his sword, before you trust him of his word.

Wine is the blood of the vine.

Hardly any Treason is guided by reason.

Friends turned fiends.

You are like to have but a bare-gain out of this bargain.

So fine a landerer should not be a slanderer.

Bolder in a buttery then in a battery.

A fit witness, a fit witless.

She went away repining, but not repenting.

Alas, what can saying make them believe, whom seeing cannot persuade?

This is no stumbling, but plain tumbling.

Such errors will cause terrors.

Scriptural Examples.
2 Cor. 10.3. Though we walk in the the flesh, yet do not we war after the
flesh.

2 Cor. 6.9. As unknown and yet known, etc.

Psalm. 21.7. In te confisi, numquam confusi.

See Isa. 5.7.

Romans 2.1. In quo alium domnas, teipsum condemnac.

See 2 Cor. 4 8, 9.

Matthew. 8.22. Let the dead bury the dead, etc.

ANTANACLASIS, (...), Reciprocatio, Reciprocation or beating back, derived from
(...), [ antanaclao] reciprico, refringo, to go back or bear back.

It is a various signification of the same word:

A figure when the same word is repeated in a diverse if not in a contrary
signification; It is also a retreat to the matter at the end of a long
parenthesis.

-- Amari
Mejuvat, Antanaclasis erit, si nil sit amari.
Veniam, si Senatus det veniam.
English Examples.
Care for those things in your youth which may in old age discharge you of care.

Care in the first place signifies to provide, in the last, the solicitude and
anxiety of the mind.

In thy youth learn some craft, that in old age thou may get thy living
without craft.

Craft in the first place, signifies science, or occupation; in the second,
deceit or subtilty.

Thus it is a Retreat at the end of a Parenthesis.
Shall that heart (which does not only feel them, but has all motion of this
life placed in them) shall that heart I say, etc.

Scriptural Examples of Antanaclasis.
Matthew. 28.29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until
that day, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, etc.

Here the first word (Drink) has a literal or proper signification; but the
later, a Metaphorical acceptance, concerning their partaking together of the
joys of Heaven.

John 1 10. The world was made by him, and the world knew him not, etc.

The former word (world) notes the whole universe; the later, the unbelieving
men, who are of the world.

Thus in Matthew. 13.33. Leaven signifies the nature of the Gospel, and in Mat.
16.6, 12, 7, 8. sinful corruption.

Matthew. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead, etc.

See Matthew. 10.39. Luke 6.26, etc. Joh. 4.13, 14. Isa. 59.18.

PLOCE, (...), nexus, contextus, binding together, or a continuation without
interruption: derived from (...), [ pleco] necto, to knit or bind together.

A figure when a word is by way of Emphasis so repeated, that it denotes not
only the thing signified, but the quality of the thing:

Hereby the proper name of any man well known, being repeated, signifies the
nature and permanent quality of the man, whose name it is.

Farnaby.
Est Ploce: Corydon, Corydon est tempore ab illo.
Hic consul est vere consul.
Talis matter erat si modo matter erat.
Tot homines adfuerant, si modo homines fuerunt.
English Examples of Ploce.
Josephus speaking of our Savior, says. There was a man called Jesus, if it
be lawful to call him a man.

Bread is bread indeed to a hungry, stomach.

In that great victory Caesar was Caesar, (i e,) a serene Conq^e^er.

What man is there living, but will pity such a case, if he be a man? the last
word (m^n) imports that humanity or compassion proper to man's nature.

Physician heal thy self, if thou art a Physician, ( i. e.) if thou have the
skill and science of Physic.

Scriptural.
Genesis 27.36. Esau speaking of his brother Jacob, says, Is he not rightly
called Jacob? for he has supplanted me these two times.

POLYPTOTON, (...), variatio casuum, aut multos casus habens, variation of
cases, a small change of the termination or case: derived from (...), [ poly]
vary, variously, and (...), [ ptoton] cadens, falling out, which is derived
from (...), [ ptoo] cado, to fall.

Polyptoton is a repetition of words of the same lineage, that differ only in
termination, and it is made by changing (1) the Mood, (2) the Tense, (3) the
Person, (4) the Case, (5) the Degree, (6) the Gender, (7) the Number, (8) the
part of Speech.

It is a kind of Gradation, for it is continued by its degrees in words
unlike, as an Anadiplisis is in like words:

A figure when several cases of the same noun, and tenses of the same verb, are
used in conjoined clauses;

Eslo Polyptoton, vario si dictio casu
Consonet: arma armis, pede pes, densusque viro vir. Farnaby.

Ense minax ensis, pede pes, and cuspide cuspis.
Cedere jussit aquam jussa recessit aqua.
Labor labori laborem adfert.
In Symplece.
Quid facies facies Veneris cum veneris ante?
Ne sedeas, sedeas: ne pereas per eas.
English Examples.
He Is faulty using of our faults.

Exceedingly exceeding.

Sometimes the same word in several cases, as, for fear, concealed his fear.

Sometimes the same Adjective in several comparisons.

Much may be said in my defense, much more for love, and most of all for that
incomparable creature, who has joined, me and love together.

Scriptural Examples of Polyptoton.
Genesis 50 24. The Lord when he visits in visiting will visit you.

Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things etc.

Eccles. 12.8. Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity.

Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, etc.

Dan. 2.37. Thou O king art a King of Kings, etc.

John 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven. 1 John 1.1. 1. Cor. 9.22.

1 John 3.7. He that does righteousness, is righteous as he is righteous.

See 2 Timothy 3.13. Heb. 6 14 Joh. 17.25. Isa, 24.16. Hos. 10.1. Micah 2.4, etc.
Isa. 19.2.

HHPOTYPOSIS, (...), Representatio, Representation is derived from (...) [
hypotypoo] repraesento per figuram d monstro, to represent, or by figure to
deaneate, or draw the lively effigies of a thing.

Hypotyposis is a representing of a thing unto the eye of the understanding, so
that it may seem rather to be felt or enjoyed then spoken of and expressed.

A figure when a whole matter is expressed so particularly, and in order, that
it seems to be represented unto ocular inspection; or when the whole image and
propo^tion of things is as it were painted out in words.

Res, loca, personas, S^e Patiop^ta.
affectus: See Chronographia.
tempora, Farnaby.
gesta,
Exprimit, atque oculis quasi subjicit S^e Diatyposis.
Hypotyposis.
Convivii luxuriosi Descrip^io.

Videbar videre alios intrantes, alios vero exeuntes; qu^sdam ex vino
vacillantes, quosdamb sterna potatione oscitantes: versaturinter h^s Gallus,
unguentis oblitus; redimitus coronis: humus erat immunad, lutulenta vino,
coronis languidulis, and spinis co^perta piscium.

Quid plus videret, qui intrasset?

English Examples of Hypotyposis.
There were hills which garnished their proud heights with trees, humble
valleys whose low estate seemed comforted with refreshing of silver rivers;
medows enameled with all sorts of eye-pleasing flowers; thickets, which being
lined with most pleasant shade, were witnessed so to by the cheerful
disposition of many well tuned birds; each pasture stored with sheep feeding
with sober security, while the pretty lambs, with bleating oratory, craved the
dams comfort; Here a shepherds boy piping, as though he should never be old,
there a young shepherdess knitting, and withal finging, and her hands kept time
with her voices music. A show as it were of an accompaniable solitariness, and
of a civil wildness.

It is a place which now humbling it self in fallowed plains, now proud in well
husbanded hills, marries barren woods to cultivated valleys, and joins neat
gardens to delicious fountains, etc.

Scriptural Examples.
Thus Apostasy and Rebellion is elegantly deciphered and characterized in

Isa. 5.6. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint: from the sole of
the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores, etc.

Another of Famine.

Lam. 4.8, 9, 10. They were more ruddy in body then rubies, etc. their visage
is blacker then a coal: they are not known in the streets: See Psalm. 37.35, 36.
their skin cleaves to their bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick.

See Isa. 1.7, 8, 34. whole chap. and Jer. 4.19, 20, etc. Col. 2.14, 15.

PARADIASTOLE, (...) Distinctio. Distinction, noting of difference, or a
separating or disagreeing; derived from (...) [ paradiastello] disjungo,
distinguo, to disjoyn, or distinguish.

Paradiastole is a dilating or enlarging of a matter by interpretation.

A figure when we grant one thing that we may deny another, and tends to the
dispersing of clouds, and removing of scruples in former speeches; and to the
distinguishing of like or semblable things, to which end the contrary unto the
thing spoken of is sometimes added for illustrations sake.

Explicat oppositum addens It argues a Paralogism of the consequent.
Paradiastole: Farnaby.
obumbrat.
Virtutem fortuna; tamen non obruit illam.
Fit magna mutatio loci, non ingonii.

Virtus premi, opprimi non potest. Vir bonus oppugnari potest pecunia, non
expugnari.

Non enim furem, sed ereptorem: non adulterum, sed expugnatorem pudicitiae: non
sacriegum, sed etc.

Sometimes we confess that which will not prejudice us; and this is called
Paromologia, confestion: as,

I grant that they are resolute, bu^ it is in matters tending immediately to
their own undoing.

Miseros etsi inimicos fovi, fateor, habetis ergo confitentem, non reum.

English Examples of Paradiastole.
Truth may be blamed, but not shamed, etc.

Being charged that in a former speech you have brought very light reasons: you
may answer;

If by [light] you mean clear; I am glad you see them;

If by [light] you mean of no weight, I am sorry you do not f^el them, etc.

This figure Paradiastole is by some learned Rhetoricians called a faulty term
of speech, opposing the truth by false terms and wrong names; as,

In calling drunkenness good fellowship; ins^tiable avarice good husbandry;
crast and deceit, wisdom and policy, etc.

Scriptural Examples.
2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down but not
destroyed.

1 Co^. 7.10. And into ^he married I command, yet not I, but the Lord. etc.

1 Cor. 4.19. And will know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the
power.

ANTIMET ABOLE, (...), Commutatio, Inversio, a changing of word, by contraries,
or a turning of the words in a sentence upside down; derived from (...), [
anti] against, and (...), [ metaballo] inverto, to invert, or turn upside down.

Antimetabole is a sentence inverst, or turned back, or it is a form of speech
which inverts a sentence by the contrary, and is used frequently to confute by
such Inversion.

A figure when words in the same sentence are repeated in a diverse case or
person.

Opposita Antimetabole mutat dicta: Poema
Est pictura loquens; mutum pictura a poema. Farnaby.

In dom^natu servitus, in servitute dominatus.

Vere dici potest Magistratum esse legem loquentem, legem autem mutum
Magistratum.

Vt nov^rum optima erunt maxim vetera, ita veterum maxim nova.

Inter viros foemina, inter foeminas vir.

English Examples of Antimetabole.
Of Eloquent men Crassus is counted the most learned Lawyer; and of Lawyer,
Scaevola most eloquent. Cicero.


Sees^ not thou these Trophies erected in his honor, and his honor shining in
these Trophies?

If any for love of honor, or honor of love, etc.

That as you are the child of a mother; so you may be the mother of a child.

They misliked what themselves did; and yet still did what themselves misliked.

If before he languished, because he could not obtain his desiring; he now
lamented, because he could not desire the obtaining.

Just to exercise his might, mighty to exercise his justice.

Scriptural Examples.
2 Cor. 12.14. The children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the
parents for the children.

Joh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, etc.

Romans 7.19. The good that I would, I do not; but the evil that I would not,
that do I.

1 Cor. 11.8, 9. For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man:
neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man.

Matthew. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.

ENANTIOSIS, (...) Contentio, Contention or contrariety: derived from (...), [
enanti^s] adversus vel oppositus, opposite or contrary.

A figure when we speak that by a contrary which we would have to be understood
as it were by affirmation.

Librat in Antithetis contraria Enantiosis:
Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur. Farnaby.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.

Neque me poenitet mortales inimicitias, amicitias sempiternas habere. Pro
Posthumo.

English Examples of Enantiosis.
There was strength against nimblenesse, rage against resolution, pride against
nobleness.

He is a swaggerer amongst quiet men, but is quiet among swaggerers. Earnest in
idle things, idle in matter of earnestness. Where there is both Antimetabole
for the turning of the sentence back, and contentio respecting the contrariety
of things meant thereby.

Could not look on, nor would not look off.

Neither the one hurt her, nor the other help her.

Just without partiality, liberal without profusion, wise without curiosity.

Love to a yielding heart is a King, but to a resisting, a Tyrant. This is a
sentence with Distinctio and Contentio.

Scriptural Examples.
Jam. 3.10, 11. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: Does a
fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?

Romans 2.21, 22. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? etc.

SYNOICEIOSIS, (...), Conciliatio, Reconciling or agreement, or a joining
together of things that differ: derived from (...), [ synoikeioo] familiarem
reddo, to render familiar.

A figure which teaches to conjoyn diverse things, or contraries, or to
reconcile things that differ, and to repugn common opiniowith reason; and is,
when contraries are attributed to the same thing.

Synoeceiosis duo dat contraria eidem:

Farnaby.
Tam quod adest, de sit, quam quod non adsit avaro.

Aeque adest moderat oni id quo fruitur, ac quo non fruitur.

English Examples.
The covetous and the prodigal are both alike in fault, for neither of them
knows to use their wealth aright; they both abuse it, and both get shame by it.

Gluttonous feasting and starving famine are both as one, for both weaken the
body, procure sickness and cause death.

The covetous man wants as well what he has as what he has not.

A dissembler studies to over-teach as well them that trust him, as them that
trust him not.

Scriptural Examples of Synoeceiosis.
Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that
withholds more then is meet, but intends to poverty.

Romans 14.5. One m^n esteems one day above another: another esteems every
day alike: let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

Psalm. 139.12. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night sh^neth
as the day: the darkness and the light are b^th alike to thee.

Job 21.23, etc. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and
quiet: his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow;
and another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with
pleasure: they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them.

Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous
and to the wicked to the good and to clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, etc.

OXYMORON, (...), Acute fatuum aut stulte ^cutum, subtil^y fool^sh; derived
from (...), [ oxy] acumen. sharpness of wit, and (...), [ mores] stultus, a
fool.

It is a sentence delivered with such affectation of wit and gravity as renders
it ridiculous.

A figure when the same thing is denied of it self, or when a contrary Epithet
is added to any word.

By this figure contraries are acutely and discreetly reconciled or joined
together, whence it comes to pass that at first sight that seems to be spoken
foolishly, which afterward is acknowledged to have been hidden under a notable
and excellent witinesse.

Farnaby.
Oxymoron iners erit ars, concordia discors.
Strenua nos exercet inertia.
Avara luxuries. Id aliquid nihil est.

Vivum cadaver. Innumeri numeri.

Cum taceut, clamant.

Si tacent, satis dicunt.

Sapiens stultus qui sapere sibi egregie videtur.

Cum ratione insanit.

Vita minime vitalis.

Nunquam se minus otiosum esse, quam cum otiosus; nec minus solum, quam cum
solus esset.

English Examples of Oxymoron.
If they are silent they say enough.

That something is nothing.

A man and no man, seeing and not seeing, in the light and not in the light,
with a stone and no stone, struck a bird and no bird, sitting and not sitting,
upon a tree and no tree.

This is spoken of Androgeus the Eunuch, who being purblinde, struck a bat in
the twilight with a pumice stone sitting upon a Mustardtree.

A wanton modesty. Froud humility.

Knowing ignorance.

A numberless number.

Scriptural Examples.
Job 22.6. Thou have stripped the naked of their clothing: He that is naked
cannot be stripped or spoiled of his clothes; but the word naked, here
signifies male vestitum, ill or poorly clad, etc.

Jer. 22.19. He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast
forth, etc. (i.e.) he shall have no burial.

1 Timothy 5.6. But she that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives.

See Act. 5.41, etc. Isa. 58.10.

AETIOLOGIA, (...) Causae redditio, a showing of a reason, derived from (...),
[ aitiologeo] rationem reddo, to render a reason.

Aetiologia is a figure or form of speech, whereby the Orator or speaker
joyneth reason or cause to a proposition or sentence uttered, as an authentic
seal thereunto.

Propositi reddit causas Aetiologia.
Sperne voluptates: nocet empta dolor voluptas.
Intelligo quam difficili scopulosoque verser loco.

Nam cum omnis arrogantia sit molesta; tum illa ingenii atque eloquentia,
molestissima. Divin. in Ver.

English Examples.
There are no wil^^s more privy then those which are veiled over with the
dissimulation of duty, Cicero.
and the custom of familiar acquaintance; for thou may easily by taking heed
shun an open enemy: but this hidden, inward and famili^r evil* does not only
appear, but also oppress, before thou shall be able to foresee and epsy it.

Cicero for Archia.
Look what wit or eloquence I have, Judges, Archias may justly challenge it to
himself: for he was the first and principal, that caused me to follow these
manner of studies.

In vain it is to water the plant, the root being perished.

H^ppy in wanting of little, because not desirous of much.

The errors in his nature were excused, by reason of the greenness of his
youth.

His heart being dissolved into love, spoke in thoughts, as not having language
enough to express his affection.

Scriptural Examples of Aetiologia.
Amos 1.11. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for four
I will not spare him: because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did
cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and kept his wrath for
ever.

Psalm. 18, 19. He brought me forth into a large place: he delivered me, because
he delighted in me.

Romans 1.20, 21. So that they are without excuse; because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, etc.

See in Romans 3.20. and 4 14, 15. etc. 15, 6.10, 11. Prove, 16.26. and 25.13.

INVERSIO, by the Greeks called Antistrophe, a turning upside down, derived
from verto, to turn or change, and in, against.

Inversion is a figure, whereby the Orator or speaker reasons, or brings in a
thing for himself, which was reported or alleged against him.

Arguit allatam rem contra Inversio pro se:
Imo equidem; neque enim si ^ccidissem, sepelissem. Farnaby.

Romulo in coena parcius bibenti, dixit quidam; Romule, si istuc omnes faciant,
vinum vilius sit: is respondit; imo vero carum, si quantum quisque volet,
bibat: nam ego bi^i quantum volui.

In English thus,

Romulus drinking sparingly, at supper one said unto him; if all men did so,
wine would be cheaper than it is: to whom Romulus answered, yea, but it would
be rather dearer, if every one drunk as much as he would; for I have drunk as
much as I desire.

This figure is of near affinity unto Metastasis, Mutation, which ancient
Rhetoricians called a form of speech, whereby we turn back those things that
are objected against us, to them which laid them to us.

Thus when Anthony charged Cicero, that he was the cause of civil war raised
between Pompeius and Caesar, Cicero rebounded the same accusation again to
Antony, saying: Thou Marcus Antony, thou I say gave to Caesar (willing to
turn all upside down) cause to make war against thy country.

Scriptural Examples.
Matthew. 15.26, 27. And he answered, and said, It is not good to take the
childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs; But she said, Truth Lord: yet indeed
the dogs eat of the crumbs, which fall from their Masters Table: Then Jesus
answered and said unto her, Oh woman, great is thy faith, etc.

1 King. 18.17, 18. Thus, when Ahab charged Elijah, that it was he that
troubled all Israel; Nay says Elijah, it is not I that trouble Israel, but
thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the
Lord, and thou have followed Balaam, etc.

PROLEPSIS, (...), Occupatio, Anticipatio, Occupation or the prevention of an
Objection, derived from (...), [ pro] prae, before, and (...), [ lambano]
capio, accipio, to take or receive; from whence (...), [ lepsis] acceptio, a
taking: or it is derived from (...), [ prolambano] anticipo, to prevent.

This is called a figure of speech between two.
Anticipation, or the prevention of an objection is a figure or form of speech,
whereby the Orator or Speaker perceiving aforehand what might be objected
against him, and hurt him as to what he is about to deliver, does confute it,
before it be spoken; or when we prevent any objection, by framing an answer; or
when we bring an objection and yield an answer thereunto:

This figure has Hypophora and Anthypophora necessarily relerting unto it.

Hypophora, signifies an Objection; it propounds an objection, and is when the
speaker makes answer unto own demand; As,

Isa. 37.23. Whom have thou reproached, and blasphemed? And against whom have
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy
one of Israel.

Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid.

Anthypophora signifies a contrary illation or inferenee, and is when an
objection is refuted or disproved by the opposition of a contrary sentence: as,

Matthew. 21.23, 24, 25. The chief Priests and the Elders of the people came unto
Christ, as he was teaching and said, By what authority do thou these things?
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if
ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do those things:
The Baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or men? etc. And they reasoned
with themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he will say unto us, Why
did ye not then believe him? but if we shall say of men, we fear the people,
etc.

Farnaby.
Anticipans, quae quis valet objecisse, Prolepsis
Diluit: Hic aliquis mihi dicat: cur ego amicum
Offendam in nugis? hae nugae seria ducent
In mala, derisum semel exceptumque sinistre.
Dicet aliquis; Haec igitur est tua disciplina? sic tu instituis*
adolescentulos, etc. Prosapodosis respensio: Ego si quis, judices, hoc rob ore
animi atque hac indole virtutis, etc.

English Examples of Anticipation.
Did I walk abroad to see my delight? my walking was the delight it self.

He saw her alive; he was glad to see her alive.

He saw her weep: he was sorry to see her weep.

He heard her comfortable speeches: nothing more joyful.

Scriptural Examples.
Romans 9.19, 20. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? who
has resisted his will? nay but, oh man, who are thou? etc.

Romans 6.15. What then? shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under
grace? where you have the objection: The answer whereunto is in these words,
God forbid.

1 Cor. 15.35. Some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what
bodies shall they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it dye, etc.

This must be noted, that the objection is many times wanting, which must be
wisely supplied by considering the occasion and the answer of it: as,

1 Timothy 5.11, 12. They will marry, having condemnation; Now, least any might,
What, for marrying? The Apostle answers here, No, for denying their first faith.

Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lo^d with thy substance, etc.

Object. So I may beggar my self. But this objection is prevented in the words
of the next verse; so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, etc.

See the like in Matthew. 6.33, etc. see Isa. 49.14, 15. Matthew. 3.9, etc.

But Prolepsis is also a figure of Construction, and then it is defined a
certain summary pronunciation of things; and it is made when the Congregation,
or the whole does aptly agree with the Verb, or Adjective, and then the parts
of the whole are reduced to the same Verb or Adjective, wherewith
notwithstanding they agree not.

Post totum parts capiet generale Prolepsis: Farnaby.

Procedunt castris hinc Acron, inde Quirinus:
Alterum in alterius mactatos sauguine cernam.
Duae aquilae volaverunt; haec ab orient, illa ab occidente.
-- Lavinaque littora venit.
Hereunto is Synchoresis of kin.
EPITROPE, (...), Permissio, permission, derived from (...), [ epitrepo]
permitto, concedo, to permit or grant.

It is the suffering of a deed:

A figure when we either seriously or Ironically permit a thing, and yet object
the inconveniency: this Ironical permission imports as much as an earnest
prohibition, though the words are otherwise.

Farnaby.
Plane aut dissimulans permittit Epitrope factum. 1. Permissio seria; ut, Tribuo
Graecis literas, do multarum artium disciplinam, non adimo sermonis leporem,
ingeniorum acumen, dicendi copiam: deniq: etiam, si qua sibi alia sumunt, non
repugno: testimoniorum religionem et fidem nunquam ista Natio coluit.

2. Permissio Ironica; an Ironical permission is then, when it only seems to be
a Permission, which yet on the contrary is rather the highest Prohibition: --
neque te teneo, neque dicta refello.
I, sequere Italiam ventis: pete regna per undas.


I, fuge, sed poteris tuti or esse domi.

Sit sur, sit sacrilegus, sit flagitiorum omnium vitiorumque Princeps; at est
bonus Imperator et faelix.

English Examples of Epitrope.
Simo in Terence seems by his words very willing to permit his son to
intermarry with Glycerie, when in very deed he with all diligence endeavors to
withdraw him from her.

Yes says he, let him take her, I wish him good of her, let him go dwell and
keep house with her.

Go, fly, but you may be safer at home.

Scriptural Examples.
Eccles. 11.9, Rejoice oh young man, and let thy heart cheer thee, etc. and
walk in the ways of thy heart, etc.

Romans 2.17. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make
thy boast of God, etc.

Rev. 22.11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

Prove. 6.10. Sleep a little, slumber a little, and fold thy hands together to
sleep a little* but in the next verse you have the meaning most manifestly laid
open, etc.

See 1 Cor. 14.38. Judge. 10.14. Romans 9.4.5. Gal. 4.14, 15. Prove. 6.32. 1 King.
22.15. Isa. 29.1. Jer. 2.28. Amos 4.4, 5.

INCREMENTVN, an increasing or waxing bigger: It is a form of speech which by
degrees ascends to the top of something, or rather above the top, that is, when
we make our speech grow and increase by an orderly placing of words, making the
latter word always exceed the former in the force of signification, contrary
to the natural order of things, which ever puts the worthiest and weightiest
words first, but this places them always last.

This figure may aptly be compared to fire, the property whereof is always to
ascend as high as matter can carry it.

It is a kind of a Climux.
A figure when a speech ascends by degrees from the lowest to the highest, where
the latter words are always the more great and vehement, by which the speech
does gradually as it were increase and wax great.

Farnaby.
Ad summum ex imo gradibus venit Incrementum;
Non plebs prava jubens; solida nec mente, tyranni
Vis fera dimoveat justum; non turbidus Auster,
Fulminei non dextra Jovis; non, si ruat orbis.
Facinus est vincire civem Romanum, scelus verberare, prope patricidium necare:
quid dicam in crucem tollere?

English Examples of Incrementum.
Terence.
O my Parmeno, the beginner, the enterprizer, performer and accomplisher of all
my pleasures.

Neither silver, gold, nor precious stones may be compared to her virtues.

He was careless of doing well, a looseness of youth; he was inclined to do
ill, a weakness of youth; his mind consented to offend, a shrewd temptation,
he committed the act, an unhappy fault; he accustomed himself to abuse, a sad
employment; yet he did not this alone, but infected others with his persuasion,
and seduced them by his example: and not that only, but detained those he had
drawn in, with fresh inventions, and disgraced the modesty of such as resisted
his corruptions, with scorns and derisions, which could argue no less in him
than a most pernicious and detestable resolution.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
Where the first degree is of ungodly men, the second of sinners who wickedly
contrive in their hearts the accomplishment of their pernicious enterprises;
the third of scorners, who glory in their wickedness and scoff at reproof.

See more examples in Psalm. 2.2, 3. Isa. 1.4. Psalm. 7.6. Psalm. 18.38, 39. Ezekiel.
2.6. Dan. 9.5. Hab. 1.5. Zech. 7.11, 12. 1 Cor 4.8. 1 John 1.1, etc.

As there are in the precedent examples gradual ascensions from the lowest to
the highest, called Incrementum, but by the Greeks Anabasis, Ascensus; So on
the contrary are there Descensions from the highest to the lowest, called
Catabasis Descensus: as,

In the names of metals, Ezekiel. 22.18. Son of man, the house of Israel is unto
me as dross: all they are brass and tin, and iron, and lead in the midst of
the furnace: they are even the dross of silver.

Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God: but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man; he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross.

EROTESIS, (...) Interrogatio, Interrogation, or questioning, derived from
(...), [ erotao] interrogo, to question.

It is but a warm proposition; yet it oftentimes does better than a bare
affirmation, This form of speech Solomon in Prove. 14.2^. uses (...) h^^
affirmation Do they not err that devise evil?
which were but too easy and livelesse a speech; it is easy and gentile to
sharpen the flats of affirmation and downright relations:

A figure whereby we either (1) demand a question, (2) earnestly affirm; or (3)
vehemently deny a thing.

Note that an affi^mative Interrogation is a vehement denying; and a negative,
a vehement affirming: and a negative interrogation sometimes vehemently
commands, and an affirmative interrogation in like manner forbids.

Farnaby.
Quaerit This is f^equently usu^l in an Enthymema.
Erotesis, poterat quod dicere recte.
Et procul, o miseri, quae tanta insania, cives?
Creditis avectos hosts? aut ulla putatis
Dona carere dolis Danaum? sic notus Ulysses?
1. When we demand a question; as, Cujum pecus? an Meliboei?

2. When we earnestly affirm; as, Quousque tandem, Catilina, abutere patientia
nostra?

When we vehemently deny; as, Aeneid. 1. Et quisquam numen Junonis adoret?
and Eclog. 3. An mihi cantando victus non redderet ille?


Item pro Balbo.

A negative Interrogation commands with a chiding or threatening; and an
affirmative Interrogation in like manner forbids: as,

Aen. 4. Non arma expedient, totaque ex urbe sequentur?

English Examples of Erotesis.
The credit of behavior, is to cover imperfection, and set forth your good
parts better: now for that, this is too flat and lively a speech, aptly to
express the affection of the mind; express it by Interrogation thus;

Is it not the chiefest credit of behavior to set forth your good parts fairly
and clearly, and to cover imperfection?

Did the Sun ever bring fruitful Harvest, but was more hot than pleasant? Have
you any fathers that be not sometimes froward? Have you any of your children
that be not sometimes cumbersome? Shall we therefore curse the Sun? disobey our
fathers? and hate our children?

Scriptural Examples.
There are in Scripture nine kinds of questions ( inter alia).

1. Sometimes a question is asked with desire only to receive an answer: as,
The Mariners of Jonas.

Jonas 1.8. Tell us (say they) for whose cause is this evil come upon us? what
is thine occupation? and whence come thou? Such a question you may find the
wise men made touching Christ, in Matthew. 2.2.

2. Interrogations in Scripture are sometimes emphatical and strong
affirmations: as,

Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? ( i. e.) thou and thy
Sacrifice shall both certainly be accepted, etc.

Josh. 1.9. Have not I commanded thee? etc. I have without all question
assuredly commanded thee, etc.

See more examples in Genesis 13.9.37.13. 2 Samuel 13.28. 2 King. 6.32. Joh. 4.35.
Mar. 12.24. Jer. 23.23, 24, etc. 2 King. 12.19.

3. Interrogations also are sometimes strong and vehement negations: as,

Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? (i. e.) no man can understand the
depth of them.

Genesis 18.14. Is any thing too hard for God?

Job 8.3, 11. Does God prevert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?
Can the rush grow up without mire? Can the flag grow without water? etc.

See Matthew. 12.26. Romans 3.3, 10, 14, 15. and 8.35.

4. Interrogations sometimes diminish and abate the sense: as,

Zech. 4.7. Who art thou, O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall be a
plain, etc. (i. e) Thou look very big and great, but who art thou? I will
tell thee, oh proud oppressor of my people, though in thy own conceit thou art
a Mountain immovable, yet in my peoples eyes thou art but a Molehill, and
shall shortly be made a nothing, even as a plain before them.

Thus in 2 Samuel 7.18. David when he would abase himself, cries out; Who am I, O
Lord God? and what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto?

5. Interrogations sometimes raise and heighten the sense by way of admiration:
as,

Psalm. 8.9. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world?

Exodus 15.11. Who is a God like unto thee? etc. (i. e.) Let all the world (if
they can) show such a God as thou art.

See Mark 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? etc. The question
here puts the brightest glory upon God in pardoning sin; There is no
sin-pardoning God, but our God only.

6. Interrogations are sometimes expostulatory and complain: as,

Job 3.11, 12. Why dyed I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost
when I came out of the belly? Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts
that I should suck?

Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? etc.

Jer. 12.1. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? so in Isa. 1.21. etc.

7. You find in the Scripture doubting questions: as,

Psalm. 77.7, 8. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? etc.

8. You may also find teaching questions: as,

Isa. 60.8. Who are these that fly as a clowd, and as the Doves to their
windows? This teaches us the multitude of those that shall (when the Angels
shall be sent out of the Temple to preach the everlasting Gospel) flock in unto
Christ.

9. You may also find learning questions: as,

Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? etc.

ECPHONESIS, (...), Exclamatio, Exclamation, or a crying out: derived from
(...), [ ecphoneo] exclamo, to cry out.

Ecphonesis is a pathetical figure, whereby as the Orator or speaker expresses
the vehement affection and passion of his own mind, so he also excites and
stirs up the minds and affections of those to whom he speaks.

It is expressed or understood by an Adverb of crying out, as, Oh, alas, behold;
which are the signs of this figure.

Concitat Ecphonesis and Exclamatio mentem.
Heu pietas! o spes falsas! proh vana voluptas!
O clementiam admirabilem! Farnaby.


O scelus! o pestis o labes! o libidinem effraenatam atque indomitam!

O utinam tunc cum Lacedaemona class petisset, Obrutus insanis esset adulter
aquis!

English Examples.
Thus Pyrocles seeing the mild Philoclea innocently beheaded, bursts forth
into this exclamation;

O Tyrant heaven, and Traitor earth, how is this done? How is this suffered?
Has this world a government?

Alas what delights and how great enjoyments has one day deprived thee of!

Ah poor confidence! oh glorious triumphs over unarmed captives!

Oh admirable clemency and mercy!

Oh most wicked presumption, from whence art thou sprung up to cover the earth
with falsehood and deceit!

Scriptural Examples of Ecphonesis.
This figure is made in Scripture these ten ways, viz.

1. In way of Admiration: as,

Romans 11.33. Oh the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! etc.

Psalm. 8.1. O Lord, how excellent is thy Name!

144.15. O happy people that are in such a case! etc.

2. In way of Indignation^, as

Acts 13.10. O full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child of the devil,
thou enemy of all righteousness! etc.

3. In way of Detestation and abhorrencie: as,

Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death!

Jer. 44.4. O do not this abominable thing that I hate, etc.

4. In the way of entreaty or wishing: as,

Psalm. 14.17, O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion!

Isa. 64.1. O that thou would rent the heavens! etc. see 1 Chronicles. 11.17.

Job 6.8. O that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing
I long for!

Psalm. 55.6. O that I had the wings of a Dove, that I might fly and be at
rest! See Genesis 17.18. Deuteronomy. 5.29.

5. In way of Commiseration and Lamentation: as,

Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, etc. how often
would I have gathered thy children together, etc.

Lam. 1.1. How is the golden City spoiled! how does the City sit solitary, that
was full of people? etc. how is she become as a widow?

6. In way of Reprehension: as,

Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, etc. See in Acts 7.51,
52, etc.

7. In way of Derision: as,

Mark 15.29. And they that passed by (our Savior) rayled on him, wagging their
heads, and saying; Ah thou that destroyest the Temple and buildest it in three
days!

8. In way of Love: as,

Psalm. 84.1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, thou Lord of Hosts!

9. In way of exultation and triumph: as,

1 Cor. 15.55. Oh death, where is thy sting, oh grave, where is thy victory?

10. In way of Fear: as,

1 Timothy 6.11. But thou O man of God, flee these things: and follow after
righteousness, etc.

EPIPHONEMA, (...), Acclamatio, Acclamation, or a shooting out of the voice:
derived from (...), [ epiphoneo] acclamo, to cry out or shoot forth the voice.

It is a kind of Exclamation.,
It is an applause of a thing approved, or a sententio^s ^lause of a discourse,
and serves for Amplification, when, after a great crime, or desert, exclaimed
upon or extolled, it gives a moral note, worthy of credit and observation.

Acclamation is a figure, when after a thing is done or declared, a clause or
part of a sentence is added, briefly purporting some Emphasis, and the speakers
censure of the thing so done or declared.

Narratae subit and rei Epiphonema probatae. Farnaby.
Acclamation is brought in with these words, viz. Sic ita, adeo ut, quippe,
tantus, quantus, talis, qualis, ecce, videamus ergo, etc. ut, Tant molis erat
Romanam condere gentem.

Quam ut adipiscantur, omnes optant: eandem accusant adepti -- Tanta est
stultitia et perversitas. Cic. de Senect.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. Lucr. 1. Adeo a te teneris assuescere
multum est.

Jam indicant tot hominum fletus, quam sis charus tuis, adeo ut omnes videant,
quam misere insaniunt, qui opes virtuti praeferunt.

English Examples of Acclamation.
Thus after the relation of Scipio Affricanus's course, who having been
Generalissimo of the greatest Armies in the world; having for a long time had
Kings s^itors for his favor, and to the day of his death, Nations kept in aw
of (...) name; yet in 56 years neither bought nor sold goods nor lands, nor
built any house or Castle of his own, left not above 46 l. in gold, and 6 l. in
silver behind him at his death.

It may be folded up in this Acclamation;

So little need has he to stoop to private cares, that thrives upon public
victories; and so small leisure has he to be desirous of riches, that has been
so long possessed and satisfied with honor, which our Ancestors reputed the
immortal end of mortal actions.

So inconstant is the favor of Princes.

Thus dangerous is the satisfaction of a sensual appetite.

So hard is it to escape the force of temptations.

So weighty a matter it was to set up the Roman Nation.

Scriptural Examples of Acclamation.
Thus in Matthew. 22. in the beginning of the Chapter, after the relation of the
Parable of the Kings sons marriage, and of the man, who (for that he had nor on
a wedding garment) was cast into outer darkness, etc. you find this
acclamation elegantly added at the end of that discourse: as,

In the 14 verse, For many are called, but few are chosen.

So the Psalmograph having in the former part of the 2. Psalm spoken of the
terrors of Gods indignation when his wrath is kindled against his Adversaries,
we find this acclamation,

In the last verse; Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Thus also he having in the 72. Psalm highly set forth the glorious excellency
of the name of God; shuts up his praise with this Acclamation,

In the last verse; Blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory.

Luke 10.30. see Act. 19, 20. Matthew. 19.27. Mark. 7.37.

EPANORTHOSIS, (...), Correctio, emendatio, Correction or amending; derived
from (...), [ epanortho^] Corrigo, to correct or amend.

Epanorthosis and Aposiopesis are kinds of Revocation.
Correction having used a word of sufficient force, yet pretending a greater
strength of meaning, refuses it, and supplies the place with one of more
extension.

It is the reinforcement of the clause last uttered by the subsequent.

A figure when in our speech, something that went before, is called back and
corrected; whereof there are two kinds; the one is when a word is corrected
after; the other, when a word is corrected before it is spoken.

This Exornation is made four ways, viz. 1. By degrees of comparison. 2. By
comparison of the greater and lesser. 3. By doubting. 4. By the signs of
repenting.


Farnaby.
Est Epanorthosis positi correctio sensus:
O Clementia, seu potius patientia mira!
Dixi, filium habeo; ah quid dixi? habere me? imo habui Chreme! nunc habeam
necne, incertum est.

Facti quasi poenitentia: Sed quid ego ita gravem personam induxi?

English Examples of Epanorthosis.
Joseph was amongst his brethren, did I say brethren? nay Tyger-like Monsters.

I persuade you not to let slip occasion, whilst it may not only be taken, but
offers, nay sues t^ be taken.

For this thy shameful and accursed fact, what shall I call thee? a wretch? nay
a beast; nay a poisonous Serpent; yet none of these are fit enough for thee, a
devil thou art both in respect of thy malice which thou possessest, and o^ the
sundry mischiefs thou daily do commit.

Cicero against Verres. We have here bought before you Judges, not a thief, but
a violent robber; not an Adulterer, but a breaker of all Chastity, etc.

I have in your service spent not my time only, but my strength and estate.

Scriptural Examples.
Gal 4.9. But now after that you have known God, or rather are known of God,
etc.

Thus in Act. 25.27. Paul corrects his doubtfulnesse of Agrippa's belief, where
he says, Believe thou King Agrippa? I know thou believe.

1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God in me.

See more examples in Romans 8.34. Isa. 49.15. Gal. 2.20. Luke 11.27, 28, etc.

When the word is corrected before it be spoken: as,

2 Cor. 3.3. Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshy Tables of the heart.

This is also a kind of Revocation.
APOSIOPESIS, (...) reticentia, a holding ones peace, derived from, (...), [
apo] post, after; and (...), [ siopao] obticeo, to hold ones peace or be silent.

Aposiopesis is a form of speech whereby the speaker through some affection, as
either of sorrow, bashfulnesse, fear, anger, or vehemence, breaks off his
speech before it be all ended.

A figure, when speaking of a thing, we yet seem to conceal it, though indeed
by this means we aggravate it; or,

When the course of the sentence begun is so stayed, as thereby some part of
the sentence, not being uttered, may be understood.

Farnaby.
Aposiopesis sensa imperfecta relinquit:
Qu^s ego: sed motos praestat componere fluctus.
Quem quidem ego si sensero. Sed quid opus est verbis?

De nostrum enim omnium -- non audeo totum dicare. Cic.

Ego te furcifer, si vivo. Caetera gestu agit.

Nunquid, vos Medici, quid characteres ficti? quid vocabula ignota? sed aicere
dispudet.

English Examples of Aposiopesis.
The use hereof is either to stay the vehemence of immoderate affections
proceeding to some excess, or to signify by a part what the whole means.

I let pass your frequent drunkenness, your wanton company.

Much more might be said, but I dare not utter all my mind.

How does the child Ascanius, whom timely Troy to thee: -- breaking off by
interruption of sorrow. Virgil.


I might say much more, but modesty commands silence.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 6.3. My soul is sore vexed, but thou O Lord how long? ( i. e.) how long
will thou delay to send me help?

Luke 19.42. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! ( i. e.) how happy had thou been, if thou had
known them!

1 King. 21.7. Do thou now govern the Kingdom of Israel? Arise, Art thou a
King! ( i. e.) If thou be a King, thou may do what pleases thy self. Arise
speedily and be doing. But remember this was the counsel of a Jezebel.

Heb. 3.11. To whom I swear in my wrath, if they enter into my rest; ( i. e.)
They shall never enter into my rest; if they come there, let me cease to be
God, or let me not be true.

See John 12.27. Psalm. 95.11.85.35. 2 Cor. 12.6. Hos. 8.1. Isa. 1.13.

APORIA, (...), Addubitatio, Doubting, or a want of counsel or advice; derived
from (...), [ aporeo] animi pendeo, animi dubious sum, and nescio quid mihi sit
faciendum; to be doubtful of mind, or not to know what is best to be said or
done: or it is derived from (...), [ aporos] which signifies as it were not
having a way or passage.

Aporia is a figure whereby the Speaker shows that he doubts, either where
to begin for the multitude of matters, or what to do or say in some strange or
ambiguous thing; and does as it were argue the case with himself.

Farnaby.
Consulit addubitans quid agat dicatve Aporia.
Quid faciam? roger, anne rogem? quid deinde rogabo?
En quid agam? rursusne procos irrisa priores
Experiar? Nomadumque p^tam connubia supplex?
At length the answer of this doubt follows;

Quin morere, ut merita es, ferreque averte dolorem.
Addubitatio sola est,
-- Heu quae nunc tellus, quae me aequora possunt
Excipe^e? aut quid misero mihi denique restat?
English Examples of Aporia.
Whether he took them from his fellows more impudently, Cice^o.
gave them to a harlot more lasciously, removed them from the Rom^ne people
more wickedly, or altered them more presumptuously, I cannot well declare.

What shall I do? whither shall I fly? whom shall I blame? what shall I
pretend?

I know not what to term it, folly or forgetfulness, ignorance or wilfulness.

Scriptural Examples.
Phil. 1.22, 23, 24. But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my
labor: yet what I shall choose, I know not; for I am in a straight between
two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better:
nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you, etc.

Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I fly from
thy presence?

See Romans 7.24, 25. Lam. 2.13. Luke 16.3, 4.

ANACOENOSIS, (...), Communicatio, Communication, or an imparing a thing to
another; derived from (...), [ ana] with, and (...), [ coinoo] communico, to
communicate unto another.

Anacoenosis is a figure whereby we consult with, deliberate, and as it were
argue the case with others.

This form of speech is elegantly used with such as are (1) Dead: (2) with the
Judge: (3) with the Hearers: (4) with the Opp^nent: (5) with such as are
absent: (6) with sensitive or inanimate things.

English Examples.
Were it your case, what would you answer? Tell me, I appeal to your inmost
thoughts.

Would you judge him unworthy to be your friend, that began his fidelity with
an inviolable Covenant never to be an enemy?

Scriptural Examples of Anacoenosis.
Mal. 1.6. If then I be a father, where is mine honor? If I be a Master, where
is my fear? etc.

Isa. 5.3, 4. Now therefore, oh Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard; What could I have done any more to
my Vineyard that I have not done unto it? etc.

Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand? am I not also a God a far off?

See Luke 11.19. 1 Cor. 4.21. chap. 10.15, 16. chap. 11.15, 14. Gal. 4.21.3.12.
etc.

PROSOPOPOEIA, (...), fictio personae, the feigning of a person, derived from
(...), [ prosopon] persona, a person, and (...), [ poieo] facio vel fingo, to
make or feign.

Pr^sopopoeia is the feigning of a person to speak, or the attributing of a
person to the inanimate creatures; as, when we bring in persons that are dead,
or the inanimate creatures speaking or hearing, etc.

A figurative Exornation, when in our speech what thing soever which is not a
person, is Metaphorically brought in and represended as a person; or when the
properties of man are for similitude and agreeableness sake attributed unto
other things; whence it is said that this form of speech animates and makes
dead men speak; or it is,

When in our speech we feign another person speaking.

By this figure God, Angels and men, dead, or alive, the Heavens, Earth, Sea,
etc. are brought in speaking, hearing, etc.

Personam inducit Of this kind are Mimesis and Dialegismus.
Prosopopoeia loquentem: Farnaby.

Hosue mihi fructus, hunc fertilitatis honorem
Officiique refers? quod adunci vulnera aratri
Rastrorumque fero, totoque exerceor anno.
Sic Aeneae Prosopopoeiam Virgilius Aeneid 2. composuit, cum Aeneas sociis
cibum vinumque

Dividit, and dictis marentia pectora mulcet.
O Socii (neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum)
O passi graviora! dabit Deus his quoque finem etc.
Tandem sic Prosopopoeiam claudit:
Talia voce refert.
Look that your access to, and retreat from this figure be comely, lest you
seem precipitantly to rush in upon it.

English Examples of Prosopopoeia.
Thus Sir Philip Sidney gives sense and speech to the needle and silk in
Pamela's hands, and life, and speech unto Learning, and a Lilly; yea Death it
self is feigned to live and make a speech.

Thus, if an Orator having occasion to commend Truth or any virtue unto his
hearers, he may after some due praise of it, feign it a person, and bring it in
bitterly complaining how cruelly she is oppressed, and how little esteemed; how
many be her enemies, and how few her friends; how she wandereth hither and
thither without entertainment, and remains without habitation, etc.

I see my words will not move you, but suppose some of your grave Ancestors
should thus speak to you; Children, can we behold your manners without
indignation, being full of pride, effeminatenesse, etc.

If your Ancestors were now alive, and saw you abusing your self in mispending
your estate by them providently gathered together and conferred upon you, would
they not say thus, etc.

Scriptural Examples of Prosopopoeia.
Josh. 24.27. Behold this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it has heard
all the words of the Lord which he has spoken unto us, etc.

Judge. 9.8. Thus Jotham brings in the trees speaking as men: The Olive Tree
will not leave his fatness, nor the figtree his sweetness, nor the vine his
wine, to reign over others; but it is the bramble that affects sovereignty
and domination, a base, scratching, worthless, fruitless shrub, good for
nothing but to stop gaps and keep out beasts from spoiling the pleasant fields,
and afterward to be burnt.

1 Kings 13.2. And he cried against the Altar in the word of the Lord, and
said, O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord, etc.

Psalm. 98.8. Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills rejoice together.

Thus in Isa. 35.1, 2. the Prophet attributes joy and singing to the
Wilderness, the Solitary place, and the Desert.

See Psalm. 51.8. Psalm. 103.1. Psalm. 82.1, 2. Romans 8.19, 20. Isa. 1.2.

Thus in Joel 2. from 1. to the 12. ver. you have a most lively Rhetorical
Prosopopoeical description of the terrible Army of the Babylonians.

Prosopopaeia is twofold; Imperfect, or Perfect.

1. An Imperfect Prosopopaeia is when the speech of another is set down lightly
and indirectly; as in Ps. 11.1. David brings in the wicked, as saying unto his
soul; Flee as a bird unto your Mountain.

2. A Perfect Prosopopoeia is when the whole feigning of the person is set down
in our speech, with a fit entering into and leaving off of the same.

Thus in Prove. 8. Wisdom cries at the Gates, etc. Unto you O men I call, etc.
where the entrance is in the beginning of the chapter, her speech in the latter
part of i^.

APOSTROPHE, (...), aversio, a turning away or dislike: derived from (...), [
apo] from, and (...), [ strepho] verto, to turn.

Apostrophe is a diversion of speech to another person then the speech
appointed did intend or require; or it is a turning of the speech from one
person to another, many times abruptly.

A figure when we break off the course of our speech, This Exsornation has
some affinity with Prosopopoeia.
and speak to some new person, present, or absent, as to the people, or
witnesses, when it was before directed to the Judges, or Opponent.

This Diversion of speech is made these nine ways; viz. (1) To God, (2) to
Angels, (3) to men in their several ranks, whether absent or present, dead or
alive, (4) to the adversary, (5) to the heavenly bodies and Meteors, (6) to the
earth and things in it, (7) to the Sea and things in it, (8) to beasts, birds
and fishes (9) to inanimate things.

Sermonem a praesenti avertit Apostrophe: et auro

Farnaby.
Vi potitur. Quid non mortalia pectora cogit

Auri sacra fames?

Vos Sanctissimi Angeli, testes volo meae innocentiae.

Quousque tandem, Catilina, abutere patientia nostra?

Vos adeste ciconiae, et ingratitudinem hominum redarguite.

Vos agri, vos parietes obtestor; an non sudabatis, cum tantum nefas hoc loco
perpetrabatur?

Per Apostrophen Poeticam mutando casum: Terretur minimo pennae stridore
columba,

Vngnibus, accipiter, saucia facta tuis.

English Examples of Apostrophe.
To the people thus,

Now let me entreat any man here present, that thinks himself not exempted from
the like wrong, but liable to the like prejudice, to imagine himself in my
case, and to undertake for my sake some few thoughts of my distress.

Herein you witnesses are to consult with your own consciences, and to enter
into a true examination of your own memory.

Did you mark his speeches? did you note his looks?

Sometimes the occasion is taken from some quality, or other thing, whereto
your self gives show of life: as,

Hope, tell me, what ground have thou to hope for, etc.

Love, be ashamed to be called Love.

Scriptural Examples of Apostrophe.
The Lord by his Prophet Hosea having long complained of Israel for their high
provocations against him, does break off from speaking of Israel, and turns his
speech to Israel: as,

Hos. 13.9 O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.

Thus David having denounced Gods judgments against the Kings and Rulers of the
earth in the 2. Psalm, does presently divert his speech to the Kings and great
ones themselves.

Psalm. 2.9, 10. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, etc. Be wise
therefore oh ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth.

Thus Isaah finding the people to be rebellious, to whom he was speaking,
diverts his speech to the inanimate creatures.

Isa. 1.2. Hear oh heavens, and give ear oh earth: for the Lord has spoken, I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

David being dismayed with the number of his enemies, turns his speech to God,
saying,

Psalm. 3.3. But thou, oh Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up
of my head.

See Genesis 49.18. Psalm. 33.20, 21, 22. Judge. 5.11.

SYNONYMIA, (...), nominis communio, seu nomina diversa idem significantia, a
partaking together of a name, or diverse words signifying one and the same
thing, whereof the latter is usually explanatory to the former: derived from,
(...), [ syn] simul, together, and (...), [ onoma] nomen, a name or word.

A Synonymie is a commodious heaping together of diverse words of one
signification.

This figure adorneth and garnisheth speech as a rich wardrobe, wherein are
many and sundry changes of garments to adorn one and the same person.
A figure when by a variation and change of words that are of like
signification, one thing is iterated diverse times.

This kind of Elocution is to be used as often as we see not enough in one word
evidently to signify the dignity or magnitude of the thing mentioned.

This figure and Palalogia, which signifies Repetition of the same word, are
alike; and serves to amplify and to excite vehement affection and passion,
when from one thing many ways expressed, we fasten many stings as it were in
the mind of the hearer.

Verba Synonymia addit rem significantia eandem. Farnaby,


Enses and gladii. Superatne and vescitur aura
Aetherea, nec adhuc crudelibus occubat umbris?
Prostavit, perculit affixit.
Abiit, excessit, evasit, erupit.
English Examples of a Synonymie.
Wisdom in the poor man, A Synonymie of word^.
lies as a thing despised, rejected, oppressed, buried and utterly extinct.

Is it not a certain mark and token of intolerable arrogance and venomous envy,
where the tongue is still exercised in depraving, slandering, defacing,
deriding and condemning of other men's words and works?

Who more worthy of renown, A Synonymie of sentences.
honor and same, then Caesar? who more worthily esteemed, beloved, reverenced
and honored then noble Caesar? who amongst men was his equal in knowledge,
understanding, policy and wisdom? what was he that might be compared to him,
either in courage of heart, in fortitude of mind, or magnanimity of nature?

Thus to describe a beautiful woman, may be said;

She has a most winning countenance, a most pleasant eye, a most amiable
presence, a cheerful aspect, she is a most delicate object, etc.

Your beauty (sweet Lady) has conquered my reason, subdued my will, mastered
my judgment.

Scriptural Examples of a Synonymie.
Isa. 19.8. The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the
brooks shall lament, etc.

Psalm. 18.13. The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his
voice, etc. Here the first sentence is repeated by the latter, but yet with
other words of the same signification: for in the former is, the Lord; in the
latter, the Highest; in the former, thundered; in the latter, gave his voice.

Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God,
my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation,
and my high Tower.

Prove. 1.20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets.

Prove. 2.2. So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom; and apply thy heart to
understanding, yea, if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice
for understanding, etc.

Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way
of the ungodly; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.

Prove. 9.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge
of the Holy is understanding.

Prove. 30.14. The poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.

See Prove. 5.10, 13.2.11, 21. Psalm. 74.2, 7, 18. Prove. 16.18, 23. Prove.
6.4.8.34. Isa. 14.25, etc.

HIRMOS, (...), nexus, series a bond or knot, or an heaping up of many things
of different kinds: derived from (...), [ heiro] necto, copulo, to knit or
couple together.

A figure whereby a sudden entrance is made into a confused heap of matter; or
when that which might have been spoken in one word is for plainness and
evidence sake mustered together, or rehearsed through many species or forms.

Diversas specie res multas congerit Hirmos:
Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, pictor, aliptes, Farnaby.

Augur, Schoenobates, Medicus, Magus; omnia novit.
English Examples of Hirmos.
All men exclaim upon these exactions, Nobles, Gentry, Commonalty, Poor, Rich,
Merchants, Peasants, young, old, high, low, and all cry out upon the hard
impositions of these butthens.

Loves companions be unquietness, longings, fond comforts, faint discomforts,
hopes, jealousies, rages, carelessness, carfulness, yieldings, etc.

Scriptural Examples.
Isa. 3.16. Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with
st^etched-out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and mincing as they go;
and making a tinckling with their feet.

Isa. 1.11. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the
Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts!
and I desire not the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats, etc.

See Isa. 1.12, 13, 14. Romans 1.29, 30. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22, etc.

APOPHASIS, (...), negatio, a denying, derived from (...), [ phao] dico, to
speak and (...), [ apo] which sometimes signifies a denying; or from (...), [
apophemi] nego, to deny.

It is a kind of an Irony, whereby we deny that we say or do that which we
especially say or do, Farnaby.
Non dico Apophasis:
Nec ea dico, quae si dicam, tamen infirmare non possis.
Nil dico.


Quid memorem, efferam, repetam? etc.

English Examples.
I say nothing.

Neither will I mention those things, which if I should, you notwithstanding
could neither confute nor speak against them.

For that this figure and the next differ only in the manne^ of speaking; take
the Scriptural Examples of both together.

PARALIPSIS, (...), [paraleipsis] praeteritio, an over-passing, derived from
(...), [ paraleipo] praetermitto, omitto, to pretermit, or leave out.

Preterition is a kind of an Irony, and is when you say you let pass that
which notwithstanding you touch at full: or, When we say we pass by a thing,
which yet with a certain elegancy we note; speaking much, in saying we will not
say it.

The forms of this figure are these, viz.

I let pass, I am silent. I will leave out. I omit. I say not.

-- Taceo, mitto, est Paralipsis. Farnaby.


Sunt haec et alia in te falsi accusatoris signa permulta, quibus ego non utor.

Praeterire me nostram calamitatem, que tanta fuit, ut eam ad aures L. Luculli,
non e praelio nuncius, sed ex sermon rumor afferret. Hic praeterire se simulat
Orator suorum calamitatem, quam tamen significantius exprimere non posset.

Apophasis, is not unlike to this figure, for it differs not, unless in the
manner of speaking, and is the same in the matter and sense.

English Examples of Paralipsis and Apophasis.
I urge not to you the hope of your friends, though that should animate you to
answer their expectation.

I lay not before you the necessity of the place which you are to supply,
wherein to be defective and insufficient were some shame; I omit the envious
concurrences, and some prepared comparisons in your country, which have some
feeling with young men of foresight.

I only say, how shall our promises give judgment against us, etc.

I do not say you received bribes of your fellows.

I busy not my self in this thing, that you spoil Cities and Kingdoms, and all
men's houses.

I let pass your thefts and your robberies.

A Scriptural Example of both figures.
Philemon v. 19. Albeit I do not say to thee, thou owe thy self unto me.

PERIPHRASIS, (...), Circuml^cutio, a long circumstance, or a speaking of many
words, when few may suffice; derived from (...), [ periphrazo] circumloquor, to
utter that in many words which might be spoken in few.

Whatsoever may be more briefly signified, and is with eloquence more amply
manifested, is a Periph^asis.
It is the using of many words for one thing.

Periphasis is a figure when a short ordinary sense is odly expressed by more
words; or when a thing is shadowed out by some equivalent expressions.

Rem circumloquitur per plura Periphrasis unam:
Trojani belli Scriptor. Chironis alumnus. Far^aby.

This figure is made principally four ways, viz.

1. When some notable enterprise, ones native country, or a sect, or strange
opinion is put in stead of the proper name, etc. as in the first example,

Trojani belli Scriptor, The Writer of the Trojan war, for Homer.

Chironis alumnus, he that was educated by Chiron the son of Saturn, for
Achilles.

2. When by the Etymology, to wit, when the cause or reason of a name is
unfolded: as,

Vir sapientiae studiosus, a man studious of wisdom, for a Philosopher.

3. When by Annotation, that is, by certain marks or tokens something is
described: as,

Cubito se emungit, pro Salsamentario.

Anger is a vehement heat of the mind, which brings palenesse to the
countenance, burning to the eyes, and trembling to the parts of the body.

4. When by Definition a thing is described: as,

Ars ornate dicendi, pro Rhetorica.

The At of eloquent speaking, for Rhetorique.

Legum ac civium libertatis oppressor, pro Tyranno.

An oppressor of the laws and liberties of the people, for a Tyrant.

Other English Examples of Periphrasis.
Thus, for, having risen early, Having striven with the Suns earliness.

So in stead of Mopsa wept ill-favouredly, Mopsa disgraced weeping with her
countenance.

To sleep among thieves; by this figure thus,

To trust a sleeping life among theives.

When they had slept a while, thus;

When they had a while hearkened to the persuasion of sleep; where, to be
inclined to sleep, is expressed by a Metaphor (which is very helpful in this form
of speech) taken from one who moves and inclines by persuasion.

Thus instead of Plangus speech began to be suspected, it is said;

Plangus his speech began to be translated into the language of suspicion.

Scriptural Examples of Periphrasis.
2 Pet. 1.14. To put off or lay down this Tabernacle, ( i. e.) to die.

Josh. 23.14. I am going the way of all the earth, for that none can escape it:
(i. e.) death.

Eccles. 12.3, 4. Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house, nor
go up into my bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine
eyelids, until, etc. the sense is, I will not rest until, etc.

Romans 4.11. The Father of the Faithful, ( i.e.) Abraham.

1 Timothy 2.7. A Teacher of the Gentiles, ( i.e.) Paul.

Joh. 21.20. The Disciple whom Jesus loved; (i. e.) John.

Mark 14.25. The fruit of the Vine: (i. e.) Wine.

Job 18.14. The King of terrors; ( i. e.) death.

See it further in page 5.
METAPLASMVS, Transformation, It is a Figure when by reason of the verse, etc.
something is necessarily changed redundant, or defficient.

PROSTHESIS, (...), appositio, a putting of one letter to another, derived from
(...), [ prostithemi] appono, to put or add unto.

A figure (contrary to Aphaeresis) whereby a letter or syllable is added to the
beginning of a word.

Aphaeresis, (...), [aphairesis] ademptio, detractio, a taking away.

A figure contrary to Prosthesis, and is, when a letter or syllable is taken
away from the beginning of a word.

Farnaby.
Prosthesis apponit capiti, quod Aphaeresis aufert. Examples of Prosthesis and
Aphaeresis.
Vt; gnatus. tetuli. ruit. and non temnere divos. Gnatus, for, natus. Tetuli,
for, tuli, Ruit, for, eruit. Temnere, for, contemnere.

SYNCOPE, (...), a cutting away. Syncope is a figure contrary to Epenthesis,
and is when a letter or syllable is taken or cut away from the midst of a word.

Epenthesis, (...), interpositio, interposition, or a putting in between.

Epenthesis is the interposition of a letter or syllable in the midst of a word.

Syncope de medio tollit, quod Epenthesis infert. Farnaby.
Examples of Syncope and Epenthesis.
Relligio. Mavors. Jusso. Surrexe. Repostum.

Relligio for, religio. Repostum, for, repositum. Abiit, for, abivit. Petiit,
for, petivit. Dixti, for, dixisti.

APOCOPE, (...), abscissio, a cutting off.

Apocope is a figure contrary to Paragoge, and is when the last letter or
syllable of a word is cut off or taken away.

Paragoge (...), productio, a making long.

Paragoge is a figure when a letter or syllable is added to the end of a word.

Aufert Apocope finem, quem dat Paragoge. Examples of Apocope and Paragoge.
Farnaby.

Ingeni. Hymen. Curru. Tyrio vestirier ostro.

Ingeni, for, Ingenii. Curru, for, currui. Peculi, for, Peculii. Dicier, for,
dici.

ANTITHESIS, (...), Oppositio, opposition, or (...), [ antitheton] oppositum,
opposite, set or placed, against; derived from (...), [ anti] against, and
(...), [ thesis] positio, a position, or state of a question, which is derived
from (...), [ tithemi] pono, to put.

Antithesis is sometimes a figure, whereby one letter is put for another; and
then it is the same with Antistoichon, which signifies change of letters.

Litterulam Antithesis mutat, quod and Antistoechon: Farnaby.

Olli subridens, vostrum, servom. faciundo.
Olli, for, illi. Vostrum, for, vestrum. Servom, for, servum. Faciundo, for,
faciendo.

Antithesis, is also the illustration of a thing by its opposite, or the
placing of contraries one against another, as spokes in a wheel; and is a
Rhetorial Exornation when contraries are opposed to contraries in a speech or
sentence; or when contrary Epithets are opposed, as also when sentences, or
parts of a sentence are opposed to each other.

In bona segete nonnulla spica nequam, neque in mala non aliqua bona.

This Exornation is of contrary words; or contrary sentences.

1. Of contrary words: as,

Hujus orationis difficilius est exitum, quam principium invenire.

Quisquis ubique habitat, maxim nusquam habitat.

2. Of Sentences: This Antithesis marvailously delights and allures.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.

Habet assentatio jucunda principia; eadem exitus aemarissimos adfert.

-- Plus hujus inopia ad misericordiam, quam illius open ad crudelitatem.

Cujus adolescentia ad scientiam rei militaris, non alienis praeceptis, sed
suis imperiis, non offensionibus belli, sed victoriis, non stipendiis, sed
triumphis, est traducta.

But that is the most elegant Antithesis, when contrary words are oftnest
opposed to each other: as,

Egentee in locupletes, perditi in bonos, servi in dominos armabantur.

Or when contrary sentences are oftnest opposed: as,

Conferte hanc pacem cum illo bello; hujus praetoris adventum cum illius
Imperatoris victoria; hujus cohortem impuram cum illius exercitu invicto; hujus
libidines cum illius continentia: ab illo qui cepit conditas, ab hoc qui
constitutas accepit, captas dicetis Syracusas. Verr. Act. 5.

English Examples of Antithesis.
He is gone, but yet by a gainful remove; from painful labor to quiet rest,
from un quiet desires to happy contentment, from sorrow to joy, and from
transitory time to immortality.

So well sighted were the eyes of his mind, that by them he saw life in death,
an exultation in falling, glory in shame, a Kingdom in bondage, and a glorious
light in the midst of darkness.

Compare the ones impatiency with the others mildness, the ones insolency with
the others submission, the ones humility with the others indignation, and tell
me whether he that conquered seemed not rather confounded, then he that
yielded, any thing discouraged; or set the ones triumph against the others
captivity, loss against victory, feasts against wounds, a crown against
fetters; and the majesty of courage will appear in the overthrown.

What Is more odious then labor to the idle, fasting to the glutton, want to
the covetous, shame to the proud, and good laws to the wicked?

Art thou rich? then rob not the poor: if thou be wise, beguile not the
simple; if strong, tread not the weak under thy feet.

Scriptural Examples of Antithesis.
Prove. 14.11. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the Tabernacle
of the upright shall flourish.

Verse 34. Righteousenesse exalts a Nation: but sin is a reproach to any
people.

Isa. 59.9. We wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we
walk in darkness.

Lam. 1.1. How does the City sit solitary that was full of people! how is she
become as a widow! she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among
the Provinces, how is she become tributary!

Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.

Prove. 29.7. An unjust man is an abomination to the just; and he that is
upright in the way, is an abomination to the wicked.

Prove. 3.35. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of
fools.

See Isa 5.20. Prove. 3.33.12.23.28.1.12.24.13.4.15.1.17.15. Prove. 13.7, 8.

Farnaby.
METATHESIS, (...), Transpositio, Transposition.

Transposition is a Grammar figure whereby one letter is put for another.

Transponitque elementa Metathesis; ut, tibi Thymbre.
Thymbre, pro, Thymber* item, pistris, pro, pristis.
ECTHLIPSIS, (...), elisio, a striking out. It is a figure of Prosodia,
especially when ( M) with his vowel is taken away, the next word beginning with
a vowel.

Synaloepha, (...), [synaloiphe] Commixtio, a mingling together.

It is a gathering of two vowels into one syllable: or a Collision or dashing
together of a vowel before another in diverse words.

Ecthlipsis M. vocales aufert Synaloepha. Farnaby.


Examples of Ecthlipsis and Synalaepha.
Tu in me ita es, hem! in te ut ego sum: ac tu me ibi ama, ut te ego amo hic
jam. SYSTOLE, (...), correptio, a shortning.

A figure of Prosodia, whereby a long syllable is contrary to its nature made
short.

This and Synecphonesis are alike, whereunto Diastole is contrary.

Diastole, (...), extensio, extension, or lengthening.

A figure of Prosodia, whereby syllable, short by nature is made long.

Systole ducta rapit; correpta Diastole duc^t. Farnaby.


Examples of Systole and Diastole.
Recidimus. Steterunt. Naufragia. Semisopi^a.

SYNAERESIS, (...), [synairesis] Contrictio, Contraction.

It is a contraction of two words or syllable into one.

Farnaby.
Syllaha de binis confecta Synaeresis esto:
Acripides. alveo. cui. tenvis. parjetis. aurea.
Seu lento fuerint alvaria vimine texta.
Alvaria pro alvearia.

Diaeresis (...), [diairesis] divisio, division.

It is a figure of Prosodia, and is when one syllable is divided into two parts.

Farnaby.
Dividit in binas partita Diaeresis unam:
Evoluisset. aheneus. evohe. materiai.
Debuerant fusos evoluisse suos.
Evoluisse, for, evolvisse. ahe^eus, pro, aeneus. evohe, pro, vae. materiai,
pro, materiae.

ELLIPSIS, (...), [elleipsis] defectus, defect, or want: derived from (...), [
elleipo] deficio, to lack or want.

It is somewhat like unto Aposiopesis.
A figure when for expressing of passion and affection, some word (necessary in
construction) is forborne: or, when in a sentence, a word is wanting, to make
that sense, which has been spoken.

Dicitur Ellepsis, si, ad sensum, dictio desit:
Non est solvendo. dicunt. quid plura? quid istis? Farnaby.

So that deficient speech of Venus, Aen. 1. carries matter of admiration with
it.

Sed vos qui tandem? ubi omittitur [estis].

And that of Pamphilus his indignation.

Ter. Act. 1. Scen. 5. Tantamne rem tam negligenter agier? ubi deest [decet].
Ex pede Herculem: ubi omittitur computes magnitudinem.

Scriptural Examples of Ellipsis.
Genesis 3.1. And he said to the woman, ( i.e.) the devil in the Serpent.

Exodus 4.15. Then Zipporah took a sharp [stone or knife] which is understood,
but not expressed in the Original.

Numb. 14 19. He also that shall have dominion shall be of Jacob, etc. (i. e.)
the offspring of Jacob.

See Numb. 16.28. 2 King. 19.9.22.18.

Isa. 1.13. I cannot iniquity, ( i. e.) I cannot bear iniquity.

Hos. 8.1. Trumpet to mouth, ( i. e.) set the Trumpet to thy mouth.

Psalm. 6.4. And thou Lord, how long?

ZEVGMA, (...), junctura, a joining or coupling together: derived from (...),
jungo, to join or couple.

Zeugma is a figure of construction, whereby one Verb or Adjective answering
the nearer to diverse Nominative cases or Substantives, is reduced to the one
expressly, but to the other by a supplement.

Suppositis multis si verbum inserviat unum,
Farnaby.
Aut Adjectivum, fit Zeugma: Hic illius arma,
Hic currus fuit. Hircus erit tibi salvus and hoedi.
Vicit pudorem libido, timorem audacia, rationem amentia.

But when there is a Comparison, or Similitude, the Verb or Adjective agrees
with the former Nominative case or Substantive: as,

Ego melius quam tu scribo. Ego sicut foenum arui.

Hoc ille ita prudenter atque ego fecisset.

Zeugma is made three ways; viz.

1. In Person: as,

Ego and tu studes.

1. In Gender: as,

Maritus and uxor est irata.

3. In Number: as, -- Hic illius arma, hic currus fuit.

Zeugma has three kinds: viz.

1. Protozeugma. which is when the Verb or Adjective is expressed in the
beginning of the clause or sentence; and omitted after: -- Sunt nobis mitia
poma,
Castna^ae molles, and pressi copia lactis,


Dormio ego and tu.

For neither art thou he Cataline, Cicero against Cataline.
whom at any time shame could call back from dishonesty, either fear from
peril, or reason from madness.

Here the Verb [could call back] is the common word which is expressed in the
first clause, and understood in the rest following.

2. Mesozeugma, when the common word is put in the middle clause: as,

Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.

Ego Dormio and tu.

What a shame is this, that neither hope of reward, nor fear of reproach could
any thing move him, neither the persuasion of his friends, nor the love of his
country!

3. Hypozeugma, which is when the Verb or Adjective, or the common word is put
in the last clause, or in the end of the clause: as,

Ego mihi illum, sibi me ille anteferebat.

Ego and tu d^rmis.

Non Venus and vivum sublimia pectora fregit.

The foundation of freedom, the fountain of equity, the safeguard of wealth,
and custody of life is preserved by laws.

By this figure Zeugma, a verb is sometimes reduced to two Nominative cases,
and agrees with both, and then it is called a Zeugma of locution, not of
construction; as,

Joannes fuit piscator and Petrus.

John was a fisherman and Peter.

SYLLEPSIS, (...), Comprehensio, Comprehension, derived from (...), [
syllambano] comprehendo, to comprehend or contain.

A figure of Construction, and is when a Nominative case plural is joined to a
Verb singular, or a Nominative singular to a Verb plural: or it is a
comprehension of the more unworthy under the more worthy.

Farnaby.
Personam, genus and numerum conceptio triplex.
Accipit indignum Syllepsis sub mage digno:
Tuque puerque eritis. Rex and Regina beati.
Quid tu and soror facitis? In English,

What do you and your sister make?

Ego and matter miseri perimus: I and my mother being miserable, do perish.

Tu and uxor, qui adfuistis. testis estote: You and your wi^e, who were
present, be ye witnesses.

Syllepsis is threefold: viz.

1. Of the Person: as,

Ego and pater sumus in tuto: I and my father are safe.

Neque ego, neque tu sapimus: Neither I nor you are wise.

Tu q^id ego and populus mecum desideret audi: Hear thou what I and the people
with me do desire.

2. Of the Gender: as,

^ex and Regni beati: The King and the Queen be blessed.

3. Of the Number: as,

Ego cum fratre sumus candidi: I with my brother are white.

So Ovid. Impliciti laqueis nudus uterque jacet: They lie both naked fast tied
together with cords, speaking of Mars and Venus tied together in Vulcans net.

DIALYTON, (...), dissolutum, disjoined; derived from (...), [ dialyo] dissolvo
to disjoyn.

It is all one with Asyndeton.

Asyndeton, (...), inconjunctum, disjoined, or without copulative: derived from
the privative a, and (...), [ syndetos] colligatus, bound together; which is
derived from (...) [ deo] ^ig^, to bind.

A figure when in a heap or pile of words, a conjunction copulative it not only
for speed and vehemence, but for pathetical Emphasis sake left out.

Dialyton tollit juncturam, ut Asyndeton, idque Farnaby.

Articulus has been accounted among the Ancient Rhet. a figure, but now
Asyndeton. supplies its place.
Articulus faciet: Rex, Miles, Plebs negat illud.
Frangetoros, pete vina, rosas cape^ tingere nardo,
Tot res repent circumvallant, unde emergi non potest; vis, egestas,
injustitia, solitudo, infamia.

Vbi singulae voces asynditae, sunt emphaticae.

Caeteros ruerem, agerem, raperem, tunderem, proste^nerem.

Veni, vidi, vici.

Here if the words were copulated with conjunctions, the quick virtue,
vehemence and earnest affection of the speech would languish and decay.

English Examples of Dialyton and Asyndeton.
Her face with beauty, her head with wisdom, her eyes with Majesty, her
countenance with gracefulness, her lips with loveliness; where many [ands]
are spared.

The King himself, the soldier, all sorts of people deny this.

By the folly and wickedness thou have lost thy substance, thy good name, thy
friends, thy parents, and offended thy Creator.

In some places only the Conjunction is put in the last place, in a Compare of
three: as,

A fair woman does not only command without entreaty, but persuade without
speaking.

Her wit endeared by youth, her affection by birth, and her sadness by her
beauty.

Scriptural Examples.
1 Cor. 13, 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, envyeth not, vaunteth not it
self, is not puffed up, behaves not it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is
not easily provoked, thinks no evil, etc.

2 Timothy: 3.2, 3. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, etc.

The like also you may find in Romans 1.29, etc. Psalm. 66.1, 2, 3. Romans 3.11, 12,
etc. 1 These, 5, 16. etc.

POLYSYNDETON, (...), vary and multipliciter conjunctum, diversely and many
ways joined or coupled together: derived from (...), [ polu multum, valde,
very much, and (...), [ syndetos] conjunctus, joined together.

A figure signifying superfluity of conjunctions, and is when diverse words are
for their weightinesse, (and not without an Emphasis) knit together with many
copulatives.

Conjunctura frequens vocum Polysyndeton esto: Farnaby.

Fataque forsunasque virum moresque manusque
Live. lib. 8. Dec. 3. Et somnus and vinum, and epulae, and scorta, and balneae,
corpora atque animos enervant.

English Examples.
Overmuch sleep also, and wine, and banquets, and queans, and bathes enervate
and enfeeble the body and mind.

He was both an enemy to his country, and a betrayer of his trust, and a
contemner of the good laws, and a subverter of the peoples liberties and
immunities.

Scriptural Examples of Polysyndeton.
1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have
not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinckling cymbal, and though I
have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge,
yea, if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I
were nothing.

Act. 1.13. Where abode both Peter and James, and John, and Andrew, etc.

G^l. 4.10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.

The like examples you have in Romans 8.38, 39. P^al. 18.2, etc.

PLEONASMVS, (...), redundantia, superfluity: derived from (...), [ pleonazo]
redundo, to abound superfluously.

A figure whereby some superfluous word is added in a sentence to signify
emphatically the vehemence and earnestness of the speaker, and the certainty
of the matter spoken.

Farnaby.
Vocibus exuperat Pleonasmus and emphasin auget.
Auribus his audivi, oculis vidi, ore loquutus.
Cic. Accipies igitur hoc parvum opusculum.

Vbi gentium? quo terrarum abiit?

Te^. Te interea loci cognovi.

Nilo amn^ vectus.

Te^. Eg^ hominem callidiorem vidi n^minem quam Phormionem.

English Examples.
I heard it with these ears.

I saw it with these eyes.

I spoke the words with my own mouth.

Scriptural Examples of Pleonasmus.
The God of all grace, out of the fountain of his rich mercy often uses this
manner of speaking, thereby to condescend to the weakness of our capacities,
clear up things to our understandings, and beat them as it were into our dull
apprehension: as,

Deuteronomy. 13.4. Ye shall walk after the Lord and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

Deuteronomy. 33.6. O foolish people and unwise, etc.

Prove. 27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips.

1 John 1.1. We have seen with our eyes, etc.

So Joh. 1.3.6.33, 34, 35.

These Pleonastical inculcations are not vain, but serve to work things the
better upon our hard hearts.

The Scripture is often exegetical; what it speaks darkly in one place, it
explains in another.

PARELCON, (...), protractio, protraction, or prolonging; derived from (...), [
parelco] potraho, to protract or prolong.

A figure when a syllable, or whole word is added to another in the end of it.

Farnaby.
Syllabicum adjectum sit vocis fine Parelcon:
Quipote. numnam. etiamnum. ehodum. tu Sosia adesdum.
PARENTHESIS, (...), interpositio, interposition, or an inserting between:
derived from (...), [ parentithemi] insero, interjicio: to interpose, or cast
between.

Parenthesis is a form of speech or a clause comprehended within another
sentence, which (though it give some strength) may very well be left out, and
yet the speech perfect, or the sense sound.

Herein are two rules observable, viz.

1. Let it neither be long nor frequent, because then it will render the
sentence obscure.

2. Let it be very seldom that one Parenthesis be inserted within another.

Farnaby.
Membrum interjecto sermon Parenthesis auget:
Credo equidem (nec vana fides) genus esse Deorum.
Horat. Caetera de genere hoc (adeo sunt multa) loquacem

Delassare valent Fabium.

English Examples.
Sometimes a Parenthesis makes your discourse more graceful and intelligible:
as,

Tell me ingenuously (if there be any ingenuity in you) whether, etc.

That what his wit could conceive (and his wit can conceive as far as the
limits of reason stretch) was all directed to the setting forth of his friend,
etc.

And indeed all Parentheses are in extremes, either graces or foyls to a speech;

If they be long they seem interruptions, and therefore at the end of them must
be a retreat to the matter, called Antanaclasis, in which figure you shall find
examples of such Parentheses as require a retreat to the matter.

A Parenthesis is often put in. when the speaker supposing that the hearer may
demand a reason of, or make an objection to what he says, p^even^eth him by an
interposition expressed before the sentence be all ended: so that hereby it may
appear that a Parenthesis serves to confirm the saying by the inte^position of
a reason, and to confute the objection by the timely prevention of an answer:
Also where the sentence may seem dark, or doubtful, it puts in a short
annotation or exposition to give light, and to resolve the doubt.

Scriptural Examples of Parenthesis.
2 Cor. 11.23. Are they Ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more, etc.

Isa. 7.23. At that time all vineyards (though there were a thousand vines in
one, and sold for a thousand silverlings) shall be turned into briars and
thorns.

EVOCATIO, Evocation or calling forth.

I^ is an immediate Reduction of the third person either to the first or second.
Evocation is a figure of construction, and is when the Nominative Case to a
Verb of the third Person is set before a Verb of the first or second Person,
which draws and as it were calls it away to its own impropriety: or,

When as the first or second Person does immediately call unto it self the
third; they do both become the first or second Person.

Farnaby.
Personam ad primam revocatur sive secundam.
Tertia: Qui legis hac. Populus superamur ab uno.
Ego pauper laboro; tu dives ludis.

Where note that the Verb must agree with the Person calling; as may yet
further appear; viz.

Ego tuae deliciae istuc veniam.

Magna pars studiosorum amoenitates quaerimus; A great part of us students do
seek pleasures.

PARATHESIS, (...), appositio, apposition, or a putting of one thing to
another; derived from (...) [ paratithemi] appono, to put or add unto.

Apposition is a continued or immediate Conjunction of two Substantives of the
same case, by the one whereof the other is declared: as,

Vrbs Roma, the City Rome.

And it may be of many Substantives: as,

Ma^cus Tullius Cicero.

Apposition is a figure of Construction, (which the Ancients called
Interpretation or Declaration) whereby one Noune Substantive is for Declaration
and distinction sake added unto another in the same case: as,

Flumen Rhenus, the flood Rhenus.

Et Casu Substantiva apponuntur eodem.
Turba molesta proci. Mons Taurus. Fons Aganippe. Farnaby.

This figure is made for a threefold consideration: viz.

1. For the restraining of a generality: as,

Animal equus, a living creature, an horse,

2. For the removing of Equivocation: as,

Taurus Mons Asiae.

Lupum [piscem] non vidit Italia.

3. For the attribution of some property: as,

Erasmus, vir exactissimo judicio: Erasmus, a man of a most exact judgment.

Nierus, ^dolescens insigni forma: Nireus, a stripling of an excellent beauty.

A Scriptural Example of Parathesis.
John 14.22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, Lord how is it that thou, etc.

ANTIPTOSIS, (...) casus pro casu positio, the putting of one case for another
derived from (...), [ anti] pro, for, and (...), [ ptosis] casus, a case.

It is a position of one case for another.

A figure of construction, and is when one case is put for another, and
sometimes with a very good grace.

Antiptosis amat pro casu ponere casum:
Farnaby.
Vrbem quam statuo vestra est. Trabeate the Vocat. for traheatus, the Nominative.
srabeate salutat.
The City which I me^n is yours.

Sermonem quem audistis non est meus; The talk which you have heard is not mine.

Aristotelis libri sant omne genus eloquentia referti; The No. for the
Genitive. The Dat. for Accul. Abl. for Dat.
for omnis generis.

Terence: Nam expedit bonas esse vobis. vobis, for vos.

Virg, Haeret pede pes, densusque viro vir. pede, pro pedi.

But this figure and Hypallage are found rather to excuse the license or the
error of Authors, then to show that we may do the same.

Scriptural Examples.
Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar, etc.

Rev. 1.5, Luke 1.55.

HELLISMVS, (...), Graecorum imitatio, Sermo Graecanicus, Graecismus seu
proprietas Graecorum verborum; A Graecism or speech after the manner of the
Greeks, derived from (...), [ Hellen] Deucalions son, from whom the Greeks are
called (...), [ Hellenes] from whence (...), [ Hellenizo] Greece loquor, to
speak after the manner of the Greeks.

A Graecism or an imitation of the Greeks in phrase or construction, or a
speech after the manner of the Greeks: which is,

When the construction proper to the Greek tongue is used in another language.

Hellenismus erit phrasis aut constructio Graeca:
Desine clamorum. fallunt, ardebat Alexin.
Nobis non licet esse tam disertis.
(Terentius, Vtique vobis expedit esse bonas)
-- didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores.
Virg. Cui nec certaverit ulla.

Hor. desine curarum, pro a curis.

This Graecism Edm. Spencer uses also not unelegantly in the English tongue:
as, Edm Spencer. chapter 13.


For not to have been dipped in Lethe Lake, Could save the Achilles.
son of Theris from to die.

Tmesis, (...), Sectio, a Section, or dividing, derived from (...), [ temno] or
(...), [ tmao] seco, scindo, to cut or divide.

Tmesis is a figure whereby the parts of a compound or simple word are divided
by the interposition of another.

Compositae in parts est Tmesis sectio vocis: Farnaby.

Quae mihi cunque placent. Septem subjecta trtoni.
Hor. Est quadam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. (i. e.) licet quadantenus
prodire.

Plaut. Sed nae ego stultus, qui rem curo publicam. (i. e.) qui rem publicam
curo.

HENDIADYS, (...), or (...), [ hediaduo] unius in duo solutio, a dividing of
one thing into two: derived from (...), [ edo] corrodo, to bite or gnaw in
sunder, quasi (...), [hen dia duoin] unum per duo, one thing by two.

Hendiadys is a figure whereby one thing is divided into two, or when one thing
is expressed by more words.

Farnaby.
Hendiadys unum in duo solvit, mobile fixum
Dans: auro and pateris, Chalybem fraenosque momordit.
Pateris et auro, (i. e.) aureis pateri^.

Chalybem fraenosque etc. (i.e.) fraenos chalybeos.

In regione and umbra mortis, (i. e.) regione umbrosa mortis.

English Examples.
Cups of gold, ( i. e.) golden cups.

In the Region and shadow of death, ( i. e) in the shadie region of death.

Scriptural Examples of Hendiadys.
Genesis 19.24. And Jehovah rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire,
etc. (i. e.) fiery and burning brimstone, or sulphurous fire. See Genesis 1.26.

Jer. 29.11. Ad dandum vobis finem and expectationem, (i. e.) finem expectatum.

Matthew. 4.16. They that sat in the Region and shadow of death; ( i. e.) in the
shadie region of death.

Matthew. 20.20. Then came the mother of Zebedees children with her sons,
worshipping him and desiring, etc. (i. e.) desiring by worshipping.

ENALLAGE, (...), Ordinis permutaetio, a change of order; derived from (...), [
enallatto] permuto, to change one thing for another; or from (...), [ enallos]
inversus and praeposterus, turned upside down and disorderly.

A figure whereby the Number or Gender, Mood, Person, or Tense are changed, or
put one for another.

Personam, numerum, commutat Enallage tempus, Farnaby.

Cumque modo genus; ut: Enal. Genesis
Pereo Pro qui mihi charior sum, Enal. Numeri.
quod charius est mi.
Ni faciat vici. praesto est, hinc spargere voces.
Ovid. Et flesti, and nostros vidisti flentis ocellos. Flentis, pro flentium,
nisi nostros pro meos dixeris.

Cicero ad Trebat. Sed valebis meaque Enal. Modi
negotia videbis, meque dits adjuvantibus ante brumam expectabis: pro Vale,
vide, expecta.

The future Tense of the Indicative being put for the Imperative Mood.

Ter. in Phor. Si quis me quaerit rufus, Praesto est, Enal Pers.
desine: pro, Praesto sum; nam de se loguitur.

Virg. Omnis humo fumat Neptunia Troja. pro fumaevit. Enal Temporum.


The Present Tense being put for the Preter-perfect.

Scriptural Examples of Enallage.
Enal. of the Number.
This change of order is sometimes of the Number: as,

Psalm, 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God: They are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, etc.

See Exodus 20.2. Prove. 1.11. Matthew. 1.21.

Here the singular is put for the plural number; or on the contrary.

Enal. of the Gend.
Thus in Isa. 3.12. Women shall bear rule over them, etc. ( i. e.) effeminate
men shall, etc. The Feminine gender put for the Masculine, effeminate men are
called women.

Enal. of the Tense.
Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
etc. ( i. e.) whose heart, affections and will God has so renewed, that he
will not walk in their counsel, etc. where the present is put for the future
tense. See Matthew. 24.40.

Psalm. 18, 29. For by thee I have run through a Troop: Enal. of the Pers.
and by my God have I leaped over a wall.

Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxed fat, etc. the
like example you have in Genesis 49.4.

SYNTHESIS, (...), Compositio, Composition, or a joining together; derived from
(...), [ syntithemi] compono, to compose or put together.

It is a construction made for significations sake, or a speech congruous in
sense, not in voice.

It is a figure of construction, whereby a Noun collective singular is joined
to a Verb plural.

Of others it is also called a figure whereby two words are joined into one by
a sign of union.

Synthesis est seusu tantum, non congrua voce: Farnaby.

Turba ruunt. aperite aliquis. pars maxima caesi.
Gens armati; a Nation or people armed.

Sometimes it is made in gender only: as,

Elephantus gravida, an Elephant great with young.

Or for supplements sake: as,

Centauro in magna; where the word puppi, or ship is understood.

Sometimes it is made both in gender and number: as,

Pars mersi tenuere ratem. Part being drowned, held the oar.

Laudem semper-florentis Homeri.

Monti-feriens fulmen.

English Examples of Synthesis.
The tempest-tossed Seas.

The earth-incircling Ocean.

The Green-mantled Earth.

A Heaven-faln star.

A Rock-rending whirlwinde.

Marble-hearted cruelty.

ANASTROPHE, (...), praepostera rerum collocatio, a praeposterous placing of
words or matter; derived from (...), [ anastrepho] retro verto, to turn back.

A figure whereby words which should have been precedent, are postpon'd:
Farnaby.
Digna praeire solet postponere Anastrophe verba:
Transtra per. Italiam contra. Maria omnia circum.


HYPERBATON, (...), Transgressio, Transgression, or a passing over, derived
from (...), [ hyperbaino] transgredior, to pass over.

By Rhetoricians, it is called a transposed order of words; such as the cause
and comeliness of speech often requires.

Hyperbaton is a figure when words are for elegancy and variety transposed from
the right order of construction, (which is the plain Grammatical order) into
another handsomer and more fit order: or,

When words agreeing in sense are in site or placing disjoined:

Farnaby.
Est vocum inter se turbatus Hyperbaton ordo:
Vina, bonus quae deinde cadis onerarat Acestes,
Littore Trinacrio, dederatque abeuntibus heroes,
Dividit.
But this figure and Antiptosis are found rather to excuse the license or the
error of Authors, then to show that we may do the like.

Scriptural Examples of Hyperbaton.
Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins.

Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it
not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints.

Ephesians. 1.14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the purchachased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

HYPALLAGE, (...), immutatio; a changing; derived from (...), [ hypo] in, and
(...), [ allatto] muto, to change.

A figure when the natural order of the words is changed, as when two words
change their cases, or when words are altered among themselves.

Casu transposito submutat Hypallage verba: Farnaby.

Impia trabs, videt hos ortus. dare classibus Austros:
For dare classes Austris.

Et gladium vagina vacuum in urbe non vidimus: For vaginam gladio vacuam.

Scriptural Examples of Hypallage.
Job. 17.4. Thou have hid their heart from understanding ( i. o.) thou have hid
understanding from their heart.

Isa. 5.30. The light shall be darkened in the Heavens thereof, ( i. e.) the
heavens in the light thereof.

Psalm. 104.4. Who makes his Angels spirits, ( i. e.) the spirits his angels or
messengers.

Heb. 3.13. Through the deceitfulness of sin, ( i. e) by deceitful sin.

See Isa. 1, 3. Psalm. 80.6. Amos 5.16. Pro. 7.22.

HYSTEROLOGIA, (...), dictio praepostera, a praeposterous or disorderly speech,
when that which by order ought to have been spoken first, is brought in last.

It is otherwise called Hysteron Proteron, (...), postremum primum, the last
first: derived from (...), [ hysteros] postremus, the last or hindmost, and
(...), [ legos] verbum, a word or speech.

It is called in the English phrase, The Cart before the Horse.

A figure when in a speech that which in course of nature ought to have
preceded, is brought in last.

Farnaby.
Hysteron and Proteron sive Hysterologia secundo
Prima loco ponit: Lavindque littora venit.
Detrudunt naves scopulo. nutrit peperitque
Valet atque vivit.

Postquam altos tetigit fluctus, and ad aequora venit.

English Examples.
The ship arrived at the Lavinian shore: it came foul of the Rock.

She nourished and preserved him, she brought him forth into the world.

He is in health and alive.

Scriptural Examples of Hysterologia.
The order o^ ^ime is not always kept in Scripture; but sometimes that which
was done last is placed first; The Saints looked more at the substance then at
small circumstances in their writings; and therefore the placing of things in
Scripture must not be strictly urged; for it is usual by this figure or
anticipation of time to relate that first which either as to course of nature,
or as to the time of accomplishment, should have had the last place: as appears
by Joh. 11.2. compared with chapter 12. v. 3.

Psalm. 7.14. He travaileth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief: here
note that the birth is set before the conception.

Luke 4.9. The Devils leading up of Christ unto the top of the pinnacle of the
Temple, is mentioned after his taking him up into the exceeding high Mountain:
and yet that preceded this, as appears by Mat. 4 5, 8.

See Genesis 11.1.30.22, 23. Isa. 38.21, 22.

SYNCHORESIS, (...), Concessio, Concession, or granting of an argument: derived
from (...), [ synchoreo] conced^, to grant.

A figure when an argument is Ironically or mockingly yielded unto, and then
marred with a stinging retort upon the objector.

This form of speech delights most, either when that which we grant is
prejudicial to, and stings the objector, as in controversies it often happens;
or when the argument granted, brings no loss unto him that grants it.

Sit Sacrilegus, sit fur, fit, flagitiorum omnium vitiorumque princeps: at est
bonus Imperator.

Sint Christiani pauperes, sint mundo immundo exosi; sunt tamen coeli haeredes.

Cum adversarium pungimus: ut,

Habes igitur Tubero, quod est accusatori maxim optandum, confitentem, se in
ea part fuisse, qua te Tuboro, qua virum omni laud dignum patrem tuum. Itaque
prius de vestro delicto confiteamini necesse est, quam Ligarii ullam culpam
reprehendatis.

English Examples.
I admit you are resolute; I grant your determination is immovable, but it is
in things directly repugnant to the grave advice of your knowing friends, and
in things of a great tendency to your utter undoing.

They are proud, vain, disobedient, I acknowledge it; yet they are our children.

Scriptural Examples of Synchoresis.
James 2.19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well: the Devils
also believe and tremble.

Eccles. 11.9. Thus Solomon also checks the young man's folly: Rejoice O young
man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee, etc. and walk in the ways of
thy heart, etc. But know thou, etc.

Here first you have an Ironical concession, but after this, a stinging [but]
which mar^s all.

The like examples you may find in 2 Cor. 4.8. Romans 11.19, 20. 1 Cor. 1.2, 11.
2 Cor. 12.16, 17.

ANTHROPOPATHIA, (...), humanus affectus, humane affection: derived from (...),
[ anthropos] homo, a man, and (...), [ pathos] affectus, affection: or rather
from (...), [ an^hropopatheo] humano more afficior, aut loquor, to be affected
with, or to speak after the manner of men.

It is an attributing to God humane affections, or it is a speaking after the
manner of men.

A Metaphor whereby that which properly is agreeable to the creatures, and
especially to man, is by some similitude transferred unto the Creator and
heavenly things.

This is very frequent in Scriptures, when it speaks of God after the manner of
men, and by bodily things sets forth the divine excellencies of the spiritual
and eternal being.

This Metaphorical form of speech is also by others called Syncatabasis,
condescensio, condescension, for that in holy writ the Lord does as it were
descend unto us, and under humane things resembles and expresses heavenly
mysteries unto our capacities.

Thus the Lord is said to have a face in Psalm. 116.11.17.15. and eyes, in Psalm.
11.4. to signify his omnisciencie; bowe's in Isa. 63.15; and a bosom in Psalm.
74.11. to denote unto us his infinite mercy and most ardent love.

Thus in Psalm. 48.14. he is said to be his peoples guide even unto death; and
in Psalm. 62, 7. the rock of their strength and their refuge; in Psalm. 18.2.
their buckler and the horn of their salvation; Thus in Psalm. 17.8. he is said
to have wings, to show his care and protection of his people.

These and such like are the condescensional characters of comfort, whereby we
may easily read and plainly understand the goodness and rich mercy of the
incomprehensible Jehovah.

Thus the Lord also in respect of his adversaries is by this Metaphor
pourtrayed with letters of a contrary signification; as, a Giant to wound, a
Judge to condemn, and a fire to consume.

EXEGESIS, (...), explicatio, explication or Exposition: derived from (...), [
exegoumai] explico, to explain or expound.

Exegesis is a figure very usual in Scripture, when those things which were
first spoken more darkly, are afterward in the same sentence manifestly
explained: or,

When a thing spoken in one member of a sentence, is by way of explication and
confirmation repeated in the latter part of it.

An English Example.
Time at one instant seeming both short and long, short in the pleasingnesse in
calling to mind, long in the stay of his desires.

Scriptural Examples.
Romans 11.7, 8. God has given them the spirit of slumber: what is that? Eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear.

Isa. 51, 1, 2. Look unto the Rock, whence ye are hewn: look unto Abraham your
father, etc.

Romans 7.18. For I know, that in me, that is to say, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing.

Isa. 1, 2, 3. The latter part of the third verse expounds the second verse,
etc.

Isa. 1.22, 23. Thy silver is become dross: thy wine is mixed with water: ( i.
e.) Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves, etc.

Prove. 3.3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck,
write them upon the table of thine heart.

The like in Psalm. 17.1.10.1.6, 8, 9.35.1.23.18.2, 3. Zech. 6.12, 13. 2 King.
20.3. Prove. 30.3. Deuteronomy. 7.3. 2 Timothy 1, 2, 3, etc. Jonah 2, 3, 4, 6. 1 Cor. 5.9.
2 Timothy 4.6.

SYNCRISIS, (...), Comparatio, a Comparison; derived from (...), [ syncrino]
comparo, to compare.

1. Syncrisis is a comparison of contrary things and diverse persons in one
sentence.

2. Comparatio is a form of speech, which by apt similitude shows that the
example brought in, is either like, unlike, or contrary: like things are
compared among themselves; unlike, from the less to the greater in amplifying,
and from the greater to the less in diminishing; and contraries by opposing
one another.

English Examples of Syncrisis.
The subtle commit the fault, and the simple bear the blame.

He that prefers wealthy ignorance before chargeable study, prefers contempt
before honor, darkness before light, and death before life.

Scriptural Examples of Syncrisis.
Luke 23.39, 40, 41. There you have the guilty opposed to the just, and injury
to equity; in these words, says the believing thief to the other thief, We
indeed are justly here, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this
man (meaning Christ) has done nothing amiss

Isa. 65.12, 14. Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall suffer hunger; my
servants shall drink, but ye shall abide thirst: Behold, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry through sorrow of heart, and shall howl through
vexation of spirit.

Many of Solomon's Proverbs are compounded and garnished with this Exornation:
as,

Prove. 10.25. As the whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation, 19.10.

Prove. 14.1. Every wise woman builds her house: but the foolish plucks it
down with her hands.

10.1. A wise son makes a glad father: but an indiscreet son is an heaviness
to his mother.

3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the
Tabernacle of the just.

English and Scriptural Examples of Comparatio.
1. Comparison of like things: as,

Each book sent into the world, is like a Barque put to Sea, and as liable to
censures, as the Barque is to foul weather. Herbert.

In the greenest grass is the greatest Serpent: in the clearest water the
ugliest road: in the most curious sepulcher are enclosed rotten bones: the
Estrich carries fair feathers, but rank flesh.

2 Timothy 3.8. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
Truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

2. Comparison of unlike things: as,

Brutus put his sons to death, for conspiracy of Treason: Manlius punished his
son for his virtue.

Matthew. 6.26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barns: yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not
much better then they!

3. From the less to the greater: as,

Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctify to the purifying of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God?

The like examples are in Matthew. 10.25.6.30.

4. From the greater to the less: as,

2 Pet. 2.4. If God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment, etc. much less will he spare the wicked, who walk after the flesh in
the lusts of uncleanness.

1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear?

SIMILITVDO, a Simil^tude: It is a form of speech whereby the Orator or speaker
compares one thing with the other by a similitude fit to his purpose. This
Exornation yields both profit and pleasure, profit by its perspicuity, and
pleasure by its proportion.

A Similitude is a Metaphor dilated, or enlarged, and a Metaphor a Similitude
contracted.

English Examples of a Similitude.
As it makes no matter whether you lay a sick man in a bedsted made of plain
wood, or in a bedsted gilded and garnished with gold; for whithersoever you
remove him, he carries his disease with him: even so is it all one, whether the
mind which is sick with insatiable avarice, be placed in riches or in poverty;
for while the disease hangs still upon it, it finds no rest.

This comfort in danger was but like the honey that Samson found in the Lions
jaws, or like lightning in a foggy night.

Scriptural Examples.
Note that similitudes are rather to make dark things plain, then to prove any
doubtful thing; similitudes are not argumentative; as appears by the parable of
the unjust Steward, in Luke 16.6, 7, etc.

Prove. 26.1. As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest; so honor is not seemly
for a fool.

Verse. 14. As the door turns upon his hinges, so does the slothful upon his
bed.

Prove. 28.15. As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over
the poor people.

DISSIMILITVDO, Dissimilitude.

Dissimilitude is a form of speech, whereby diverse things are compared in a
diverse quality.

An Example of Chrysostom.
If we have any disease in our body, we use exercise, and all other means, that
we may hence forward be delivered and free from it; but being sick in soul, we
dissemble and make delay: we leave the fountain uncured, and count necessary
things superfluous.

Scriptural Examples.
Luke 9.58. The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have nests, but the
Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the air knows her appointed times, and the Turtle,
and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people
know not the judgment of the Lord, etc.

The like in Isai. 1.3, etc.

HOMOEOPTOTON, (...), similiter cadens, similes casus habens, falling out
alike, or having cases alike: derived from (...), [ ptoo] cado, to fall out or
happen, and (...), [ homoi^s] similiter, alike.

It is a Rhetorical Exornation whereby in the Latin tongue diverse clauses end
with like cases: But in respect of the English, which is not varied by Cases,
it may be called, setting of diverse Nounes in one sentence which end alike,
with the same letter or syllable.

A Latin Example of Homoeoptoton.
Pomp. Non enim illae sunt solae virtutes imperatoriae, quae vulgo exstimantur,
labor in negotiis, fortitudo in periculis, industria in agendo, celeritas in
conficiendo, consilium in providendo.

English Examples.
In activity commendable, in a Commonwealth profitable, and in war terrible.

Let thy Country be served, thy Governors obeyed, and thy Parents honored.

Art thou in poverty? seek not principality, but rather how to relieve thy
necessity.

Foolish pity undoes many a City.

A friend in need is a friend indeed.

Scriptural Examples of Homoeoptoton.
Prove. 16.12. It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness: for the
throne is established by righteousness.

Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty: and he that
rules his spirit, then he that takes a City.

Isa. 11.5. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his Ioyns; and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

HOMOEOTELEVTON, (...), [homoiotel^uton, See Epistrophe.
] similem finem habens, aut similiter desinens, ending alike: derived from
(...), [ teleuton] ultimum, the last, and (...), [ homoios] similiter, alike.

A figure when diverse parts or members of a sentence end alike: this Exornation
for the most part shuts up the clauses of the sentence either with a Verb or an
Adverb.

Latin Examples.
Quam celeriter Pompeio duce belli impetus navigavit? qui Siciliam adiit,
Africam exploravit, inde Sardiniam cum class venit.

Cicer. pro. Pomp. Vt ejus voluntatibus non solum cives assenserint, socii
obtemperarint, hosts obed^erint, sed etiam venti tempestatesque obsecundarint.

English Examples.
He is looked upon as an eloquent man, who can invent wittily, remember
perfectly, dispose orderly, figure diversely, pronounce aptly, confirm strongly,
and conclude directly.

No marvel though wisdom complains that she is either wilfully despised, or
carelessly neglected, either openly scorned, or secretly abhorred.

Scriptural Examples of Homoeoteleuton.
Isa. 13.16, 20, 21. Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes, their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, neither shall the shepherds make
their folds there, but wild beasts of the desert shall lie down there, etc.

Isa. 40.2. Cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, that he^ iniquity is
pardoned, etc.

COMPAR, even, equal. alike:

It is of Grecians called Is^colon and Parison.

It is an even gait of sentences answering each other in measures
interchangeably.

A Rhetorical Exornation whereby the parts of a sentence do consist almost of
the like number of syllables; or when the words of a sentence match each other
in rank, or the parts accord in a fit proportion; which is, when the former
parts of a sentence or oration are answered by the later, and that by proper
words respecting the former.

Latin Examples.
Sic ergo in Pompejana: Qui plura bella gessit, quam caeteri legerunt: plures
provincias confecit quam alii concupiverunt.

Ibid. Extrema hyeme apparavit, ineunte vero suscepit, media aestate confecit.

Idem pro Sylla: Permitto aliquid iracundiae tuae, do adolescentiae, cedo
amicitiae, tribuo parenti.

English Examples.
He left the City garnished, that the same might be a monument of victory, of
clemency, of continency; that men might see what he had conquered, what he
spared, what he had lest. Cicero.

If you compare the parts of the later clauses with the former, you will find
that they are fitly matched.

My years are not so many, but that one death may conclude them; nor my faults
so many, but that one death may satisfy them.

Save his gray hairs from rebuke, and his aged mind from despair: where gray
hairs, aged mind, rebuke and despair, answer each other.

It connects contraries, thus:

An innocent although he be accused, he may be acquitted; but the guilty,
except he be accused, he cannot be condemned.

Scriptural Examples of Compare.
Amos 5.24. Let equity run down as waters, and righteo^snesse as a mighty
stream.

Isa. 1.5. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, etc.

Prove. 18.18. The lot causes contentions to cease; and parts between the
mighty.

Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loves wine
and oil, shall not be rich.

Verse. 18. The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous; and the
transgressor for the upright.

See the like in Prove. 15.8. Prove. 19.29, 20.29.8.10.3.11.4.12.21.8, 10.1.12,
etc. Isa. 29.1. Prove. 11.9, 17, 19, 20.

PARABOLA, (...), [parabole] a parable, or a similitude of a thing: derived
from (...) [ paraballo] confero, comparo, assimilo, to confer, resemble, or
make comparison.

A Parable is as it were a shadow that goes before the truth: and is by nature
a comparison of things that differ, made under some simili^ude.

It is said to be a similitude, when by some comparison we make known that
which we would have to be understood.

So we say a man to be made of iron, when we would be understood to speak of a
cruel hardhearted and strong man.

It is a comparing, signifying a similitude, (or a comparative speech) tending
to the explanation and perspicuity of the things under it: or it is a
similitudinary speech, whereby one thing is uttered and another signified.

These are English Parables, or Similitudes.
As a vessel cannot be known, whether i^ be whole or broken, except it have
liquor in it: so no man can be thoroughly known what he is, before he be in
authority.

If we need look so far back for an example, we may see this truth veryfied in
Hazael; compare 2 King. 8.13. with chapter 13. v. 22.

Like as it is a shame for a man that would hit the white, to miss the whole
But: even so it is a shame for him that thirsts after honor, to fail of
honesty. This is a saying of a Heathen Philosopher.

A parable in the Gospel signifies an Aenigmatical or Allegorical Comparison,
as also an Algory and Aenigma.

A parable must be expounded, and no further strained then things agree with
the principal inten^ion scope and drift of the Spirit of God in that Scripture:
as Matthew. 20.1, 2, etc. where the scope is, God is not a debtor unto any man.

In Parables we must always look more ^o the sense and scope, then to the
letter.

Note that in a Parable there are three things essen^i^lly considerable; viz.

1. Cottex, the rind or shell; that is the words and terms.

1. Radix, the root or the scope unto which the Pa^able tends.

3. Medulla, the marrow, that is, the mystical sense of the Parable, or the
fruit which may be gathered from it.

Matthew. 24.32. As from the budding and sprouting of trees, ye may know that
Summer is nigh; so likewise ye when ye shall see the signs of the Son of man,
know that his coming is near, even at the doors: so in Mark. 3.23.

Matthew. 13.33. The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took
and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

Here the former part of the Parable is that which is brought into the
similitude: whereof the literal sense is,

That a little leaven (being put together with the meal into one lump) has
that effect, that it pierces into and spreads over the whole lump.

The later part is that unto which the former is applied, and by our Savior
signified in the first words: The kingdom of heaven.

The mystical sense thereof is,

That the Gospel has that efficacy, that being preached in Palestina, it
should presently be spread over the whole world, and make the Church far larger
then it was; for leaven does mystically signify the Gospel; and the whole
lump, the Church, which God has from eternity decreed to call unto himself out
of the world by the Gospel.

Isa. 5.1. The Parable of the vineyard you have there; which in the 7. verse is
explained thus,

The vineyard is the house of Irael; the pleasant plant is the men of Judah; by
grapes judgment is understood; and by wild grapes oppression.

Ezekiel. 17.2. A great Eagle with great wings, long winged, full of feathers, An
Epigmatical Parable.
which had diverse colors, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of
the Cedar, he cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land
of Traffic, etc.

This obscure Parable the holy Ghost explains in the 12 ver. thus,

The great Eagle signifies the King of Babylon; by Lebanon is signified
Jerusalem: and by the highest branch of the Cedar and the top of his young
twigs, the King and Princes of Jerusalem; by a land of traffic and a City of
Merchants, is signified Babylon.

See Luke 16.19. Mat. 13.3.24.44. Luke 8.4. Mat. 22.2, etc.

EXERGASIA. (...), expolitio, repetitio, a polishing or trimming; derived from
(...), [ exergazomai] repeto, effectum reddo, to repeat, to polish a thing
after it is finished.

A figure when we abide still in one place, and yet seem to speak diverse
things, many times repeating one sentence, but yet with other words, sentences
and exornations.

It differs (as M^lancthon says) from Synonymia, forasmuch as that repeats a
sentence, or thing, only with changed words: but this with like words, like
sentences, and like things, having also many exornations to the garnishing of
it.

Thus to describe a beautiful woman, may be said,

She has a winning countenance, a pleasant eye, an amiable presence, a
cheerful aspect.

She was the object of his thoughts, the entert^inment of his discourse, the
contentment of his heart.

Your beauty (sweet Lady) has conquered my reason, subdued my will, mastered
my judgment.

Scriptural Examples.
Psalm. 17.1. Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my
prayer, that proceeds not from feigned lips.

35.1, 2 3. Plead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight
against them that fight against me; Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand
up for mine help; Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that
persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

More examples you have in Psalm 18.2, 3. Jonas 2, 3, 4, 6. Zech. 6.12, 13.

CHRONOGRAPHIA, (...), Temporum descriptio, a description of times and seasons:
derived from (...) [ grapho] scribo, to write or describe; and (...), [
chronos] tempus, time or season.

Chronographie is a Rhetorical Exornation, whereby the Orator describes any
time or season for delectations sake: as the morning, the evening, midnight,
the dawning and break of the day, the Sunrising, the Sunsetting, Spring,
Summer, Autumn, Winter, etc.

When break of day had drawn the curtain of heaven.

When the morning had won the field of darkness. The morning.


When bright Aurora with her glittering beams, sweet and comfortable rays, had
reassumed her dominion in the air.

When the Morns fair cheek had not yet lost her tears.

When the bright beams of the East had driven away the dark shadow of the
night, and the cheerful birds had welcomed the first dawning light with their
glad songs, and when black and sable clouds were changed into golden glory.

The evening.
When the stars begin to glory of the light which they borrowed from the Sun.

When the nights black-mantle over-sp^eads the sky.

When candles begin to inherit the Suns office.

When the night clad in black, mourns for the loss of day.

When the darkness arises in the East, and stars begin to appear; when
laborers forsake the fields, birds betake themselves to their night-boughs,
and when the silence of all creatures is increased through the desire of rest.

When all weary creatures take their sweet slumber, Midnight.
when cares are slackned, and hearts forget their labors, etc.

When the Sun visits the face of the earth with the warming and enlivening
influence of his beams; The Spr.
when fountains and streams wax clear, pastures green; when the flowers of the
field, with the trees blossoms do present their beauty to the eyes of the
beholder, etc.

Autumn.
When trees are widowed of their leaves.

By the like observation of circumstances are all other descriptions of ti^e.

EVPHEMISMVS, (...), bona dictionis mutatio, seu favorabilis locutio, a good
change of a word, or a fair kind of speech: derived from (...), [ e^] been,
well or pleasingly, and (...), [ phemi] dico, to speak; or from (...), [
euphemeo] faveo lingua, aut bona verba dico, to favor in ^peech or to give
pleasing wo^d's.

It is a fair kind of speech, or a modest way of expressing ones mind.

A figu^e whereby in Scripture you shall find a fair name put on a foul vice,
and a word of a good and bad signification interpreted to the better part; and
it is also when things (which would offend a most modest and chaste ear) are
veiled with Periphrasis, or circumlocution.

Thus in Deuteronomy. 22.9. See Antiphrosis.
To sanctify is put for to defile.

Thus incest and adultery is sometimes expressed by a modest term of uncovering
the nakedness; this you have in Lev. 18.6, 20, 11, 17. Ezekiel. 22.10.

Thus the vessel wherein nature eases it self, is for seemlinesse veiled with
the Periphrasis, a v^ssel wherein is no pleasure, and this in Jer. 22.28 and
Hos. 8.8.

Thus in Prove. 5.20. Solomon most seemly observes the modesty of speech; where
he says, Let her breasts always satisfy thee, why should thou embrace the
bosom of a stranger?

Thus urine is veiled with a Circumlocution, water of the feet.

PARRHESIA, (...), Licentia, loquendi libertas and audacia, liberty or
boldness of speaking: derived from (...), [ pan] and (...). [ rhesis] license,
or liberty.

A figure when we speak freely and boldly concerning things displeasing and
obnoxious to envy, especially when fear seemed to hinder it; or,

When in any case we show our confidence for the present, our fearfulness for
the future, or our ability to confute a false accusation; or, as other say,

It is either when we boldly acknowledge and defend a fault not proved against
us, or when we venturously and confidently upbraid and rebuke others for their
faults; In which form of speech, it being to Superiors, such an asswaging may
elegantly be used; to wit,

May I with your leave, speak freely what I think?

Or a modest insinuation made by showing the necessity of freedom of speech in
that behalf.

Vide quam non reformidem, quanta possum voce contendam; tantum abest ut tuae
sententiae subscribam, ut in publico hoc consessu decedere non reformidem:
Ecce, adeo non curo iram vestram.

English Examples.
You may suppose me proud and inconstant, but my sincerity shall out-dare all
their calumnies.

It is contrary to the known rules of Justice to condem any man (as you have)
without hearing him first, whom you condemn.

Scriptural Examples of Parrhesia.
Job 32.21, 22. Let me not I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me
give flattering titles unto man, for I know not to give flattering titles, in
so doing, my Maker would soon take me away.

Elihu having in the 18, 19, and 20 verses made his apology or insinuation,
does here declare his purpose of free speech, and adds his reason in verse. 22.

Gal. 1.10. For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men?
for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

Psalm. 46.2, 3. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed: and
though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; though the waters
thereof roar and be troubled, etc.

HEBRAISM, or an imitation of the Hebrews in phrase or construction; It is when
the construction proper to the Hebrew tongue is used in another language.

The Hebrews do often in stead of an Epithet, put the Substantive in the
Genitive case; as,

Men of mercy, for, merciful men.

A land of desolation, for, a desolate land.

A man of desires, for a man very desirable and lovely, in Dan. 9.23.

The son of perdition ( i. e.) one ordained unto condemnation: as John 17.12.

2 These. 2, 3. The man of sin; there is a great emphasis in it; it is as much
as if the Apostle had said, a very sinful man, a man made up of wickedness,
being as it were sin it self in the abstract.

This is an Hebraism very frequent in Scripture; hence in Isa. 53 3. Christ is
called a man of sorrows, ( i. e,) a man even compacted and compounded of all
kinds and degrees of sorrows.

The Hebrews do also often use the Imperative Mood for the Future Tense, to
show the certainty of a thing; as,

Amos 5, 6. Seek the Lord and live, (i. e.) ye shall certainly live.

So Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. The Lord bids Moses go up to Mount Nebo and dye there;
(i. e.) thou shall certainly die there.

And contrarily they sometimes put the Future Tense for the Imperative Mood; as,

Exodus 20. Thou [shalt] not kill, steal, etc. for do not kill, steal, etc.

Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge; for, let the Priests lips
preserve knowledge.

When the Hebrews would express an excellent or glorious thing, they often
join the name of God with it: as,

Genesis 23.6. Abraham is called a Prince of God.

Exodus 3.1, 4, 7. Horeb is called the Mountain of God: that is, a most high and
excellent Mountain.

Psalm. 46.4. The City of God; ( i. e.) a glorious City.

If, among the Hebrews is a note of swearing: as,

Heb. 3.11. Therefore I swear in wrath, if they shall enter into my rest; ( i.
e.) they shall never enter into my rest.

The like in 1 Samuel 14.45.

APODIOXIS, (...), Rejectio, expulsio, rejection or an expelling: derived from
(...), [ apodioco] Rejicio, expello, to reject or expel.

A figure when any argument or objection is with indignation rejected as
extremely absurd, impettinent, false and by no means to be admitted of.

A Latin Example.
Sed de Lucullo alio dicam loco, and ita dicam, ut neque vera laus ei detracta
oratione mea, neque falsa affixa esse videatur.

English Examples.
Cicero for Milo: What should Milo hate Clodius, the flower of his glory?

And would any wise man ever have so said? were not ignorance the cause of this
opinion, folly could not be the fruit.

Scriptural Examples of Apodioxis.
Matthew. 16.23. Thus Christ rejects Peter's argument, touching his endeavor to
avert Christ from his suffering; Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense
unto me: for thou savourest not the things of God.

Thus when James and John would have leave of Christ to command fire to come
down from heaven upon the Samaritans that would not receive him, Christ rebukes
them, and said in Luke 9.55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, etc.

See Act. 8.20. Mat. 4.6, 7. Psalm. 50.16.

APODIXIS, (...), Demonstratio and evidens probatio, Demonstration or evident
proof derived from (...); [ apodeiknumi] rationibus seu argumentis demonstro,
aut probo, evidently to show or prove.

A form of speech by which the Orator or speaker grounds his saying upon
general experience: it differs from (the next figure) Martyria in this that in
Martyria, the Speaker confirms what he says by the Testimony of his own
knowledge; in this he infers his reason and confirmation from known principles,
which experience proves, and no man can deny.

English Examples.
Hereunto appertain many Proverbs, and common sayings, which arise from general
proof and experience: as,

Trust not an horses heel, nor a dogs tooth.

Fire and water have no mercy.

Scriptural Examples of Apodixis.
Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap.

Job 8.11. Can the rush grow up without mire? Can the stag grow without water?

Prove. 6.27. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt?
Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt?

MARTYRIA, (...), Testimonium, Testatio, Testimony or evidence: derived from
(...), [ martyr] testis, a witness.

A figure when the speaker confirms something by his own experience.

Thus the Physician makes report of his own proof in diseases and cures, and
sometimes records them to the great benefit of succeeding generations.

Thus the Captain which has been in many battails, at many seiges, and has
had experience in many stratagems, teaches young soldiers, and confirms his
advice by his own testimony founded upon often proof.

Scriptural Examples of Martyria.
Job 5.3. I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his
habitation.

Psalm. 37.35. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like
a green baytree, yet he passed away, and so he was not, yea, I sought him, but
he could not be found.

Verse 25. I have been young and now am old: yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

So 1 John 1.1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life; (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it,
and bear witness, and show unto you the eternal life which was with the
Father, and was manifested unto us) That which we have seen and heard, declare
we unto you, etc.

EPIMONE, (...), Commoratio, item persoverantia, a tarrying long upon one
matter; derived from (...), [ epimeno] maneo, (i. e.) expecto ob rem aliquam,
to stay or wait for something.

Epimone is a figure whereby the speaker dwells upon, and persists in a former
conclusion, or the same cause much after one form of speech, but repeated in
other words more plainly: By others it is said to be when the speaker knowing
whereon the greatest weight of his cause or matter does depend, makes often
recourse thither, and repeats it many times by variation.

English Examples.
And shall so eminent a virtue be expelled, thrust out, banished, and cast away
from the City?

What did thou covet? what did thou wish? what did thou desire?

Scriptural Examples.
Eccles. 1.3. What profit has a man of all his labor which he has under the
Sun?

What profit] to wit, toward the attaining of happiness; otherwise in all
labors there is some profit toward the helping of our earthly estates, as
Prove. 14.23.

This is an elegant Epimone or dwelling upon the former conclusion, of the
vanity of all things delivered in the former verse, and here repeated in other
words more plainly.

Genesis 18.24, etc. Here you have a good examample in Abraham's suit to God for
the Sodomites, in these words; If there be fifty righteous within the city,
will thou destroy, and not spa^e the place for the fifty righteous that are
therein? That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
with the wicked, etc. And thus he perseverantly continues his suit to the sixth
request.

John 21.15, etc. Thus Christ speaks to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas love
thou me more then these? feed my sheep; which saying he persists in and repeats
three times one presently after another.

Matthew. 12, 31, 32. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men:
but the blasphemy against the holy Spirit shall not be forgiven unto men: And
whosoever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but
whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

The like examples you may find in Mar. 7.21, 22, 23. Col. 2.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor,
7.36, 37.

HORISMOS, (...), Definitio, Definition, or an express declaring what a thing
or the nature thereof is; derived from (...), [ horizo] definio, to define, or
make a plain description of a thing.

A figure whereby we declare what a thing is, or delineate the nature of it;
and it is often used when we would show a difference between two words: namely
by defining both.

Latin Examples.
Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis.

Virtus est habitus rationi consentaneus.

Nolo te parcum appellars, cum sis avarus; nam qui parcus est, utitur eo quod
satis est, tu contra propter avaritiam, quo plus habes, eo magis eges; gloria
est illustris ac pervulgata multorum ac magnorum vel in suos cives, vel in
patriam, vel in omne genus hominum, fama meritorum.

English Examples.
Godliness is the exact care of a Christian, to worship God in the spirit
according to the dictates of his will, with all sincerity.

He that subverts the Laws, and infringes the peoples liberties, is a Tyrant.

Fear is an apprehension of future harm.

In way of Gradation:

To refuse good counsel is folly; to contemn it, wickedness: to scorn it,
madness.

Beauty is nothing but a transitory charm, an illusion of senses, a slave of
pleasure: a flower which has but a moment of life; a dyal on which we never
look, but whilst the Sun shines on it: it is a dunghill covered with snow: a
glass painted with false colors, etc.

This is not fortitude, but temerity; for fortitude is an heroic contempt of
evil through due consideration of the justness of the cause, controversy and
call: but temerity is a foolish enterprise of perils without due consideration
of either.

Scriptural Examples of Horismos.
Job 28.28. Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from
evil, is understanding.

Isa. 58, 4, 4, 6, 7. Thus you have an hypocritical fast elegantly defined, and
distinguished from such a one as is acceptable with God.

See Luke 4.18. Isa. 61.1. Gal. 5.19.20, 21, 22, etc. Prove. 27.3, 4.

METABASIS, (...), Transitio, Transition, or a passing over from one thing to
another: derived from (...), [ metabaino] transeo, to pass over from one thing
to another.

A figure whereby the parts of an oration or speech are knit together: and is,

When we are briefly put in mind of what has been said, and what remains
further to be spoken.

This Exornation conduces to eloquence and attention; to the understanding and
remembrance of the things handled in a speech.

The first part of this figure has respect unto the precedent; the later part
makes way for, or prepares the Reader unto the following matter.

Latin and English Examples interwoven.
This figure is made eight ways: viz.

1. From the equal.

At haec erant jucundissima, nec minus voluptatis attulerunt illa: In English,

But these things were most pleasant and delectable, nor shall those bring
less pleasure.

The matters which you have already heard, were wonderful, and those that you
shall hear, are no less mavelous.

2. From the unequal.

Sed haec utcumque ignoscenda, illud quis ferat? audistis gravissima, sed
audietis graviora: In English,

But these things howsoever to be forgiven, who can bear that? you have heard
very grievous things, but ye shall hear more grievous.

I have declared unto you many of the commendable faculties of his mind, yet I
will tell you of many more, and far more excellent.

3. From the like.

Haec perfida designavit, cujus generis sunt and illa, quae nuper Romae
patrasse dicitur: In English thus,

He has evidently marked out these traiterous and disloyal acts; of which sort
also are those which are reported to have been lately perpetrated at Rome.

I have hitherto made mention of his noble enterprises in France, and now will
I rehearse his worthy acts done in England.

4. From the contrary.

Sed haec juv^nis peccavit, nunc Senis virtutes audietis: In English thus,

But this young man has offended, now ye shall hear the virtues and properties
of an old man.

As I have spoken of his sad adversity and misery, so will I now speak of his
happy prosperity, which at length ensued, as the bright day does the dark night.

5. From the differing.

De moribus habes, nunc de doctrina reliquum est ut dicamus: In English thus,

You have a relation touching manners, now it remains that we speak concerning
doctrine.

6. As it were by anticipation or the prevention of an objection.

Jam ad reliqua properabimus, si prius illud unum adjecerimus: In English thus,

Now we will hasten unto that which is behind, if we shall first add in that
one thing.

By Anticipation more clearly thus;

Peradventure you think me too long in the threatenings of the Law; I will now
pass to the sweet promises of the Gospel.

7. By Reprehension.

Quid his immoror? ad id, quod est hujus causa caput, festinet oration: In
English thus,

Why stay I upon these things? I shall hasten my speech unto that which is the
principal point of the matter in question.

8. From Consequents, or from things relating to something precedent.

Habes quod in illum contulerim beneficiorum; nunc quam gratiam mihi retulerit
audi: In English thus,

You have heard what kindnesses I conferred on him; now what return he made me
of those favors, attend ye.

You have heard how he promised, and now I will tell you how he performed, etc.

Scriptural Examples of Transition.
1 Cor. 12, 31. And I will yet show you a more excellent way.

The first part looks to the precedent, but the latter makes way for the
subsequent matter: Which is as much as if Paul had said, You have heard of the
gifts of prophesying and interpretation; of the gifts of miracles, of healing,
of diversity of tongues, etc. which are indeed eminent gifts, and such as I
exhort you to desire and look out after. But the way of love (which this
Transition makes way for, and which he comes to in the first verse of the next
chapter) is a far more excellent way then all these.

It is the custom likewise of the same Apostle, that passing over from one
matter to another, he gives a certain entrance, or a little beginning whereby
he does as it were prepare the Reader to the following matter: as,

1 Cor. 15.1, 2. He admonishes the Corinthians to remember what they had
learned; So 1 Cor. 11.17. having briefly reprehended them, he passes over unto
another matter.

PARECBASIS, (...), Digressio, Digression, excursion, or a going from a matter
in hand to speak of another thing: derived from (...), [ parecbaino] digredior,
to digress or go from the purpose.

Digression is as it were a wandering from the purpose or intended matter.

It is the handling of some matter going out from order, but yet upon
sufficient ground, and for the advantage and illustration of the cause or
matter we have in hand.

Digression is a figure when something is added beside or beyond the purpose or
intended matter, and goes out from the appointed discou^se.

Note that digression ought in some respect to be agreeable, and pertinent to
those matters which we have in hand, and not to be strange or remote from the
purpose: and that by the abuses of this Exornation, namely, by going forth
abruptly, by tarrying too long abroad, and returning in unto the matter
overthwartly, we shall in stead of adorning and garnishing our cause or speech,
darken our main cause or principal matter, and deform the Oration.

This Exornation is frequent in Scripture: as,

Romans 1. from 1. to 8. The Apostle Paul here digresses from his name, to the
description of his calling in the first verse; then unto the definition of the
Gospel in the 2. verse, by and by to the description of Christ in the 3. and 4.
verses; then he again as it were slides unto his calling in the 5. verse; at
length he prays for grace and peace for the Romans, unto whom his Epistle is
directed, and so he does, as it were, finish his course or compass: and these
are occasioned by the words in the sentences or things spoken of.

Col 1.3, 4. We give thanks to God [even the f^ther of our Lord Jesus Christ,
always praying for you]: since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of
your love toward all Saints.

Where you see the Digression noted, then you have the apt return into the
matter: Since we heard of, etc.

Genesis 2.8. to 15. verse. And the Lord God planted a garden Eastward in Eden,
and there he put the man whom he had made: [for out of the ground made the Lord
God to grow every tree pleasant to the sight, etc. the Digression here, begins
at the 9. and ends with the 14 verse] then in the 15. verse you have the return
unto the matter in hand; in these words; Then the Lord God took the man and put
him into the Garden of Eden, etc.

See 1 Cor. 1.13. Ephesians. 3.1. Genesis 38. the whole chapter.

PARECHESIS, (...), allusio, allusion, or a resembling of one thing to another:
derived from (...), [ parecheo] sono assimilis sum, to resemble, or allude unto.

Parechesis is a figure when we bring in something of another to another
intent then his own: or:

When the allusion of words is to be searched after in another language or
speech then in that wherein the Author wrote.

Latin Examples.
Quod Orator de caecitate, de ignorantia dico: vultus perpetua nocte coopertus,
non concipit nefas, ad quod ducibus oculis pervenitur; tua (quo Nero senecae)
in me merita, dum vita suppetit, aeterna erunt.

De bonorum societate dicere licet, quod Ovidius de Jovis sui habitaculo, lib.
1. Metam.

Hic locus est, quem, si verbis audacia detur,
Haud timeam magni dixisse palatia coeli.
English Examples.
I may say of flatterers, as Tacitus of Courtiers: They speak more readily with
the Princes fortune then himself.

We may say of Providence, as Ovid of the Sun, It sees all things, and by it
all things on earth are governed.

I may say of an ill conscience, as Socrates of a wandering traveller, It is no
wonder if it be out of temper, when it has it is self for its companion.

Scriptural Examples of Parech^sis.
Matthew. 11.17. We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced, etc.

John 10.1. He that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth
up another way, he is a thief and a robber.

1 Cor. 1.23. But we preach Christ crucified: unto the Jews, even a stumbling
block, and unto the Graecians foolishness: but unto, etc.

See Genesis 48.14* etc. John 1.5.

GNOME, (...) Sententia, a Sentence: derived from (...), [ gnoo] nosco, to know.

A Sentence is some excellent profitable and remarkable saying: it is a pearl
in a discourse.

Gnome is a figure when we bring in a sentence or such a remarkable saying of
another to the same purpose with the Author, he being not named.

Latin Examples.
Fit ex male agendo consuetudo, deinde natura.

Ita vivendum est cum hominibus, tanquam Deus videat; sic loquendum cum deo,
tanquam homines audiant.

Civitatis anima sunt leges.

English Examples.
Where ever the Sun shines, Sentences.
is a wise man's country.

The rich man's bounty is the poor man's Exchequer.

Error and Repentance are the companions of rashness.

The covetous man wants as well that which he has, as that which he has not.

Unlawful desires are punished after the effect of enjoying; but impossible
desires are punished in the desire it self.

Scriptural Examples of Gnome.
Sentences are by Solomon in Prove. 1.2. called words of wisdom and
understanding.

Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin: but he that
refraineth his lips, is wise.

Verse. 5. He that gathers in Summer, is a wise son; but he that sleeps in
harvest, is a son that causes shame.

See Eccles. 12.11. and diverse other places of the Scripture.

PAREGMENON, (...), derivatum, deductum; a derivative, or derived from: this
word is a particle of the preterpefect tense passive of the verb (...), [
parago] deduco, derivo, to derive or take from.

A figure when words, whereof one is derived of another, are conjoined.

Latin Examples.
Is domum miser, cujus miseriam nobilitas locupletavit.

Ingenioque faves ingeniose tuo.

English Examples.
Marvel not at that which is so little mavelous.

A discreet discretion.

Sometimes there is a double Paregmenon in one sentence; as,

He wished rather to die a present death, then to live in the misery of life.

The humble soul is established by humility.

Scriptural Examples of Paregmenon.
Dan. 2.21. He gives wisdom unto the wise, etc.

Romans 9.32. For they stumbled at that stumbling stone.

1 Cor. 15.47. The first man was of the earth, earthy, the second is the Lord
from heaven, heavenly.

Prove. 11.15. He that hates suretyship is sure.

See 1 Cor. 1.19. Prove. 11.17, 25, etc.

MIMESIS, (...), imitatio, Imitation; derived from (...), [ mimeomai] imitor,
to imitate or resemble.

It is an Imitation or a using of the language of others, which is usual in the
Scriptures; as.

In Psalm. 2, 3. David uses the language, of rebellious rulers: Let us break
their bands, and cast away their cords from us.

So in 1 Cor. 15.32. Paul uses the words of Epicures, What advantages it me, if
the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

Thus the Prophet Isaiah speaks in the language of the profane rulers in
Jerusalem who made a mock at Gods Word and threats; Isa. 28.15. We have made a
Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, we have made lies our
refuge, and under a falsehood have we hid our selves.

The like in Micah 3.11, etc.

MYCTERISMUS, (...), Subsannatio, irrisio, a disdainful gibe or scoff; derived
from (...), [ mycterizo] subsanno, naso suspendo, to mock or scoff with
bending of the brows, or with blowing the nose at one; or from (...), [ aeiro]
erigo, suspendo, to lift up, or hang up, and (...), [ mycter] nasus, the nose.

It is a privy kind of mock or scoff, yet not so privy but that it may well be
perceived.

It is near to a Sarcasm, but that is more manifest, this more privy, that more
easy; and this more hard: And sometimes is a figure, when in show of
disdainful contempt of a person or thing we fling up our nose.

Thus when a certain man that was bald, had spightfully r^yled against
Diogenes, after a little pawse Diogenes answered him thus: My friend, further I
have done thee no harm, but this I must say to thee, I do much commend the
hai^s that are fallen from thy head, for I suppose they were wise, in that they
made haste to leave the company of so foolish a skull.

To one that demanded of Demonax the Philosopher, if Philosophers did use to
eat sweet Cakes: Demonax made this answer, Do thou think (says he) that Bees
gather their honey for fools only?

Luke 16.14. Thus the Pharisees derided Christ; they did not simply contemn
him, but they showed their contempt of him by their gestures.

ANAMNE^IS, (...), Recordatio, Remembrance, or a calling to mind: derived from
(...), [ anamnaomai] recordor, to remember or call to mind.

Anamnesis is a figure whereby the speaker calling to mind matters past,
whether of sorrow, joy, etc. does make recital of them for his own advantage,
or for the benefit of those that hear him: as,

Psalm. 137.1. By the Rivers, there we sat down; yea, we wept when we remembered
Sion, etc.

Luke 15.17. The Prodigal son, when he came to himself, said, How many hired
servants of my fathers house, have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with
hunger? I will arise and go to my father, etc.

Genesis 32.10. Thus Jacob in his return from Laban, in thankful remembrance of
the goodness of God to him, breaks out; With my staff I passed over this
Jordan, and now I am become two bands, etc.

Psalm. 77.5, 6. says David, I have considered the days of old, the years of
ancient times; I call to remembrance my song in the night, etc.

See Prove. 5.12, etc.

EXPEDITIO, expedition, or quick dispatch.

Expedition is a figure when many parts or reasons of an argument being
enumerated and touched, all are destroyed, save that only upon which the
speaker intends to conclude, stand to, and rest upon.

One of these courses must be taken; either you must distinctly observe and
practice these rules, or deny that ever you received instructions, or allege
want of capacity in your self, or want of use of them in your life.

That they are not necessary, you cannot say; for what more necessary in your
life, then to write well? That you are incapable, is a slander, and a
contradiction to your own conscience and my experience, that has seen such
fair essays of your endeavors: And to say you had never any directions, were
to give your two eyes the lie, and to make me believe, that I did never but
dream your good. Therefore must your labor conspire with my inventions, and so
much you unavoidably become skilful.

Seeing that this land was mine, thou must needs show that either thou did
possess it, being void, or made it thine by use, or purchase, or else that it
came to thee by Inheritance: Thou could not possess it void when I was in
possession; also thou can not make it thine by use nor custom. Thou have no
deed to evidence thy purchase of it; I being alive it could not descend upon
thee by Inheritance: it follows then that thou would put me from mine own
land, before I be dead.

DIATYPOSIS, (...), Descriptio, Informatio, Description, information of a
thing: derived from (...), [ diatypoo] describo, informo, to describe, inform,
etc.

A figure when a thing is so described by more words, that it may seem to be
set, as it were, before our eyes; or,

When we have spoken of a thing in general, descend unto particulars.

Latin Examples.
Personabant omnia vocibus ebriorum, natabant pavimenta mero, madebant
parietes, etc. vid. Ovid. in descript. pestis, lib. Metam. 7. v. 5.28.
procellae, lib. 11. ver. 500. diluvii, lib. 1. v. 260. Virgil. in descrip.
scuti Aeneae, lib. 8. Aeneid. v. 620.

English Examples.
If you desire that I make you a picture or lively description of the nature of
Desire, I will tell you; It is a strange country, whereunto the Prodigal child
sailed when he forsook his fathers house to undertake a banishment: a country
where corn is still in grass; vines in the bud; trees perpetually in blossom,
and birds always in the shell; you neither see corn, fruit, nor any thing fully
shaped, all is there only in expectation: A country where the Inhabitants are
never without fevers, one is no sooner gone, but another comes into its place:
here time looks on you afar off, and never comes near you, but shows you an
enchanted looking-glass, wherein you see a thousand false colors, which amuse
you. Here at best you have nothing to dinner but smoke and expectation.

Scriptural Examples of Diatyposis.
Psalm. 7.13, 14. God judges the righteous; God is angry with the wicked every
day; if he turn not, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow, he has also
prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordains his arrows against the
persecutors.

2 Timothy 3, 1, 2, etc. This know also, that in the last days perilous times
shall come: for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, etc.

So if speaking of war, the bloodshed, enemies, clamours depopulations, etc.
which happen by it, are laid open.

See Revel. 21.10. Revel. 1.13. Isa. 1.7, 8, etc.

This Exornation is of kin to Aetiologia.
PROECTHESIS, (...), expositio quae praemittitur; an exposition which is sent
before: derived from (...), [ porectithemi] priori loco expono, to expound in
the former place.

It is as it were a prae-exposition or a praeposition of a speech, wherein that
which comes into controversy, or debate, is presented unto the eye.

A figure usual in Scripture, when the speaker does by his answer (containing a
reason of what he, or some other has said or done) defend himself or the other
person, as unblameable in such speech or action.

Thus Job being accused and rebuked of his friends, of impatiency, sin, folly,
etc.

Replies thus:

Job 6.2, etc. O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamities laid
together in the balance, for the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the
poison whereof drinks up my spirit, etc. Does the wild Ass br^y when he has
grass? or loweth the Ox over his sodder?

In this form of speech our Savior many times defends his doings against the
accusation of his adversaries: as, for healing the man with the withered hand
on the Sabbath day.

Mark 3.4. And he says unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath
days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? but they held their peace.

The like in Matthew. 12.11. What man shall there be among you, that shall have
one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold
on it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better then a sheep? Wherefore
it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath days.

In like manner in Luke 6.1, 2, etc. Mark. 2.23 He defends his Disciples being
accused for pulling the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, by alleging the
example of David eating the Shewbread in his great hunger. Secondly, By
showing his authority, as Lord of the Sabbath. And then by citing a saying of
Hos. 6.6. I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

And in Matthew. 9.12, 13. He being accused for eating and drinking with
publicans and sinners, answers; They that are whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

DIALOGISMVS, (...), Sermocinatio; a Di^logue or conference between two:
derived from (...), [ dialogizomai] sermocino, to dispute or talk.

Dialogismus is a figure or form of speech, whereby the speaker feigns a person
to speak much or little, according to comeliness; much like unto Prosopopoeia;
differing only in this; When the person feigned speaks all himself, then it is
Prosopopoeia; but when the speaker answers now and then to the question, or
objection, which the feigned person makes unto him, it is called Dialogismus.
Or it is,

When as one discussing a thing by himself, as it were talking with another,
does move the question, and make the answer: as,

Hos. 12.7, 8, 9. Says the Lord by the Prophet there concerning Ephraim; He is
a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hands; he loves to oppress:

Then follows the fiction of Ephraims speech;

Yet, I am become rich, I have found me out substance: in all my labors they
shall find none iniquity in me, that were sin.

Then you have the Lords answer to this objection.

And I that am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, will yet make thee to
dwell in Tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast, etc.

Here note that care be taken that the speech be suitable to the person
feigned, and that it be no otherwise then in probability the same person would
use: as, here in this example; Ephraims speech savours of pride, arrogance, and
self-justification, suitable to the condition this and other Scriptures prove
him to be of; if this caution be not observed, this form of speech will seem
vain and absurd.

EMPHASIS, (...), efficacia significandi, the virtue and efficacy of signifying
ones mind: derived from (...) [ emphaino] repraesento, to represent: Or

It is an earnest, vehement, or express signification of ones mind.

Emphasis is a figure whereby a tacit virtue and efficacy of signification is
given unto words; Or

It is a form of speech which signifies that which it does not express; the
signification whereof is understood either by the manner of pronunciation, or
by the nature of the words themselves.

English Examples.
When the signification is to be understood by the pronunciation.

Dare thou presume to praise him? (i. e.) Is ignorance fit to commend
learning, or folly me^^ to praise wisdom?

Will thou believe a Scot? whereby is signified, not simply a man born in
Scotland, but any other dissembler, after the nature and disposition of that
Nation.

Thy looks upon a sudden are become dismal, thy brow dull as Saturns issue, thy
lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue were to pronounce some funeral.

He talked with such vehemence of passion, as though his heart would climb up
into his mouth to take his tongues office.

I could wish you were secretary of my thoughts, or that there were a crystal
casement in my breast, through which you might espy the inward motions and
palpitations of my heart, then you would certified of the sincerity of my heart
in this affirmation.

Scriptural Examples of Emphasis.
Eccles. 10.20. Solomon there uses an excellent emphasis, where he gives us
warning that we should not speak or think evil of the King, no not in our
bedchamber; for says he; A bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter.

Job 17.14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou
art my moher and my sister.

Heb. 12.24. To the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abel.

Prove. 30.8, 9. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me: lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor, etc.

See Isa. 2.4.5. Micah 4.3. 1 King. 20.11. Mat. 12.35.

SYLLOGISMVS, (...), Ratiocinatio, collectio quae ratiocinando fit; reasoning,
a conclusion which is made by reasoning together in argument; derived from
(...), [ syllogizomai] ratiocinatione colligo, to conclude by reasoning.

A Rhetorical syllogism is also by the Grecians called Epichirema, (...),
argumentum, quo aliquid probari, illustrari, and argui potest: An argument
whereby any thing may be proved, illustrated and reasoned.

A Rhetorical Syllogism is a form of speech, whereby the speaker amplyfieth a
matter by conjecture, that is, by expressing some signs or circumstances of a
matter; which circumstances are of three sorts, either going before it, annexed
with, or following after it.

1. As to Circumstances going before the matter.

1 Kings 17.1. As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there
shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

Here by the great drought, Elisha signifies the great famine and dearth which
should be brought by it.

Genesis 7.4. Isa. 4.1. Mat. 10.30. and 24.20.

2. As to circumstances annexed with the matter.

1 Samuel 17.6, 7. The huge statute and great strength of Goliath is signified by
the weight of his brigandine and spears head, and by the monstrous bigness of
his spear staff, compared to a weavers beam.

See Act 24.26. Matthew. 26.75. 1 Kings 12.10. Isai. 2.9. Luke 7.44.

3. As to circumstances following after the matter.

2 Samuel 18.33. There David's sorrowful bewailing of his son Absoloms death is
described: whereby may be collected how dearly he loved his son,
notwithstanding his evil inclinations.

See Isai. 49.20, etc.

A Logical Syllogism is a perfect argument consisting of three parts, inferring
a necessary conclusion; or whereby something is necessarily proved.

The first part of a Syllogism is called, the Proposition or Major, whereby the
consequent of the question, or the conclusion is at least disposed with the
argument.

The second, the Assumption or Minor; and this is affirmed from the proposition.

The third, the conclusion, this embraces the part of the question and
concludes it.

Examples of a Syllogism in Logic.
Major, 1. Every virtue is honorable; Minor, 2. Patience is a virtue;
Conclusion, 3. Therefore patience is honorable.
Every just thing is profitable; Every honest thing is just; Every honest thing
therefore is profitable.
Every rationable creature is sensible; But every man is rationable creature;
Therefore every man is sensible.
ENTHYMEMA, (...), animi conceptus conception of the mind; derived from (...),
[ enthymeomai] animo concipio, to conceive in the mind.

An Enthymem is a form of speech, which Quintilian interprets a Comment, for
that it may well be called the whole action and sentence of the mind; and it
is, as Cicero says, when the sentence concluded consists of contraries.

When any part of the Syllogism is wanting, it is said to be an Enthymem.

It is an imperfect or an unprofitable Syllogism, where one proposition is
reserved in the mind, and not declared: or it is a Syllogism of one
Proposition, in which one argument or proposition being laid down, the
conclusion is inferred.

Enthymema est imperfectus Syllogismus; in qu^ nimirum Major Minor ve
desideratur.

It is an imperfect Syllogism; that is to say, such a Syllogism, wherein the
Major or Minor being wanting is looked for.

Latin Examples.
Pius fuit, fortis, sapiens. Deum quippe coluit, hosts contudit, fortunam
utramque moderate tulit, imo superavit.

Quem alienum fidum invenies, si tuis hostis fueris?

English Enthymems.
Our Ancestors made war, not only that they might be free, but also that they
might rule: but thou think war may be left off, that we might be made
bondslaves to serve.

If great wealth brings cares, and poverty misery, then the mean between these
two extremes is a great blessing.

They which may do me good, will not; and they which are willing, cannot;
therefore my distress remains.

If intemperance be hurtful, temperance is profitable: And if intemperance be
not hurtful; neither is temperance profitable.

If fish bred in the salt water may want salting, then laws may need a law to
mend them.

DILEMMA, (...), Argumentum cornutum, an horned argument, or a double argument:
derived from (...), [ dis] twice, or double, and (...), [ lemma] Assumptio, the
Assumption or Minor Proposition, but sometimes it signifies the Major
Proposition also.

Dilemma is an argument which convinces every way, and consists of two
propositions, which both ways conclude or convince ones adversary; wherein,
whether of the two you grant, he will take hold of, or reprove you.

If he be a good man, why speak you ill of him? if he be naught, why do you
keep him company?

Why should I sharply reprove him? if he be a good man, a friendly admonition
is better; but if he be an evil man, reproof is odious and contemptible with
him.

If you deem me unworthy of an answer, it proceeds of contempt if your passion
defers a reply; it argues a displeasure.

Either covetousness, or poverty exposed him to this act; not covetousness,
for the course of his life declares him no covetous man; nor poverty, for he
has large possessions.

Scriptural Dilemma's.
1 Cor. 9.17. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if
against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me.

John 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well,
why smitest thou me?

Mark 11.30, 31, etc.

HYPOTHESIS, (...), suppositio, a supposition or argument, derived from (...),
[ hypotithemai] suppono, to suppose; or from (...), [ hypo] sub, beneath or
under, and (...), [ thesis] positio, a position or sentence propounded.

Hypothesis is an argument or matter whereon one may dispute; or it is a
conditional proposition.

By Rhetoricians it is in its peculiar signification said to be a finite
question.

Of Questions there are two kinds;

The one is infinite or endless.

The other finite or limited.

The infinite question is by the Greeks called Thesis, which signifies also a
general argument proposed.

The finite question they call Hypothesis, which is as it were a conditional
Proposition.

Suppositions in Scripture are no Positions.

When the speech is only Hypothetical, it concludes nothing; for a conditional
proposition does not simply affirm; and therefore conclusions gathered from it,
as if it were affirmative, will not hold: as,

Ezekiel. 18.24. If a righteous man turn away from his righteousness, etc.

Hence would some conclude that a righteous man may finally fall from grace;
but this is no other then a supposition, and so concludes not.

Matthew. 11.21. If the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. It
follows not that there was some inclination in Tire and Sidon to repentance.

Luke 19.46. If these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry
out. It will not hence follow that there was some inclination in the stones to
speak or cry out.

PARALOGISMVS, (...), falsa ratiocinatio, false reasoning or debating of a
matter, or a decietful conclusion; derived from (...), [ paralogizomai] subdola
supputatione fallo, vel falsa argumentatione utens decipio, to deceive by
supposition full of deceits and wiles; or to defraud by false reasoning.

A Paralogism is a sophistical or deceitful conclusion: it is a manner of
argument, which seems true when it is not.

Examples.
He that affirms William to be a living creature, says true.

He that affirms William to be a Jack-daw, affirms him to be a living creature:

And therefore he that affirms William to be a Jack-daw says true.

All sin is evil. Every Christian does sin: Therefore every Christian is
evil.
It may be answered that the assumption in this place does not take the
argument out of the proposition, but puts in another thing, and so it is no
right frame of concluding, the assumption being not affirmed from the
proposition.

Sometimes all the parts of the Syllogism are denied; as, No Pope is a Devil.
No man is a Devil: Therefore no man is a Pope.


This may be answered, that it is not according to the Definition of a Negative
Syllogism, which must have always one Affirmative.

PATHOPOEIA, (...), [pathopoiia] affectus expressio, expression of the
affection of the mind; derived from (...), [ pathos] which signifies every more
vehement affection, or an exceeding stirring up of the affections of the mind;
and (...), [ poieo] qualitate afficior, to be affected with the quality of such
ardent affections.

Pathopoeia is a form of speech whereby the Speaker moves the mind of his
hearers to some vehemence of affection, as of love, hatred, gladness, sorrow,
etc.

It is when the speaker himself (being inwardly moved with any of those deep
and vehement affections) does by evident demonstration, p^ssionate
pronunciation and suitable gestures make a lively expression thereof.

Scriptural Examples.
Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child? yea they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee: Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands,
etc.

Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Jer. 9.1, 2. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!

Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place, etc.

See Hos. 11.7, 8. 1 Cor 4.14, 15. 2 Cor. 2.4. Jer. 23.9, 10.

FINIS.
A Brief Explanation of the several Points used by the Learned in their
writings, illustrated by particular and pertinent Examples upon each.
FOrasmuch as the Points or Notes used by the Learned in distinguishing writing
(though not precisely pertinent to Rhetorique) are not the least part of
Orthography, or of the right manner of writing: the ignorance whereof is
frequently not only an obstacle to the discerning of the elegancy in writing,
but likewise to the perceiving of the writers scope, drift and sense: It will
therefore not be impertinent here to add a few lines in explanation thereof.

The points used by the learned in their writings are 7, viz.

1. A Comma. 2. A Semi-Colon. 3. A Colon. 4. A Period. 5. A note of Exclamation
or Admiration. 6. A note of Interrogation. 7. Parenthesis.
Which are particularly and orderly illustrated and exemplified.

1 Comma, Subdistinctio, the point in the part of a sentence without perfect
sense: A Comma or cutting short is a shutting up of the sense, the measure and
order in syllables being not filled up, extending from two unto seven
syllables, or thereabouts: or as others define;

It is a note of convenient silence, or rather a place of pausing or taking
breath, whereby the bound or limit of pronunciation or utterance (the sense
remaining) is so respited, as that which follows ought forthwith to succeed;

It is a short pause, and thus noted --,

A Latin Example of a Comma.
Ovid. Vtendum est aetate: cito pede praeterit aetas, Nec bona tam sequitur,
quam bona prima fuit.

English Examples.
By this point or note all the parts of a sentence are distinguished: as,

Embrace in your sweet consideration, I beseech you, the misery of my case,
acknowledge your self to be the cause, and think it reason for you to redress
the effects.

Thus she said, thus she ended, with so fair a Majesty of unconquered virtue,
that captivity might seem to have authority over tyranny, etc.

Loves companions be unquiet longings, fond comforts, faint discomforts, hopes,
jealousies, carfulness, etc.

2. Semi-colon, Semi-media distinctio, a pause somewhat longer then a Comma,
and thus noted --;

A Latin Example.
Cujus vita turpitudinis conscientia vacat; ejus nomen ab invidiosa, quantum in
nobis est, malevolentia vindicetur.

An English Example.
Her witty persuasions had wise answers; her eloquence recompensed with
sweetness; her threatenings repelled with disdain in Pamela, and patience in
Philoclea, etc.

3. Colon, Media distinctio, a mean distinction between a Comma and a Period,
is where there remains almost as much of the sentence to come, as is then past:

Or, as others define it;

It is a part of a Sentence which finishes the sense, shut up in measure and
order of syllables, but being pulled away from a period it defers the hearers
expectation, as not perfecting the sentence; and it goes forward from the
twelfth to the eighteenth syllable, and sometimes to the twenty fourth: It is a
longer stay then the former, thus noted --:

A Latin Example of Colon.
Quemadmodum Horologii umbram progressam sentim, us progredientem non cernimus:
and fruticem aut herbam orevisse apparet, crescere autem nulli videtur: ita and
ingeniorum profectus, quoniam minutis constat auctibus, ex intervallo sentitur.

An English Examples
If I speak nothing, I choke my self, and am in ^o way of relief: if simply,
neglected: if confusedly, not understood: if by the bending together all my
inward powers, they bring forth any lively expressing of that they truly feel,
that is a token, forsooth, the thoughts are at too much leisure, etc.

4. Periodus plena ac perfecta distinctio, a period, a perfect or full point,
or distinction; this is to be put at the end of a complete sentence.

That period is the most excellent, which is performed with two Colons (and
sometimes Commas) or four parts of a sentence, as that which suspends the mind,
and satisfies the ears.

A Period is thus noted --.

Herein beware that the Period be not shorter then the ear expects, nor longer
then the strength and breath of the Speaker or Reader may bear, and that it
finish its course in a handsome and full comprehension.

A Latin Example of a Period.
Est enim haec non scripta, sed nata lex; quam non didicimus, accipimus,
legimus; verum ex n^tura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus: ad quam non
docti, sed facti non instituti, sed imbuti sumus.

English Examples.
Lines cannot blush; so as modesty admits a freedom to my pen, which would be
taxed immodesty being delivered by the tongue.

That every one may understand, I seek not to talk any thing by silence, or to
cloud any thing by words.

5. A note of Exclamation or Admiration, thus noted --!

Latin Examples.
Ingens, atrox, horridum, facinus! quale nec Antiquitas vidit, nec credunt
posteri; omnium denique flagitiorum compendium in ferrei hujus seculi faeces
reservatum!

O miseras hominum mentes! O pectora caeca!
Qualibus in tenebris vitae, etc!
An English Example.
O endless endeavors! O vain glorious ignorance!

6. A note of Interrogation marked thus --?

Latin Examples.
Et quae tanta fuit Romam tibi causa videndi?
-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacta fames?
English Examples.
How is my Sun, whose beams are shining bright,
Become the cause of my dark ugly night?
Or how do I captived in this dark plight,
Bewail the case, and in the cause delight?
7. Parenthesis, which signifies interposition, is a sentence shut in with two
half Moons (which set aside) the former discourse notwithstanding remains
entire and sound: it is thus marked -- (^)

Latin Examples.
Credo equidem (noc vana fides) genus esse deorum.
-- Princeps (quia bella minantur
Hosts) militibus urbes praemunit and armis.
An English Example.
Tell me ingenuously (if there be any ingenuity in you) whether, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for, and sold by George Eversden at the
Maidenhead in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
AN Exposition with practical Observations upon the IX first Chap. of the
Proverbs, Grammatical, Rhetorical, Logical, and Theological; by Francis Tailor,
B. D. Late Minister of Canterbury. in 4.

An Exposition on the whole Book of the Canticles, by John Robotham late
Minister of Dover, in 4.

The Natural man's case Stated, or an exact map of the little world Man: In XVII
Sermons by Christopher Love in 8.

The Doctrine of Mortification, with the hearers Duty, by Christopher Love, in
8.

A Treatise of Prayer and of divine Providence as relating to it, by Edward Gee
Minister of the Gospel at Eccleston in Lancashire in 8. The 2. Edition
corrected and amended.

A comment on the First and Second Chapters of Ruth, by Thomas Full^r, Minister
of Waltham Abbey in Essex, in 8.

Mr. Culpepers treatise of Aurum potabile being an universal remedy for all
diseases, in 8

Sion and Pernassus, being divine Epigrams on several Texts of Scripture by J.
H. Gent. in 8.

The Life and Death of Sir Tho. More sometime Lord Chancellor of England.

Enoch's walk; being the substance of sundry Sermons digested into a Tested
into a Treatise by William Bell M.A. Pastor of the Church at Highton in
Lancashire, in S.

Usurpation defeated, and David restored, being an exact parallel between David
and our most gracious Sovereign King Charles the II. In their dangerous
dissettlement and wonderful Restoration, laid open in a Sermon on 2 Samuel
19.14. by Henry Newcom.

A Sermon preached at the Collegiate Church at Manchester, on the Coronation
day: by Richard Horri^k, Warden of the said College.

The Sinners Hope, as his privilege and duty in his worst condition, stated,
cleared, and improved by Henry Newcom M. A. and one of the Ministers of the
Gospel at Manchester.

Grace, the truth and growth and different degrees thereof, being the substance
of (...) Sermons preached by Christopher Love late Minister of Laurence Jury
London, to which is added a Funeral Sermon being the last Sermon he ever
preached.

King James Apology for the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, against the two
Breves of Pope Paulus Quintus and the Letter of Cardinal Bellarmine to G.
Blackwell the Archpriest.


