A SERMON, Preached on the occasion of A FUNERAL At Gabuly in Ireland.
By a Dominican Friar.
JOB X. v. x. Thou have poured out like Milk, and crudled me as Cheese.


BEloved, you see here what Job says of himself, yea Job, that holy Man; he
compared himself to Cheese, yes, he does you Sirs, he does to Cheese like
Cheese, Thou have curdled me or framed me. You know beloved, there are several
sorts of Cheese, and several ways of making Cheese, which you, and you, and you
understand.

Like Cheese, yea, I say, like Cheese. You know when Cheese is first made, they
take their Milk and let it stand till there come Cream upon it; if this Cream
be not put into a clean Vessel, or if Dust fall into it, or if not handled with
clean Hands, it will be bad Cheese, and stinking Cheese. The trial of good
Cheese is by tosting; if you put a piece of Cheese to the Fire, and if it does
not drop, you, and you, and you, will say, it is bad hungry Cheese, and you will
not care to eat it; no, no; but if it drop it is a sign't was made by a good
Huswife.

Thou have crudled me like Cheese. The Soul of Man is Cheese, be it good or
bad: Yea, yea, hearken to this, by good trout, if we believe Augustine or St.
Ambrose too; and if ever the Soul has Works in it, then it is like good
Cheese, and will, and will drop at the Fire of Persecution; it will not burn or
stink as that old Rogues Soul, and that old Hogs Soul, that is there, and
there, and there.

Thou have crudled me like Cheese. You see what Job says is true; for he was
good Cheese when all the Devils in Hell did bark at him and surrounded him, and
that where his Wife tempted him, and I believe she was handsome too, yet
notwithstanding them and hur, she was still good Cheese; He was no dry nor lean
Cheese, for he dropped, yea, and had Grace in him too; but show me a Man here
that is such Cheese as he was, any of you all: I desire you, I desire you, St.
Jerome, St. Thomas of Acquitaine, St. Dominick, St. Francis; those were brave
Men, not like you a pack of Rogues.

Thou have formed me like Cheese; but hold, I say, I knew nothing of my
preaching on this occasion till last night, and so having not timely notice, am
forced to speak less methodical, then otherwise I should have done. But let me
tell you in short, the fire of Hell, is already burning for you if you do not
have a care and make your selves good Cheese, that has Fat and Moisture in it;
if you do not, the Devil take you all for Knaves and Rogues; and if you do not,
you shall never go to Purgatory, no by God, you shall not; and what will you do
then?

Thou have crudled me like Cheese. Last Sunday was St. Th -- Day, a day that
many Souls went ^^t of Purgatory, a day that the Gates of Heaven was opened, a
day that such Villains as you might have ^hook off the Chain of your Sin, if
you had truly prayed to St. Francis, and freely given your Alms and Charity.
But hold, hold I say, instead of that you went to the Alehouse, and played at
Cards, and did Swear, and Whore, and was Drunk: O damned Rogues!

Thou have crudled me like Cheese. Nay, more than all this, is an aggravation
to this business that lies before on you: The next day being Gabuly Fair, some
of you that I am sure are hear at this time, stole a Bridle, a Bridle; I say,
you stole. Such great Villains you are, that you care not from whom you steal;
no, I say, not from whom: Nay, thou had as lief steal from a Gentleman as
from a Clown. It is true, it is true, it is you, or you, or you, methinks is --
Rogue. Does not he blush? Yes he does. Well, I shall find him out before I am
much older, yea, and tie him with that Bridel my self; then all shall be
beaten: How like a damned Rogue he will look? I will take him, and put the Bitt
in his Mouth, and will set the Devil on his Back, and make him gallop with
spur-galled Sides to Hell.

Thou have crudled me like Cheese. And now beloved, it is time for me to speak
of the dead Gentlewoman that lies before me here, I assure you, She was good
Cheese, and good fat Cheese too; for many a drop has she sweat in going to
Mass: She was Threescore and seven years old, a good Gentlewoman of a good and
noble Extraction; She had Cows and Sheep, and abundance of Horses; She was no
poor mellow Cheese; She never stole a Bridle, no, she scorned it; and a
virtuous Woman she was, that I have known her to go 5 miles to Mass in a Frosty
Morning, and a foot too, and yet she had Horses many; She kept a good House,
Bread and white Bread too, good Beer and Vsquebah; for many a Dram have I had
of her: And now let us fall on our Knees and pray for her Soul, saying,

Ave Maria.
FINIS.
London, Printed 1689.


