A SERMON Preached before the People called QUAKERS, IN THE Park of Southwark:
On the 27th. of the 9th. Month, called by some Nov. 1687.

By a Reverend and Dearly beloved Sister, who came from Scotland to rejoice
with Us for our LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE; and leave her Testimony at London.

Wherein is contained a Word, concerning the PENAL LAWS and TESTS.

PSALM CXXVI.I. When the LORD turned again the Captivity of Zion, we were like
them that Dream.

LONDON, Printed for N. H. MDCLXXXVIII.

A SERMON Preached before the People called QUAKERS.
My Dearly Beloved,
IT has been the earnest desire of my Soul to see you in the flesh, to rejoice
together, and congratulate that longed for Christian Liberty of Conscience,
which our King has been pleased to grant unto all his Subjects. Let no man
heneceforth judge to the outward appearance, nor pass sentence on a bare
Possibility. Truly about four years ago, The Duke of York's Succession to the
Crown, was a Bugbear of Inquisition that frightened three Nations out of their
wits: But like Sampson's Lion and Riddle, Out of the Eater came forth meat, and
out of the strong has come forth sweetness. This is the Lord's doing, and it
is wonderful in our eyes.

Truly (Beloved Brethren and Sistens) though the Conscience cannot be compelled,
the Oppression and Tyranny we were under, these several years by past, was a
great stumbling block in the way of our patience; when the wicked and ungodly
did rob us under pretense of Religion; and threaten to knock us in the heads
for Conscience sake: imprisoning us because we did not pay to the Tithe-takers,
Hirelings, Babie-sprinklers whatever they pleased. Heli's Sons made the Lord's
Offering to be abhorred, because they did exact upon the people, and took
according to their own pleasure by force. Paul could rather willingly work for
his Living than be burdensome to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made
him Over-seer: Therefore said to the Corinthians, I will not be burdensome to
you; For I seek not yours but you. But Thieves and Robbers, who enter not at
the door, but climb up by the walls may invert the order, and say, I seek not
you, but yours.

Religion is ^^t ^^de a va^^ to ^^ver Vill^ny^ The De^^ clothed himself with
Scripture whe^^ (...) ^^mpted our ^^viour: But he is m^^t formidable when
transformed to an Angel of Light. Demetrius and his demented Crew of Crafts-men
could under a pretense of Religion and Love to their great Goddess. Diana and
her Temple, oppose the doctrine of Christ, and cry out Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. whils^ ^^ey neither cared. ^or her ^or he Temple either, ^ut ^^ly
for their own gai^^. The Jews (...) the Prophet Jerem^ah's time could cry, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, yet did trust lying words, that
could not Profit, Steal, Murder, commit Adultery, and Swear falsely; But the
Lord's command to them was thoroughly to amend their ways, thoroughly to execute
judgment and leave off Oppression: This is very applicable to these fat Bulls
of Bashan, and lean Kine of Egypt, who have oppressed us these several years by
past. But since it has pleased God (who rules the hearts of Kings) ^o deliver
us from this Egyptian Bondage, let us freely forgive them, and pray for them,
lest (being hardened in our own impenitency) ^e be left in the Wilderness of
our own weakness, and be destroyed by the old fiery Serpent.

But above all things (My beloved Lambs) since God and the King have given us
freedom of Truth, let every one use his talent to the best advantage; (and
laying aside all malice, guile, and hypocrisy, sloth, and covetousness;) stand
upon his Watchtower, waiting for the voice and coming of the Bridegroom of our
Souls: for the Devil is busier now, and has more advantage to gain ground upon
us than when we were made cautious by the constant alarums of our assaulting
Enemy. Outward crosses drive a man to inward Piety and tranquillity of mind.
Sorrow is better than laughter (says Solomon) for by the sadness of the
Countenance the heart is made better.

The blood of the Martyrs was reputed the seed of the Primitive Church.
Hannibal's Army was indefatigable, and by the Romans esteemed invincible, till
they gave themselves to ease, wine, and voluptuous diet. Noah was not drunk,
whilst he was in fear of the flood, building an Ark for his own safety. Lot was
not ensnared in uncleanness, whilst the wicked in Sodom daily vexed his Soul.

Be watchful then (my dearly beloved) lest ye defile your Garments, and the
shame of your nakedness be seen. The Conscience is The Holy of Holies, which
the great High Priest only does enter. It is the Candle of the Lord that gives
light to our path, the primum mobile of the little world. The Spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters, when darkness covered the face of the Deep:
Even so the light of the Conscience shines and gives light to the inner Man,
tho no outward Sun, Moon, nor Star appear. It is a Lanthorn which none can
extinguish but he who bears it. Keep then your hearts with all diligence, and
Consciences void of offense toward God and Man.

Above all things (My Brethren) Love one another; Love is the Badge of
Christianity, and the mark of the true Church. Appolyon the destroying King of
the bottomless Pit, dare not show his face where true love is. Love, Life, and
Light, are the Epethites by which God expresses himself. They are inseparable
concomitants, and wherever they are, God is not far off. Love works no ill
to his Neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law. It suffers
long, and is kind, it envieth not, it vaunteth not it self, it is not puffed
up, it does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth: Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things; and in one word, Love never fails. But be not deceived (My dear
Brethren and Sisters) If any man love the World, the love of the Eather is not
in him.

Be merciful one to another, for the merciful does obtain mercy. Rather suffer
injury than be heard before those which are none of our Society. Let never a
persecuting spirit have dominion over you; but learn of Christ to be meek and
lowly. Carnal weapons, Instruments of Cruelty, have no sympathy with the sword
of the Spirit, wherewith Christ overcame The Wicked One, and reconciled the
world to God again.

That man that walks on Crutches, is never strong in the Limbs: A Religion by
Law Established is horrible Nonsense, Law and Gospel are repugnantia in
adjecto, they never agree well together, it is a Figurative Religion; like
hysteron proteron, or a man walking backwards. A Conscience regulate by human
Power, is like a Diamond set in Brass, or a Glass with Iron Hoops, a Fox
keeping Sheep, or a Malefactor made a Judge. Paul appealed to Caesar and lost
his Head for his pains. Therefore that Church that makes the arm of Flesh her
trust, may be questioned whether she be the true Church or not. Moses and
Joshua (tho they knew the truth of their Religion) did not force the Children
of Israel to accept of it, but set life and death before them; but the
punishment of obstinacy they left to the Lord. Paul may plant, and Apollos may
water, but God gives the increase. He is a foolish Steward that hireth a
Servant to his Master, whom he knows he will not accept of. How then can
rational men force one another to accept of that Religion, which they think
true, whilst they know that God accepts none but those that come willingly.
He only can make people willing in the day of his power. All the Host of Hell
could not prevail with the Apostles, yet soberly could they say, The love of
Christ constrains us. A Poet of my acquaintance compared a persecuting Church
to

A Golden Cup of Dragon's Poison full,
Or Aaron 's Calf grown to Perillu 's Bull;
Which is made this or that, or what you will,
As does the State Affairs require it still.
A strange Hysteron Proteron! Sad fate,
To see the Church the Basis of the State.
Paul's Persecution (tho it was zeal wrapped up in ignorance) was a heinous sin
before the Lord. None must do evil that good may follow. He that would
propagate and enlarge God's Church by Blood and Persecution is like one who
(under pretense of zeal) would steal money to give the poor, and so make his
Theft the Author of his Charity

The Church is Christ's Spouse, the Bride, the Lambs Wife; he fought a duel
with the Devil and Death for her, his right is good: Let him then be head of
his own Body, if any thing be interposed the Son of Righteousness is Eclipsed,
and darkness is over the whole Members.

Penal Laws and Tests are but the Patrons of Hypocrisy, and the Sword of the
Spirit of Antichrist; Hob-goblings of Apostasy wrapped up in Sheeps Clothing
which (at a distant seem innocent, but approaching nearer found to be like
revenous Wolves) which frighten Men in the Kingdom of Darkness to sacrifice
both Faith and Conscience to brazen faced Babylonian violence and humane power.

Let God then be Guardian of his own Church; The Spirit of meekness is not a
Spirit of outward violence, but a still and calm voice. One who was my
Persecuter in a sober fit told me, he never liked the Religion that was thrust
in at a Man's Broadside with the point of a Sword; yet however it be the Devil
is no gainer: For the Palm of victory flourishes best under the burden of
Persecution, when the Children of Men Lord it over God's heritage. Be steadfast
then and Waver not, neither draw back whatsoever be your condition; sweet Meats
must be eaten with sour Sauce, good Bees draw Honey from bitter Herbs; the Rod
and the Staff go well together, outward Troubles are the Pravoes Spiritual
which drive us within the line of the Church-militant. The Lord thought it not
fit to cast out all the Enemies of the Children of Israel in one year, lest the
Beasts of the field should prevail against them; even so, if we had no
Temptations to drive us to the Throne of Grace, and keep us on our guard, we
would become secure and confide in our own selves, and our own brutish and
corrupt Natures would prevail against us.

Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man; pure
Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the
Fatherless, and Widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World. Let every one order his Conversation aright, and strive to keep free
from all known sin, and to him that has learned this lesson, God will show
what further he would have done; according to that of the King and Prophet
David. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation
of God: For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant. Thus, it is not Sayers, nor bare Believers that are
justified before God, and to whom he gives the Spirit of discerning to choose
the good, and refuse the evil; but, What Man is he that fears the Lord, him
shall he teach in the Way that he shall choose.

Do not err then my beloved Brethren, neither give heed to the various Opinions
of Men of Corrupt Minds, distitute of the Truth, and tossed above with the Wind
of the Times; changing their Doctrine for filthy Lucar's sake, and unadvisedly
contradicting their former Assertions. The Gospel of Christ is but one; and
every good gift comes down from the Father of Light; with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning. Fix not your Faith to a future
Contingency, nor tip your belief with the turnings of Time; a Poet exclaiming
against this Evil, says,

The World's confused, whil^t (in a loafty strain)
Each Fool does Print, the Notions of his Brain.
Neither give your selves to read idle Controversies, though they be gilded
with the Title of the Learned; for by the Spirit of Antichrist under the Notion
of Philosophy (a falsifying Glass which can represent one thing in diverse
shapes) the World is darkened, and the key of Knowledge laid by, and the Kingdom
of Heaven shut up according to that of the Prophet, Thy Wisdom, and thy
Knowledge, it has perverted thee; a Woman once going to be burnt at the Stake,
for being a Christian, answered, those who would by Arguments persuaded her to
renounce her Religion, I cannot dispute for Christ, but I can die for Christ.
Be ready then (like this Woman) rather to suffer, then by Seditious Arguments
to give offense.

Finally (My Beloved Lambs) Let your Moderation be known unto all Men, the Lord
is at hand. For he that walks uprightly walks surely. Give no offense, But
submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whither it be
to the King as supreme: Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do well.

Had our Noble and Heroic King stood out against that Principle that persuaded
him to the Religion he now Professes, he had been much to blame; but now
considering his Courage (which has leaped over the Wall of Worldly Temptations
and stumbling Block of the feat of losing his Crown and Kindom) he is a greater
Conqueror then Alexander the Great, and more Powerful then any of his
Ancestors. It is the Lord's work and doing, therefore let no Man grudge or
repine: For the Powers that be, are ordained of GOD; Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. Therefore with the
Apostle, Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the KING. Be
charitable in Opinion, and Judge no Man, especially these that are without:
Paul was much dejected to think that the Israelites his Kinsfolk should not be
Saved; but after serious and deep Meditation, he cries out as with a Plaudite,
God has shut them all up together in unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon
them all; O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
How unsearehable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out. It is very
observable that the Apostle tells, that after the Elected Israelites were
sealed in the Fore heads, be saw a great Multitude, which no Man could Number,
of all Nations; and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, which stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with White Robes, and Palms in their
hands. Grace and Peace then be upon all the Israel of God, and all those who
love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity; for there is neither Greek, nor Jew,
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond, nor Free, but
Christ is all, and in all.

Now to him whose Kingdom is Vbiquity, and whose Duration is Eternity, God all
sufficient, who only is able to keep you Spotless, and present you before the
Throne of his Grace, with exceeding great Joy, and do abundantly above all that
we ask or think, according to the Power that works in us, he Glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages, World without end. Amen.

THE END.

