An AWAKENING WARNING TO THE Woeful World, By a Voice in three Nations;
Uttered in a brief DISSERTATION Concerning that Fatal, and to be admired
Conjunction of all the Planets, in one, and the same Sign () Sagitarius, the
last of the fiery T^^plicity, to come to pass the 1/11 day of December, Anno
1662.

IN WHICH It is clearly evinced, as well by S. Scriptures, as by the Nature of
the Conjunction it self, and other Antecedents, Concomitants and Circumstances,
that the Glorious Coming of JESUS CHRIST is at hand.

WHEREBY 1. He will recollect the Dispersed Nation of the Jews. 2. Abolish the
man of Sin, who hitherto has obtained the Principality, as well in the Church
as in the world. And 3. At length erect his Glorious Kingdom on Earth.


Autore PETRO SERARIO.

Amster^dam, MDCLXII.

To the READER.
IF any trust to Heavens, or lights presage,
Some truth; lift up your hearts thou present age.
If to believe what earth gives to the eye,
Or to the hand to feel, there is reason why;
Believe O mortals this (...) time declines,
And Stars to their Maker, their Pow'r^ resign.
O that to the world, (ah which we too much trust)
Wee'ld say, pack hence give place to God all must.
Lo this world rues, and so does Babe^ fall,
And whosoever stands for Babel shall.
He only shall escape destruction,
That Is firmly joined to Christ in union.
Choose which thou'lst rather have; the last hour runs
Which past, no scap, nor choice to mortal sons.
The day invades, wished for in every age
When God alone shall Rule this earthly Stage,
And with him Saints (to whom the promise w^^)
To be the Heirs thereof shall come to pass.
The Sign of Sagitarius.
diagram of planetary positions

The Situation of the Planets at Noon (...) day of December is thus,

According to their Latitude, all decline from the Ecliptic, toward the
North, only Mars is found in the Southern Climate.

According to their Longitude, thus they are dispersed, according to the
Degrees and Minutes of Sagitarius. -- 0 -- 9. -- 4 -- 59. -- 9 -- 25. -- 10 --
55. -- 19 -- 46. -- 25 -- 44. -- 27 -- 54.


Well-affected Reader,
THere lately came forth at Groaning, a little Book in heir Native Language,
concerning this Matter, Entitled WAT NIEWS and WAT WONDELIKS, etc. not only
setting before our eye^ the true History of this Conjunction, and the
Description of the Celestial Theater, in which this Representation should
^e^acted, together with the Properties and Operations of the Planets, the
Actors in this Scene, but also subjoyning a very serious and most pious
Exhortation, by which the Author would have us admonished, that we heed these
things, and convert in Sackcloath and Ashes, that we perish not by the invading
Judgments, which of necessity come un^voidably upon the earth; but that we may
be graciously preserved.

After this Book by and by succeeded another in the German Tongue, brought out
of Germany unto us, bearing the name of a FORERUNNER Orig. Prod^omus.
, because in it was this Concurse of all the Planets in the same Sign, as some
eminent, and notable M^ssenger, and Significator of the things which shall
follow that great Conjunction which shall be in the Year 1663 next ensuing.
Which Forerunner, indeed, does excellently harmonise with the for^^er Book; and
does alike seriously and piously monish, concerning many things; es^ecially of
the Times of the Gentiles now expiring;
of the Approach of the Conversion and Restitution of the Jews; and doubtless
of the imminent end of this world.

But because I perceived, that among other Obst^cles which bolt the door
against these so saving monitions, and the truth therein contained, whereby
they are less entertained by men of the present Generation, this is not the
meanest, that there is such small Attention lent to the Celestial Signs, and
so little Orig. Fides
Credit given, as if what things are in the He^vens, are so above us, as if
they nothing appertained to us. Touching the Sun, indeed, all confess it
procreates to us Day and Night, Summer and Winter, fruitfulness and barrenness:
And as to the Moon, none will deny that it exercises some dominion on earth,
not only on the flowing and reflowing of the Sea, but also on the Humors and
Complexions of men: insomuch that it cannot be denied much to be our concern,
how these Lights are in Heaven placed and affected, whether conjunct or
separate, whether farther distant each from other, o^ mutually near
approiching; whether the Moon makes toward the Sun, or recedes from it.
Moreover who knows not how much it concerns, in what place of Heaven, and in
what Sign, and with what Associates she enters into the Bride-chamber of her
Husband; and what Prognostics the skilful in Astrology are wont from hence to
infer and predict. But as what appertains ^o other Planets and Luminaries of
Heaven, v.g. Saturn.
J^p^re.
Mars.
^enus.
and Mercury
, what Operations they have, is little regarded; whether t^e^ ^e conjoined or
disjunct, far distant from, or near to each other; whether their beams
confluentially radiate, or not, whether they be opposite, or collateral;
whether many or few convene in the same House, in this or that Sign of the
Zodiac, men pass not, as all one to the^. Whereb^ it comes to pass that
whatsoever sign the most benign Go^vouchsafeth to hold forth in heaven, for
the commination and monition of M^nkind, is totally made useless, and becomes
v^in.

HENCE is it that I thought I should do a work worth my labor, for the Glory
of God, and the Good of my Neighbors, if I shall, as well out of Scripture, as
from the nature of the thing, and the circumst^nces thereof, demonstrate ^^ese
two things.

1. That such sorts of Signs do, without all doubt, portend, and foretell some
grand and singu^ar thing.

2. What that is which they portend and foretell; If perhaps, by the favor of
God, so^e from hence may be induced to embrace these faithful praemonitions
with greater readiness of mind.

As for the S. Scriptures; Genesis 1.14.
In the first Book of Moses, where is extant the ^en^ion of he Creation of he
Sun, Moon, and other Stars of He^ven, i^ is delivered, that these were there
placed to that end, That they might divide the Day from the Night, and be for
Signs, and Seasons, and Days, and Years. To wit, that the intention of God,
when he was about to create these Lights was this, that they should signify,
and fo^eshew something on earth, which God had before created, viz. Not only
that they should point out the times of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, and
the seasons of Seed-time, and H^rvest, of planting, and pulling up, etc.
abbreviations, lengthenings, or equalizings of days; with the Annual Feasts,
Days, Weeks, and Months: but especially that they might be for signs of those
things which must be acted on earth; and what there, in succession of time, as
well in the Government of the Church, as of the world should arise, and might
manifest himself. Which thing is intimated by Moses when he says, V. 15.
That they may be in the Expansion of Heaven, to enlighten the earth, i. e. To
give a discerning of things to be done on earth. For as for what concerns the
external Light of the day, that the Sun solely supplies to us: and for what
concerns the Light of the night, the Moon alone would be sufficient, if
nothing else were to be desired. But there ought to be more light present with
us than that whereby one man by sight, discernes another, one Animal another,
and body from body may be distinguished. To the end it may be well with man on
earth, and the whole Orb of the world below may subsist, it behooves that there
be a certain other sort of Light, which descends also from on high, and is
nourished from above; to wit, a Rational Light of discerning, and clearness of
understanding, from whence diverse Arts, Sciences, Negotiations, and
Governments, as well Ecclesiastical, as secular, are invented, and polished to
perfection. And that Light is called in the School of Wise men Sideral, or
Astrary, because it depends upon those Stars of which Moses affirms, that they
were therefore constituted in the Expansion of Heaven, that they may enlighten
the world. And foras^uch as this light exists first in the He^vens, ( viz. in
the stars and Pranets) before it shines on earth, and is there manifested; what
wonder, if any man discernes the tokens and preludes of those things which are
imminent to come to pass on earth, by the constitution of the Heavens (so as he
be endued with sufficient understanding:) even as we see in a prudent and
skilful Physiognomist, how be is able oft-times to de^ermine, and foresee what
a man carries in his breast, or will bef^ll him, by his Eyes, Coun^enance, and
Lineaments. But some man may say, (so) to illuminate the world; how is it that
Moses so vehemently dehorte^h the people from them, when he says Deuteronomy. 4.19,
20.
, Take heed lest thou lift up thine eyes to Heaven, and when thou see the
Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven, should be
driven to worship them, and serve them, Which the Lord thy God has IMPARTED
unto ALL NATIONS under the whole Heaven. But the Lord has taken you, and
brought you forth out of the Iron Furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a
people of Inheritance, Moses, That the Lord thy God has IMPARTED these to ALL
THE NATIONS under the whole Heaven? Can it be said indeed that God imparts any
evil? And that to all Peoples under the whole Heaven?

But I will declare as the very thing is; whoever he be, that is obliged to a
better and higher matter, he presently slips and prevaricates, as often as he
lets down himself to that which is lower. Forasmuch therefore as the most
bountiful God has revealed himself more clearly and nearly to this people,
than to any other; speaking to them out of the midst of the fire, and
singularly given them holy Laws, and Institutions, as he had not done to any
other people; it became them likewise to order their lives, not according to
the manner of other peoples, who had not received these (Laws) but according
to the mode which God of his special grace had taken care should be declared to
them; whereby an Access for them unto God himself, was in all cases prepared,
so as they might be perfectly instructed by him. Otherwise they would have held
it necessary to consult the Sun, Moon or Stars for events, counsels, and
direction.

Besides, the thing from which Moses so vehemently dehorteth the Israelitish
people, is not, that they attended to the course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and contemplated the work of Divine Providence in the Heaven: But only they
should not suffer themselves to be driven by them, in bowing before them, to
worship them for Gods, as was wont to be done among the Gentiles; who
attributing to the Stars and Planets, names of Gods, they erected to them
Statues, and Temples, and gave them the worship of Gods. And this they did with
so great fervency of zeal, that when after a time, by the light of the Gospel,
the fraud of Satan beg^n to be detected, these peoples, by the Faith of Chrut,
being accused of Idolatry, were soon set on fire into a huge madness. From
whence also those cruel persecutions derived their occasion. But if the
Gentiles had not abused these cesestial Creatures unto evil; If they had
suffered themselves to be led, as by the hand, unto God by these works of God,
as we may see it in Job, and his Friends; and as is still on record to memory
in the Jews Historicals the like thing of the sons of Seth in the former world;
and of Noah, Abraham, and Melchisedech in the ^^^er and present world, before
the Law was given; And of Moses Daniel, Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego, under
the Law, (of whom it is written Act. 7.22. (...) 1.4.
, that Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, etc.) As also of
the Magi, living out of the Law, and without the Law; (...) legem and sine l^^^
de gentious.
If (I say) they had not bowed themselves before the Host of Heaven, but by
this thing they had learned to bow the knee before God the Creator of all
things, worshipping not the Signs of future things which he has set before
us, but the hand it self that put them, viz. the Counsel and wisdom of the
O^nipotent God, verily they had not sinned; and it would have been far from
them to persecute any man who should attempt to bring them nearer unto God.

I conclude therefore, that from this dehortation of Moses, ( Deuteronomy. 4.19, 20.)
it cannot be concluded, that these celestial Signs ought not to be observed,
and attended unto; but only, that we ought not, too much to adhere to them,
either to bow down to them, or to worship them; or because of them to neglect
that which is better, and nearer, as it happened often in Israel, through the
seducements of the world, and of the Prince of the world. Consult Jer. 7.18.
and thou shall see how the Lord showed to his Prophet what was prepared in the
Cities of Judah, and streets of Jerusalem, viz. The Children gather wood, and
the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make Cakes to
the QUEEN of Heaven ( Melechet, that is to the Host of Heaven) and to pour out
Drink Offerings unto other Gods. Yea see in Jer. 44.17, 18. How as well the men
as the women of Judah did backslide to that degree of Idolatry, that they brake
forth into these words, But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of
our own mouth, to burn Incense to the QUEEN of Heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto HER, as we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our
Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem, for then had we
plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. So that by MELECHET, or the
Queen of Heaven, they understood no other thing but the Host of the Stars; And
therefore that the thing which the Lord blames in Israel, is not that they gave
heed to the Host of Heaven, but that they drew them into abuse, and Idolatry,
does manifestly appear by those things we read in Jer. 8.1, 2. Behold, that
which in the former Chapter he had expressed by the Name of the Queen of
Heaven, that very same here he calls the Host of Heaven; and that which he
threatens severely to punish in them, is not that they did heedfully consider
the Signs of Heaven, but that they worshipped them, and bowed themselves unto
them, as unto their Gods.

There is furthermore another thing, wherein the Israelites here greatly
sinned, That to wit, in imitation of the Heathen, they were too much afraid of
those Signs of Heaven as if there was not in being a superior power, on which,
both they, and all the Host of Heaven did depend: and as if those things which
were there prefigured, ought always necessarily to attain their affect.
In which res^ect the Lord in that manner speaks to them by his Prophet, Jer.
10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of
Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them. As if he should say, I have set
before the Heathen which h^ve not known me, signs in He ven as means leading
unto me, because they have not known any other way, and have not received any
other Law. But THOU my people ISRAEL, who have learned to know me more nearly,
and from me have received the Law out of the midst of the fire, which excels
all other Laws, return not thou unto the way of the Heathen, but learn thou
well the way shown unto thee in my Law, and there shall be no cause that thou
should be afraid of the signs of Heaven. Isa. 44.24, 25.
For (as it is written) I am he which have created the heavens, and have bound
my self to thee in an everlasting and indissolvable Covenant. I am JEHOVAH,
making all things, extending the heavens alone, spreading abroad the earth by
my power, that frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes the Diviners
mad, that turns the wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish. Be
ye only obedient unto me, walk faithfully in my Ways, and nothing of those
things is to be feared by you, of which the Heathen are afraid.

But that we may come nearer to the MATTER; If this were true, that nothing of
truth and certainty could be gathered from the celestial Signs, and therefore
it were prohibited to attend unto them; tell me, I pray thee, For whom, or what
ends are those Signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars made? To what purpose? To
what use? Why are not only the Jews in the Old Testament Joel 2.30 and 3.15.
, but Christians also in the New Mat. 24.29. Mar. 13.24. Luke 21.25.
precisely sent to them? as we shall hear more largely afterward. Therefore
from the S. Scriptures I conclude that those signs conspicuous in the Heavens
(especially in these last time^) do necessarily portend something, and
therefore of right, they are cese^ve^ly and diligently to be observed.

But some may object: Suppose that Signs are given in Heaven; Does not the
Almigh^y and most exce^ent God accuse Job of his Ignorance, even in this very
business of the predominion of the stars on us inhabitants of the earth, asking
him by way of opprobry, Have thou known the order of Heaven? will thou set the
dominion thereof on the earth? As if he had said, Thou know that thou have
no knowle^ge of this thing; and that thou can do nothing in this matter, Job
38.33. And does not Solomon, Prove. 25.3. spe^k concerning the heavens above us,
and the earth beneath us, and the hearts of Kings, that those three are
unsearchable; How then shall any man dare to attempt, without the Note of the
greatest presumption, so to search out those things which are in the Heavens,
as thence to pick out, what shall come to pas in the world? And do we not see
many, yea of the excellentest M^sters of Astrology greatly to be deceived; as
for example, That most famous Albumazar; of whom we read in his Writings, he
foresaw by the stars, that Christian Religion should not continue beyond 1400
^ears from after its first be^innings: whereas to now, since Christ's Birth, we
account 1662 years. Which term exceeds Albumazars Calculation, more than 200
years. ***
And there have been before 142 years since, certain Astrologers, which from
that great Conjunction of () Saturn, () Jupiter and () Mars, in Aquarius, which
happened in the year of Christ 1524, struck a great terror into men concerning
some imminent great Deluge (though not universal) so that many provided
themselves of ships, by which, after the manner in Noah's Flood, they might save
themselves from the Waters; whereas no such thing at all followed thereupon.
Many more of the like Errors might be produced; Orig. (...). Answ.
but let these suffice.

We answer; If this be granted, that those things which are seen in the Heavens
are truly Signs and Preludes of those things which shall come to pass on
earth, and for the understanding of them, there is need of certain and
undoubted Rules and Precepts, to discern all things aright: Yet that remains
firm, and irtefragable, that we are bound to attend to those signs, and to
apply our minds (as much as in us is) to those premonitions set forth in the
Heavens, instantly to pray for, and expect in faith, greater wisdom, and
understanding, as they have done, who ever at tained to any certainty in this
Science: And moreover to set before our eyes, those general Rules which have
been delivered to us, by the more skilful in this Art. For, albeit those
precepts (partly by the multiplicity, and subtilty of them, and partly by the
prevalency of a certain superior cause, which can invert, and make void all
these things) are not always found firm and undoubted: yet if we seek of God
our certainty, he can equally in these, as in other businesses, and Sciences of
the world (which considered in themselves are also full of uncertainty)
establish our hearts, and lead us into all certainty of truth: and give to us
that we may see and discern, what others cannot see and discern.

As for that place of Job, this only is intimated, If any man will rightly and
fundamentally know the order of heaven, and the dominion thereof on the earth
he ought to learn it of God, who alone settled all these things; and therefore
it is not meet for Job, or any other man to glory before God. And for that
saying of the wisest King, neither does tha^ intend any other thing, than to
teach us, That these three in themselves are unsearchable; to wit, Heaven, as
being too high and sublime; the Earth, as being too deep; and the heart of a
King, as being too much hidden, unstable, and mutable. So that from hence it
cannot be concluded, that a man that fears God, and cleaves to him, may not be
endued, or gifted by God with such wisdom and understanding; that he cannot
understand the things which are in Heaven above him, and in the earth beneath
him, and in the hearts of Kings without him. No by no means. For Solomon
himself in the Book of Wisdom ( Chap. 7.) V. 17.
testifies the contrary; where he compileth a Catalogue of those things which
he was taught of God, by Wisdom. God has given to me certain or true knowledge
of the things that are in Nature, that I might understand the constitution of
the world, the force of the Elements, the beginning, middle and ending of
times: the vicissitudes of Solstices, the variety of Seasons, the Circuits of
years, and situation of stars, the natures of Animals, the furies of Beasts,
the strength of the winds, and the cogitations of men: the differences of
Plants, and the qualities of Roots. All these, he says, he learned of God, as
well those things that are made in Heaven above him, as those in the bowels of
the earth beneath him; and also those things that seem to lie hidden in the
recesses of man's heart. For (as he adds, v. 21.) All such things as are
secret, or manifest, them have I known. For Wisdom which is the Artificer of
all things, taught me. See thou therefore how all things may be obtained by
Wisdom: as well the knowledge of those things which are in Heaven, as those on
Earth, and in the very Closets of the heart? Therefore he who has not this
wisdom, but does desire it, let him ask it of God, and seek it where it may be
found. Neither let him say, What advantageth it me that God has put certain
Signs in Heaven, seeing I understand them not? and so many who have assumed to
themselves skill in them, have so enormously stumbled, and exposed themselves
to scorn? For we see the same things to happen, in all Sciences, Orig
Prophetiae.
Arts, Negotiations; yea even in Prophecy, and the Gospel, which is called the
Word of Truth. Where if one, or another be certain in his Art, and Science,
thou shall find ten remaining uncertain. For, where thou may find one true
Prophet, with whom there is the sincere Word of God, there an hundred will
present themselves; who challenge to themselves the same word, and carry
before, them, in external gesture, and habit, the show or shape of a Prophet,
when as they are not. And where thou shall find one who purely delivers the
word of Truth, thou may muster up an hundred who wrest it to the private
sense of humane corruption. Are therefore all Arts and Sciences to be despised,
and to be accounted and reputed in the same rank as we see at this day, the
Celestial Signs reputed? Certainly if this were so, there were an end of all
Science, Art, Prophecy, and all Doctrine of Truth. And all things, as
uncertain and dead, must be buried in the profound darkness of Ignorance and
Confusion, and there eternally lie buried. Thou see therefore, that for the
dotages or mistakes of some in the knowledge of Astrology, and falsely
challenging to themselves the knowledge of the understanding of the Celestial
Signs, all Observation of the stars, and Prognostications are not by and by to
be vilified.

But let us proceed to the second Member of this our Dissertation; that by the
nature it self of the Conjunction we may demonstrate, That necessarily some
grand, and singular thing is here portended. That therefore thou may better
perceive the nature of this Conjunction, or concurrence of all the Planets in
one and the same Sign of the Zodiac, take this similitude: Whenever we see
all the Rulers in any City, An apt Si^aile.
or Commanders in an Army of Soldiers, convent in one place, and there take
counsel together; presently we thence conclude, some grand thing is in
agitation: The same thing therefore may be here concluded, when we see the
Planets so convent and lay their heads together. For look what the Rulers in a
City, and Commanders in an Host are; the same are the Planets in the Host of
Heaven. Other stars in the Firmament continue in their fixed distances one from
the other, and have no peculiar motion, as every one of the Planets has his
own proper motion, each wheeled about in his own sphere, after his own manner.
Therefore ancient wise men considering the Analogy or proportion between the
(Macrocosme) the great world, and the (Microcosme) the little world, said, by
the fixed stars of the Firmament were represented the firm Limbs of out body;
and by the Planets our inward bowels, which by their motion, and influences,
move, sustain, and act the whole body. What wonder then, if we beholding of
December next 1. 1662. For Serarius wrote this before the said day of December
last.
the Members of the greater world, as the Rulers of the Ethereal, and
Elementary Orbs, convening in one and the same house, laying their heads
together, we conclude that doubtless some grand thing is to be agitated in the
Heavens, which is in a readiness that unexpectedly it may break forth? And that
by so much more certainly, by how much we have been taught by long experience,
that as often as diverse Planets come together, they always bring forth some
notable change on earth.

First of all, when the two supreme Regents of the world () Saturn and ()
Jupiter concur, or come together; which indeed manifestly appears to be done
three ways. Their Congressure or coming together the first way, is every
twentieth year, or in precise speech, within the space of 19 years, days 315,
hours 19. And is called by Astrologers the special, or least Conjunction of ()
Saturn, and () Jupiter, because Saturn and Jupiter concur in the signs of the
same triplicity. Their congressure or meeting together the second way, is every
200 years, or in precise speech, once within 198 years, and 336 days. And is
called the Trigonal, or middle Conjunction, whereby the same Planets ( and) i.
e. Saturn and Jupiter concur, or meet, in another Triplicity, or Trigon Orig.
Trigonum.
. Their Concurrence the third way, returns not under 800 years: or in precise
account, after the term of 795 years and 214 days. And is called the greatest,
and total Conjunction. Which comes to pass when ( and) i.e. Saturn and Jupiter
having wandered over all the Triplicities, return to the same Goal or Bound;
from whence they first set forth.

And although upon all these 3 modes of Conjunctions of the supreme Planets (
and) Saturn and Jupiter, always some signal Changes in the world have
followed; yet notwithstanding, they always have by far been of the greatest
moment, which have followed the Great Conjunctions or Congressures of the third
way or mode. For example,
From the Fall of Adam there have been 7 of these Great Conjunctions: Or if
with Kepler and other the most famous Astrologers we may annumerate also the
First, in the very beginning of the world, then from that time, to our age are
numbered 8 of that sort of Conjunctions. For, the first is numbered in the time
of Adam, upon which followed the Fall of all Mankind. The second in the time of
Enoch, which was received with Tyranny, Robberies, building of Fortifications,
and walled Towns. 3. In Noah's time; which was entertained by the Deluge of
waters, whereby transgressors were blotted out from the face of the earth. 4.
In the life of Moses. Which was welcomed in by the Israelites going out of
Egypt, the promulgation of the Law, and the rise of the Commonwealth of Israel
in Canaan. The fifth in the days of Isaiah, upon which followed, 1. The
transportation of the 10 Tribes of Israel, into the Land of Assyria (who to
this day have not returned) and anon after that, of the two Tribes Judah and
Benjamin; from whence, nevertheless, after 70 years Captivity they did return.
6. From the time of Christ, which was accompanied and followed by the rise of
the Roman Empire, and the total destruction of the Israelitish Commonwealth. 7.
From the Age of Charles the Great, upon which followed the Division of the
Roman Empire, into Eastern and Western; as also the Invasion of the Turk, into
the land of Promise, and that Reformation sprung up in the Church, whereby the
Kingdom of the Apocalyptical Beast began to be obscured.

These things therefore being thus weighed, N.B.
what notable Changes these 7 former Conjunctions have brought into the world,
when nevertheless they consisted but of the concurse only of two or three
Planets; how can it be otherwise judged, but that necessarily a greater change
is portended under the eighth great Conjunction of them (which happened in the
year of Christ) 1603. in Sagitarius, under which we yet travel in pain, and
sob. And so much the rather, that this By This, I suppose he means this December.
^/11 Anno of Chr. 166^. of which he treats, and by That, he means that in 1603.
concurrence of all the Planets in the same fiery Sign of Sagitarius, followed
that in so short a time. For my part, those thoughts I confess, spring up
within me, That even as anciently in the Feasts of Israel, and their great
Solemnities, which lasted eight days, it was cautioned that the last day was
always to be reputed for the greatest day, with which the Feast was concluded
(Levit. 23.36. John 7.37.) So also do I judge in this matter, that of all these
8 great Conjunctions, this last is to be accounted for the greatest: After
which, there is nothing more certain to follow, than the Period of Esaus time,
and the destruction of the Beasts Dominion, and false Prophet; That now at last
the time of Jacob may succeed, and the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST and of his
Saints may be established on Earth. For if some greater thing is hence to be
expected, than ever any Conjunction before produced, what other thing can this
be, than the Restitution of that Kingdom so long promised, and desired, and
which the Apostles themselves expected by Christ to be erected, ( Acts 1.5.)
and the final ruin of the Kingdoms of unrighteousness in this world? that
another world may succeed, whose Glory may be meet for God only, and to him
ascribed.

Upon the third great Conjunction (aforesaid) the former world perished, and
another came forth, as if called up from the dead. At the fourth Conjunction
the Lord chose to himself one only Nation, out of all the peoples that had in
this new world corrupted themselves, which he brought out of the house of
Egyptian bondage, and brought them into a certain Land where he himself would
govern them. At the Fifth Conjunction, the Kingdom of Israel for the sins of
that people, was cleft and parted into two Kingdoms, of which, one was
transported into Assyria, not returning to this day; the other into Babylon,
for a little time. Upon the Sixth Conjunction, followed the dispersion of them
also which returned from Babylon, which continues to this day throughout the
Provinces of the Roman Empire. Upon the Seventh Conjunction, this very last
Monarchy of the Romans underwent the same Lot as the Kingdom of Israel
suffered. For as this was first divided, and afterward one part of it after
another was torn and carried away: So this last Monarchy of the Roman Empire
was first divided into Eastern and Western, the first whereof the Turks now
long since have invaded, and possessed. And what now I pray can remain to be
expected, upon this 8th Conjunction, but that the remnant-part of the Roman
Empire have the same fate as ancient Jerusalem had. Truly if we consult the
Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, that grand and general mutation, which
we, whether Jews or Christians do expect, and is to be expected, will appear to
be no other than that in the room of the present Kingdoms of the world, the God
of Heaven will set up a Kingdom, N.B.
which shall dissipate all other Kingdoms, (Dan. 2.44.) And that terrible
Beast of Daniel, to wit, the fourth Monarchy of the world, which has trodden
underfoot, broken, and crummed the whole Earth into morsels; and that little
and blasphemous horn, shall likewise at length, being brought to Judgment, be
deprived of their Dominion, and utterly destroyed: So that at last, the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the greatness of the Kingdom which is under the
whole Heaven, is given to the holy people of the Most High, etc. (Dan. 7.26,
27.) To wit, this is that change which we Christians with ourstretched neck do
expect, that shortly it shall comes to pass that the scattering of the holy
people, shall have an end (Dan. 12.7.) that ere long the Redeemer comes out of
Sion, who shall take away infidelity from Jacob, (Romans 11.26.) And that voice
of that strong Angel (who by his gloriousness shall brighten the whole earth)
shall ring over the whole world, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul
Spirit, and the Cage of every unclean, and hareful Bird. Rev. 18.1, 2. What (I
say) is it, that we Christians since once the Kingdom of the Beast has been
obscured, do so anxiously desire, and in all our Prayers petition for, than
that at length the sixth Vial also, may be poured out upon the River EUPHRATES,
that the way for the Kings that are to come from the East may be prepared, (
Rev. 16.12.) to wit, for the KINGS, of which Baruch speaks, ( chapter 5. v. 5.)
Arise O Jerusalem, and stand on high, and look toward the East, and behold thy
Children gathered from the west, unto the east, by the word of the holy One,
rejoicing in the remembrance of God. For they departed from thee on foot, and
were led away of their enemies. But God brings them unto thee, exalted with
Glory, as children of the Kingdom. And after these things, what else do we
expect, but that the Kings of the Earth, and all their hosts, be by those
impure Spirits (Rev. 16.13. like to Frogs) excited, and gathered together to
the war of that great day of God Almighty, (Rev. 16.4. Isa. 13.) in which God
shall arise and go down into the valley of Jehosaphat, and there shall judge
the people, and that Nation which has hitherto so miserably broken and trodden
underfoot the dispersed sheep of Israel, (Joel 3.2, 12.) and that he may
utterly and for ever blot our, and extirpate Babylon, that great City, the
Mother of the Fornications of the Earth, that terrible, and blasphemous Beast,
and False-Prophet, (Rev. 18, and 19.) Behold, that concerning these Changes,
not only the old Prophets, but the Lord himself, JESUS CHRIST, and his Apostles
do witness. And whoever is not blind, but a little exercised in the S. Script.
and experience of former Ages, and this present, it will be easy for him to
collect, that now all these things necessarily are at hand, by and by to be
expected. Therefore it ought to seem a wonder to no man; that these Celestial
Signs (which necessarily fortel the Tidings of some grand and eminent
universal change) are referred, or applied by us, to this matter.

Yet that it may more clearly appear, that this present Conjunction of all the
Planets, is with great equity to be so interpreted by us; go to, let us turn
our selves to the Planets themselves: and let us, I pray thee, contemplate the
Constitution and Disposition of these Peers of Heaven, and Regents of the
world; how their countenances are found disposed, both toward us, and one
toward another, in this their unusual Congressure, or coming together. For the
Countenance, as it is commonly given forth, is the Index of the mind.

As to the POSTURE of these Regents, thou shall find them all, to be
complexionated with a troubled, and sad countenance. To wit, thou shall see the
Moon, newly departed from the beams of the Sun (from whom she was gone scarce 7
degrees) to be vehemently enflamed, all fiery, and burning, by the corporal
Conjunction of Mars: and that so much the more, in that Mars himself is more
enflamed by the conjunction of the Sun, and the Sun takes his turn to be made
more hurtful and discontented by the Conjunction of Saturn. To which is added,
that Mercury, which with the good is good, and with the bad is bad, is here
necessarily become the worst with the worst. For he being corporally joined
with Saturn, what else will he bring forth by his Influences in this universal
Combustion, but all manner of fallacies, frauds, betrayings, filling all with
sinister suspicions, secret Conspiracies, and intestine hatreds, and so
fulfilling, or filling up the measure of all unrighteousness, and violence on
earth. Whilst Venus and Jupiter (whose House this is) although also present,
yet so remore, will be so hindered and obstructed by the combustion, and
malignity of the intercurrent Planets, that they will not be able with their
more benign beams (while as strangers they invaded another House) to reach
unto us. And if that be true, that Theodorus Hoen, a Famous Astrologer
affirms, and others also, testify to be certainly collected from the Tables
of Conjunctions of Planets, that in the time of Noah, there was the like
conjunction of all the Planets in PISCES, awatery Sign, upon which followed
that terrible Judgment of an universal Deluge, which together at once blotted
out all the wicked, from the face of the earth: why may it not be lawful for us
to collect from this concurse of all the Planets in the fiery Sign Sagittarius,
that by it is portended and foretold that fiery Judgment which immediately
foreruns the Kingdom of Christ; intimated in Peter ( Ep. 2. chapter 3.) and in the
Revelation, ( chapter 11. v. 18.)

2. If thou consider the PLACE, in which all those Ethereal Regents convene,
thou will find it to be the same, wherein the late great Conjunction in the
year 1603, the 29th. day of Sept. or 9 of Oct. was acted, under which we still
labor; its full and final operation being not yet at an end: to wit, the last
Sign of Sagitarius in the fiery Trigon. As if the Heavens, which are said to
declare the glory of God, and his Justice ( Psalm. 19.) did by their voice
intend no other than to repeat that signification of the next preceding great
Conjunction, and by a second Proclamation to confirm unto us, that this
combustion is no other then that whereby this present world of the wicked shall
be burnt. For if this be true, that the present world shall shortly perish by
fire, and that Signs thereof are by God placed in Heaven; it is necessary that
this Sign be some fiery one, which may most aptly square with the expression of
this signification. And if the Sign ought to be a fiery one, it must be this,
which is the third and last, in which also the great preceding, and last
Conjunction was acted. And that which is more, and more commends this place of
the Heaven is, that the very next day after the said Conjunction, Sept. 30. or
Oct. 10. 1603. when now by the coming of Mars, that great Conjunction had
received its compleatment, that fame New Star appeared in Serpentario,
precisely in the same place of Heaven, on which all the Astrologers eyes were
fixed, expecting the Conjunction of ( and) Saturn and Mars, witness Kepler, in
the Book which he wrote concerning the New Star in Serpentario, of which he
notes many, and wonderful things. I will here add one out of the said Book,
where the Author comparing this Star This Star, i. e. that 1603.
with that which was seen in Cassiopeia, in the year 1573, says thus: THAT
FORMER Former. Orig. prior illa, relating I suppose to that star, Anno 1573.
And Later relates to that 1603. as I understand Sed caveat Lector.
comes on the world unpremonished, and as an unlookt for enemy, which having
possessed the City walls, appeared in the Market place before the Citizens had
heard the fame of his Expedition. But this LATTER being long time before
expected, entered at the appointed day, with great solemnity, after the manner
of some mighty Monarch, who about to visit his Metropolitan City, sending before
him his Quarter Masters, designeth places to all the Princes of his Court. Now
the Ways or Streets are cleansed; now the common people upon the rumor of the
Army, run to and fro; now the Boys complain of the delay of his coming, whilst
the fardels and household stuff are brought in. By and by his retinue
following, while the first enter the gates, and the noise of them, and sound of
Drums pierces all the high ways; all persons being alarmed, they fill the
Windows, crowd the Streets, and the little Boys and young Girls are startled
with joy, the high Heroes and faithful Ministers ride on her seback; the common
people gaze with open mouth, and wishly look on every one, as greedy to behold
the King. At last, after the long Train, appears the Troop of Drummers and
Trumpeters; after which follows the awful rank of Armed men, on each side
whereof there is a file of Curriers; in the midst is the KING, curvetting or
prancing on a generous Horse, Glorious in Purple or Scarlet, and Gold. There
needs not the pointing of Fingers, or asking of Questions, every one, having
seen the Guard, says in his own private breast, Behold now at last him whom
thou have desired. What meant this quick-sighted Author, in so prolix, and
elegant a description of this Star, but that he might set before our eyes, the
Majesty of him that is signified thereby? to wit, that Glorious Advent of the
King of Kings, whom all, and every where the Creatures, especially the
Inhabitants of his Metropolis (the men of Jerusalem) have, as with
outstretched neck so long expected. To which purpose it advantageth, that the
said Keplerus affirms, that this Star almost in all circumstances is like to
that which the wise men saw in the East, as the Sign of the Lord Jesus, King of
the Jews, excepting this Stars Immobility, and Altitude. See Kepler in the
said Book, p. 134, 135. To wit, this in Serpeutario, stood unmovable in the
Firmament; That of the wise men moved in the inferior sky. The other was in
the superior, this in the inferior part of Heaven. Whereby it seems, not
obscurely to be intimated that this Star, as it looked at none other than that
same King of the Jews, so it was the Harbenger of an higher, and more
unmovable Kingdom, than ever yet Christ had, or hitherto has been known to
the world. Seeing these things are so (that namely, the place in which this
year He means last year, viz. 1662.
is the meeting of all the Planets, appears to be one and the same, with that
place wherein 59 years since, was beheld not only that great Conjunction, but
also that new Royal Star in Serpentarie, and of some called the Sign of the Son
of man) what other thing I pray can be collected (if any credit may be give to
the works of God) then this, that this congressure of 1602.
or coming together, has respect unto the same thing of which we monished but
now, concerning that great Conjunction, and new Star.

To the CIRCUMSTANCES of this Synod (of Stars) will belong the consideration of
the TIME, in which it begins, continues, and ends. It begins with the entrance
of Jupiter to the rest already congregated; which is done in the night
preceding that 1/12 day of December: and is ended by the Moons going out again,
in the night immediately following: so that the Duration of this Conjunction,
is not beyond one day, which also is indeed ominous. For as if thou shall see
the States of a City, or Commanders of an Army, solemnly congregated, suddenly
and tremulously again depart one from another, there is none but would thence
gather, that there is some great matter in that thing: even so it is altogether
in this matter; whilst those Captains of the Celestial bodies that have
fcarcely once met for so many Ages, should so speedily again hasten away from
each other, may they not justly strike a terror? For they are assembled
together in that common Palace of the Celestial Sagitarius out of our sight, in
a place subterraneous to us in Europe, in the night time (we being deeply
asleep) and so are carried up as in one Chariot above our Horizon, and born
away beyond our vertical South point, and by the West transported out of our
sight, and so begin again to be separated.

But how are they separated? Which of them all first goes forth? The Moon,
which by any means, by her swift motion among the Stars acting the part of a
Currier, or Post, is first dismissed, that it may carry about swift tidings to
the whole world. Yea because she is the Receptacle and Chariot of all the
Celestial Influences, and the slinger out of them upon the world, it causes a
beginning of unusual operations, i. e. It pours forth the efficacy of those
beams which had been collected in the common Conjunction. After which, after 5
days follows enflamed Mars, the instrument of heat, or wrath and fury, yet
fuming. Next after the Sun, follows Venus, after other 10 days, to wit, the
30th. of December. And again after nine days Mercury ( January 8.) Only
malignant Saturn being left alone in the House of Juplter to contend with
benign Jupiter for a whole year, when or at which time, Jupiter being weary of
striving, is driven out of his own house, betakes himself to Capricorn, Anno
1664, Jan. 3. Saturn abiding behind in his place aforesaid, above 11 months
(to the 16 of December.) But there will come to pass yet, two notable
Conjunctions in the same fiery Sign of Sagittarius. N.B.
The fast is of Jupiter with Saturn, Oct. 21. 1663. The second of Mars with
Saturn, November. 22. 1664; all which (if any credit to Heaven) being the worst
of ominous Tokens, seem to be the foretellers of terrible Confusions,
Perturbations, Wars and Slaughters on earth, because so many fatal periods of
things every where in the world fall in together.

The ANTECEDENTS, which went before this Session of these Rulers of the world,
and are such a sign of some grand and singular thing to be noted thereby, are
these (besides what we but now premised concerning that great Conjunction and
new Star.)

1. That terrible Comet, which about the end of Autumn in the year 1618,
exposed it self to be beheld, formidable for its Tail, or flaming wand. The
chastisements of which Rod, even to this day leave the whole body of the
Church, sickly, and as in an Agony, full of wounds, and malignant Ulcers, whose
Corruption is not yet wrought out, nor the pain mitigated. 2. Another Comet
appeared in the year 1652. And again a third in the year 1659, near the
Celestial Aquila, or Eagle, not drawing a flaming Tail after it, like the rest,
but on its forehead was a fiery Dart, brandishing as it were its forked head
like a sting, making at the Eagle.

2. Besides Comets, which are to us as public Heralds of things signified to
us by the solemn meetings of those Celestial Regents, how many wonderful
(Phenomenon) Appearances in the Air have been seen, for some years last past?
What Armies in the Heavens? What Conflicts in the Air? What concertations of
Ships, men of War, dashing themselves one against another, destroying each
other with Fire and Sword? Who is able to recite, how many Monsters, and
Prodigies, as well in Heaven, as on the Earth, and Sea have been seen, ( since
the last Conjunction 1603 came forth upon the Stage?) what terrible Tempests,
and unheard of Blasts of winds have been, whereby not only innumerable Ships
have been broken at Sea, but Trees have been eracicated out of the Earth, and
high Towers cast down. But I speak what I know happened a year or two since at
Rostoch, whose Tower, though covered, or crampt with Brass, was cut a two, as
it were with a Sword, and carried away as if with hands, without the walls. How
many, and how great Earthquakes to be trembled at, since that, as well in
Italy, as France, and elsewhere have happened; with which many men as in a
moment, have been swallowed up, yea whole Cities, yea whole Islands drowned, or
overwhelmed with Mountains (as Pluyrs in Rhetia, in the year 1618.) How many
sudden burnings have been seen here and there since that, whose original no man
knows? Yea how many have been, of which it is manifest they were sent from the
Heavens, as by common fame happened in certain places in Germany, in the
Territories of Cleve, and in other Regions. Out of Galata, a City situated not
far from Constantinople, I saw it written, that in the flame with which the
City was burning, were seen evil Spirits, driving forward the Flame. What rage
of Famine occasioned by the dearth and want of Provision, has wasted
throughout the whole body of the Roman Empire; whereby Mothers were made to
devour their own Offspring, and friend to kill his friend, that he might eat
his flesh; yea and the bodies of the dead were taken up out of the graves, that
the barking stomach might be satiated. If I would relate what prodigious things
came to pass in earth and Heaven during the bloody War of Germany, Poland,
England, Swedland, and Denmark, I should be too prolix or tedious, and perhaps
more ungrateful to tender years. Of those things only, which happened in
England, Scotland and Ireland, within the space of one year, there is a whole
Book extant, under the name of Mirabilis Annus, etc. which were seen in Heaven
and in Earth within the year 1660. And if there should be set before our eyes
what Monsters have come forth from the time of the last Conjunction, as well
among Bruits, as men, it would be horrid to hear them, and unsafe for women
great with child to read them. Only this one will I declare, of which I have
undoubted certainty; to wit, that in Tannum, a City in Norway, in the Province
of Wensussel, about the Kalends of January, 1661, there was an Infant born,
which was heard to cry in his Mothers womb 12 times, Woe to Denmark, Woe to
the whole world, Therefore all these things which we have seen to follow the
last Conjunction, and now also to precede before the concutrence of the Planets
in the same place, are a demonstration to me, that of necessity some grand, and
singular things hereby are signified, even such things as I have but now noted.

But some man may perhaps say, It is not a thing so past remedy and given for
gone, as is presumed by us. The Conjunction of all the Planets is not a matter
so unwonted and rare, that it should seem to portend a fiery judgment, as that
Conjunction in the time of Noah portended the deluge. The reason is, because
(as Seth Calvisius in his Chronological work does testify) there was observed
also a Conjunction of all the Planets in the year of Christ 1186, Sept. 16, the
third day of the week, the first hour of the Day; upon which notwithstanding,
no such, or the like thing followed.

I Answer; That reason is not sufficient to break the force of our Argument: 1.
Because that Conjunction of 1186, although it fell within the bounds of a
Conjunction, yet was it not in one Sign, as is ours, but in diverse Signs: the
great Luminaries being in Virgo, and the rest of the Planets in Libra. 2.
Because that Conjunction in 1186 being in an earthy, and ayry Sign, must
necessarily be meeker than this in a fiery Sign, or than that in a watery sign
in Noah's time. 3. Lest notwithstanding, any man should repute that Conjunction
in 1186 to be of no moment, let him consult the Histories of 1186, and he shall
see, that by and by, in the year following it, Jerusalem was taken by Saladine
the King of the Saracens, and that New Jerusalemitish Kingdom was taken away
from the Christians. Nor were there wanting other horrid things. The Sea in
Sicilia, contrary to its Nature went backward, to the drowning of 5 millions of
men. In Italy it rained Hailstones of the bigness of Goose Eggs. Carina a City
of Sicilia, was swallowed of an Earthquake; and in that 20 thousand men
perished. Also a fiery Beam was seen in the Heavens, and other portentous
things of that nature. So that that Conjunction also, departed not, without
some notable operation or effect, as well in the air, as in the earth. 4. Let
men know that we do not put the whole stress of our Prognostication in the
naked Conjunction. For unless Antecedents, Concomitants, and Subsequents,
founded as well in S. Scripture, as in experience, did add weight to the thing,
we should not write these things with such confidence.

Let us now therefore come to CONCOMITANTS, from whence may be concluded, at
least probably, concerning the end of this world, and the imminent approach of
the future. Verily, I do not think it lightly to be esteemed, that care is so
taken by the providence of the all-fore-seeing, and fore-disposing God, that on
the day preceding this Conjunction, viz. December 10. should fall the Lords day
of the 2 Advent. wherein are those words of Christ, Luc. 21.25. And then shall
be signs in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and upon the earth distress of
Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the waves roaring, men's hearts failing
them for fear; and for looking after those things which are coming on earth;
for the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of
man coming in a cloud, with power, and great glory. As if that our blessed God,
to whom all his ways are known from eternity, had, besides this concurrence of
the Planets, and agitations of the celestial powers, expressly commanded that
also this Prophecy and exhortation of the Lord Jesus, should be read of all,
and inculcated, precisely on that very day which immediately goes before that
Conjunction, if perhaps yet in this last moment of time, some would consider,
and use means to be saved.

See now, we have given it forth, demonstrated both out of the S. Scriptures,
as also from the nature of the thing, and diverse both antecedent, and
concomitant circumstances, That these celestial signs do necessarily portend
some great and singular thing some mighty change, as well in the Civil, as the
Ecclesiastical Government. And for as much as, according to the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the constitution of the Time wherein we live, no
singular thing yet remains to be fulfilled, but that the Jews may be converted
unto Christ; and incidently that Babylon comes into remembrance before God, and
all the wicked, by the fire of the judgment be blotted out of the earth,
whereby all the Kingdoms of the world may be made obedient unto God and Christ;
we justly conclude hence, that all these very same things are prefigured and
portended to us, by all the aforesaid celestial signs before recited. And
therefore we ought seriously to watch, and diligently to weigh with our selves
how the matter stands in us with God and our neighbor. Whether our loins are
girt, our lamps burning? N.B.
That in such posture we expect the coming of our Lord to the marriage, and
that so soon as ever he shall come, and knock, we presently open to him the
door, Luke 12.35, 36. I say, Whether our lamps be trimmed, that at whatsoever
hour that cry shall ring out, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, we forthwith be
prepared to meet him. If not, but in the absence of our Lord we are found to
have dealt perfidiously, have acted strifes and contentions, eaten and drunk
with the drunken, have fallen into a Lethargy of sloth and negligence, and so
have profoundly and deeply slept. What remedy then? How then shall we hide our
selves from the wrath of the Lamb, and from the face of so faithful a Master,
and Bridegroom, who so dearly bought us, and did so straightly charge us to wait
for his return to the Marriage? What shall we answer unto him who has so
faithfully and continually forewarned us by so many, and so great monitions of
his most Sacred word, and by so many, and so great signs in the Heavens?

But I seem to hear the voice of some most famous men, and exercised or
experienced in Astronomicals, objecting, It Is true, that the Planets do by
their Influences act upon these inferior bodies, as certain general causes; but
seeing the actions of men, and their Effects, and Consequences are not
determined by those general causes, but by these particular (to wit, by man's
will, and the free consults of men) it were fond, and beside sound reason, to
intend to conclude any thing certain concerning the Actions of men, and their
effects and consequences, by those general Influences of the Planets.

To these things I Answer, 1. We determine nothing concerning the Actions of
men, and their Effects and Consequences by the Stars, as by their CAUSES, but
only as by the SIGNS of them. Whereby God does foreshew us, and set before our
eyes as in a Table the freest Actions of men, and their Effects and
Consequences: For as God foresaw all things which should ever come ^o pass,
from the first beginning of the world (as it appears plainly out of the
Prophesies of Daniel, (chap. 2. 20.) and of other Prophets; so has he set the
Signs of all these things in the Heavens, that they who have eyes to see,
might there see as in a Looking-Glass, what God has foreseen shall come to
pass on earth in his time. 2. In that we seem here to determine something as
certain, we have not that, from the Stars, but from the S. Scriptures, probable
Reason, and by a certain sensitive experience. All which, seeing they do so
fairly agree with the Stars, and concur to the same sense, they deservedly
ought to be of some moment with us.

But grant that thou can not know certainly any thing, by those Celestial
Signs, as being above thee, and exceed thy capacity; If nevertheless thou have
thine eyes open to see what things are done on earth, and thine ears to hear
what the Sacred Scripture does expressly and roundly teach, there will not be
wanting to thee Reasons, whereby thou may sufficiently discern, the end of
this world, and the beginning of the next at hand. For which there is no need
of spiritual eyes, and sublime understanding, ^ut only of attentive observation
of things visible, and sensible, and humane Faith only, whereby we so believe
the Signs incurring into our eyes, that we be convinced. For who does not see
how the whole Christian world is divided in it self, and miserably torn into
many contrary parties? Even as the Secular Government, or last Monarchy of the
world? And which is more, how not only the whole is divided into two integral
and great parts (as of old) but into many little small parts; and again every
Part, every Sect, every Region, and Nation, disagree among themselves, so that
the people know not which way to turn, nor whom they may believe. One Roman
Catholic rises against another Roman Catholic; Lutheran against Lutheran;
Reformed against Reformed; Anabaptist against Anabaptist, yea one Member of the
Roman Empire against another. The Guest is not safe with his Host, nor the
Father in Law with the Son in Law; the amity of Brethren also is rare, as the
Poet Non ^ospes ab hospite tutus. Nec socer a genere, etc.
describes to the life the character of the former world, which the Deluge of
waters, of old, washed away. But if that the Lord Christ affirms, Mat. 12.
That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, be of undoubted truth, how
I pray shall the Kingdom of Christians, in respect as well of the Religious
Government, as of the secular, so many ways divided, be able to stand long.

If, moreover the dispersing of the holy people, shall have an end, as the
Angel in Daniel speaks ( chap. 12.) And if the God of Israel and Judah, shall
again have mercy on them, and restore unto them their Kingdom (as the writings
of the Prophets are full of promises concerning that matter) in what time, I
pray, most likely do thou think, that will come to pass? Will it not be, when
they shall least dare promise that thing to themselves? Will they especially
then expect it, when they are broken with the sense of their unworthiness,
whether happily the Lord, the God of their Fathers will vouchsafe of his meet
Grace and Mercy, to remember them? Let whose will war against them, they will
take Arms against no man. If any man smite them, they bear it. If any drive
them from place to place, they give place, and fly away, as the chased Fawns of
the Hind upon the mountains. If any lays hands on them, and drags them to
execution, to kill them, as swine, they deliver up themselves to the slaughter.
If any will kill them with the sword, or burn them in the fire (as in Lusitania
is often done) or attempt to bury them alive in pits (as not many years since
was done in Polonia) they have nothing wherewith they oppose, or defend
themselves, but prayers to God; justifying him in his Judgments, and pleasing
themselves after a sort, in the punishment of their sins; hoping in this, that
the measure of their punishments, and chastisements will at length be
fulfilled, that God may again have mercy upon them. And whereas formerly they
were so averse from the Christians, that not in their greatest necessity would
they receive of us any support or alms; now it is come to this pass, that they
not only gratefully accept of a morsel of bread, giving God thanks for it, but
also come and desire the same of us. Which indeed is no obscure sign on earth,
that their conversion and redemption draws nigh: Even as of old in Egypt,
then was the time at hand, that Joseph would make known himself to his
Brethren, and receive all his Fathers Family into his protection, when it fell
out, that his Brethren thinking no such thing, came to receive from the hand of
Joseph (whom long since they had sold, and delivered him into the hand of
strange Nations) bread, and succors for the support of life. And if now the
Mercy for the Jews is at hand, to wit, the Revelation of the true Joseph among
them; it necessarily follows, that the judgment of Babylon is at hand, and of
necessity the destruction of the last Bestial Monarchy (as before we have often
advised) is before the doors. For hear how Jeremiah ( chap. 51.) knits these
two together, namely, the Conversion of the Jews, and the Subversion of
Babylon. For he says, v. 5. Israel and Judah shall not always be left of God,
the Lord of Hosts, in widdowhood, because their Land was filled with
transgression, because of the holy one of Israel, etc. And immediately in v. 6.
Fly ye out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut
off in her iniquity; for this is the time of Gods vengeance, he will render to
her a recompense. Behold, so soon as God shall have mercy on his people,
presently he will gird himself to render vengeance on Babylon, for her
injustice, Pride, and all Oppression toward the miserable dispersed sheep of
Israel. As in the former Chap. the Lord complained, saying, The sheeps (my
people) are destroyed, their shepwards made them to go astray, they went from
Mountain to Hill, forgetting the place of their lying down; all that found them
devoured them, and their adversaries said, we offend not, because they have
sinned against the Lord, the habitation of Justice, even the Lord, the hope of
their Fathers, Jer. 50.6, 7. Hear also how Joel joins these two together (
viz. the Conversion of the Jews, and the Judgment of the Heathen which
oppressed them, as mutual consequents) chap. 3.1. where he says, Behold in
those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah
and Jerusalem, I will also gather all Nations, and will bring them down into
the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there, for my people, and
for my heritage Israel whom they have scattered among the Nations, and parted
my Land, and they have cast Lots for my people, and have given a Boy for a
harlot, and sold a Girl for wine, that they might drink. Note here how swiftly
the one shall follow the other. Even so soon as the Cup of indignation is
removed from Sion, so soon shall it be drunk to the Daughter of Edom. The
punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O Daughter of Zion. He will no
more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit thine iniquity, O Daughter
of Edom. He will discover thy sins, Lam. 4.22. As if the Lord had said, Thou
have seen how I have visited and discovered the iniquity of my people; how I
have led them captive among all Nations: that these being admonished by their
example, might be wiser, and might more diligently observe my Commandments than
they have done. But because thou have done no better, but worse than they; and
in stead of the Mercy with which thou should have been inclined toward my
people; and the righteousness with which thou ought to have convinced them
of unrighteousness, thou have done altogether the contrary: thou have used no
mercy toward my people; and by thy unrighteousness have hardened them in their
iniquity, and whilst thou di^st these things, thou would justify thy self;
fixing thine eyes not upon thy self, but upon them; thou saw not the Beam in
thine own eye, but did the More that was in thy Neighbors eye; meditating in
thine heart; This people suffers condign punishment for their facts, because
they rejected the Lord Jesus, who was the hope of their Forefathers, and that
in raging against them, we cannot sin. Yea thou have persuaded thy self that in
thy afflicting, crucifying and killing of my people, thou have done my work,
and rendered my revenge, Joel 3.4. But I; as soon as the iniquity of my people
shall be finished, even as I have done to them, so will I do to thee. I will
visit thee, and discover thy abominations. And as thou have exercised no mercy
toward my people, so no body shall pity thee. As thou have done, so shall it
be required to thee; in the Cup thou have drunk to others, shall it be drunk to
thee. Yea the double thereof, Rev. 18.6.

As to the Time of the Conversion of the Jews, and the restoring of the Kingdom
of Israel (of which all the Prophets are full) and by consequence the end of
the terrible 4th. Beast of Daniel, that it is at hand, that also may be
sufficiently demonstrated by those Signs which are prescribed in the Old and
New Testament; some at least of which I will touch. And 1. out of 4 otherwise
the 2 of Esdram 5.1, 2, etc.
of Esdr, 5.1, 2, 3, etc. V. 1. Nevertheless, as concerning the tokens, behold
he days shall come, that they which shall dwell on the earth, shall be taken
in a great number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and the Land shall be
barren of Faith, 2. But iniquity shall be increased, a^^ve that which thou now
see, or that thou have heard long ago. 3. And he Land that thou now see to
have root, shall thou see wasted sudden^y. 4. But if the most High grant thee
to live, thou shall see after the THIRD TRUMPET, that the Sun shall shine
suddenly again in the night; and the Moon thrice in the day. 5. And Blond shall
drop out of the wood, and the stone shall give his voice, and the people shall
be troubled. 6. And even he shall rule; whom they looked not for, that dwell
upon the earth; and the fowls shall take their flight away together. 7. And
the Sodomitish Sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise in the night, which
many have not known: but they shall all hear the voice thereof. 8. There shall
be a Confusion also in many places, and the fire shall be often sent out Margin.
S^aked.
again, and the wild Beasts shall change their places, and Menstruous women
shall bring forth Monsters. 9. And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and
all friends shall destroy one another; then shall wit hide it self, and
understanding withdraw it self into his secret Chamber. 10. And shall be sought
of many, and yet not be found: then shall unrighteousness, and incontinency be
multiplied on earth. 11. One Land also shall ask another, and say, Is
Righteousness that makes a man righteous gone through thee? And it shall say,
No. 12. At the same time men shall hope, but nothing obtain: they shall labor,
but their ways shall not prosper. And these are partly general signs, and
partly particular, which God foretells shall come to pass, before he shall again
gather together Israel, and render to the Inhabitants of the earth according to
their ways. All which signs without doubt have been abundantly enough
fulfilled. The Inhabitants of the earth have heaped up to themselves much
Revenue, great Treasures of Silver and Gold; mean while no Faith, no Truth can
be found among men. That Country in which Esdras then lived, when this Vision
happened unto him, to wit, the Land of Babylon, from that time it became
desolate; in diverse places now, upon a sudden the light has shone forth by
night, as if it had been day, and by day such clow^ings of the Light of the Sun
has suddenly risen, that the Moon has thrice in the day presented it self
conspicuous, and with its brightness, has supplied the defect of the Sun. In
diverse places now, a few Weeks since in Poland, Blood was seen to drop from
wood, and to rain from Heaven. Yea also a Stone seemed to utter a voice, as
often as certain voices, divinely articulated to strike a terror into men were
heard, as proceeding out of the stones of a Wall; the credit of which thing is
asserted among Historians. As for the Commotions, and Insurrections of peoples,
whereby new Lord-Rulers have come unexpected, upon the Inhabitants of the
Earth; how frequently has that happened, and to this day happens? Who shall
declare how often the Fowls of Heaven have transported themselves to other
haunts, because of warlike commotions? That which is said of the Sodomitish
Sea, without doubt has long since been fulfilled. Especially this our most
fruitful Age is most frequently famed for horrid Earthquakes, sudden
Conflagrations (as before mentioned) the flight of wild Beasts from place to
place, abortive Births, both corporal, and spiritual, and horrid Monsters. As
for Waters and Friends, how often can thou find sweet waters in Salt? Friends
contending against Friends, post-poning the League of amity, behind the present
Interest. Which being so, the Prophet justly subjoyneth that then, Wit shall
hide it self, and understanding withdraw it self into its secret Chamber; and
sh^^^ be sought of many, and yet not be found: then shall unrighteousness and
incontinency be multiplied on earth. And that he that will seek righteousness,
though he run from Land to Land, from the River to the Sea, from one quarter of
Heaven to the other, yet shall he find none. For where now can be found the
true knowledge of God, and the genuine understanding of the S^cred Scriptures?
How many have sought it with all their strength, and yet have not found it?
When ever was iniquity more abounding? so that it possesses and fills all
Courts, Temples, and Cloisters: So that as concerning the Righteousness which
justifies, i. e. truly renders men just before God, there is no more of it
perceived at this day, than as if it had never been in the world. Finally, when
ever was seen on earth more vain hope in men, and frustraneous labor? Behold
then, seeing all these signs are fulfilled, what else may be inferred, but
that the receiving and restoration of the Jews, and the visitation of the
Inhabitants of the earth, conjoined to it (whereby God will render to them
according to their works) are at hand.

If thou defirest yet nearer signs, whereby thou may be instructed more
fully concerning that precious time wherein the Omnipotent God will begin to
draw near, to visit the Inhabitants of the earth, and put an end to the
dispersion of the Jews, and the humiliation of Sion, see in the same Book,
chap. 6. Where thou will find the God of Esdras thus speaking, v. 20. And when
the world that shall begin to vanish away shall be finished (or sealed) then
will I show these takens: The books shall be opened before the Firmament, and
they shall see altogether. 21. And the children of an year old shall speak with
their voices, and the women with child shall bring forth un^imely children, of
thret or four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up, 22. And
suddenly shall the sown places appear unsown, the full storehouses shall
suddenly be found empty. 23. And the TRUMPET shall give a sound, which when
every man hears, they shall be suddenly afraid. 24. At that time friends
shall fight one against another, like enemies; and the earth shall stand in
fear with those that dwell therein: the springs of the Fountains shall stand
still, and in three hours they shall not run. 25. Whosoever remains, from
all these I have told thee, shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of
the world, Behold concerning these signs I cannot ^ay they are all, a^ready
fulfilled: Albeit of some of them, I am confident their beginnings ^e now
conspicuous: as 1. That of the Books opened before the face of all peoples
under the Firmament, viz. in the Books of man's Conscience, which hither to
have been as it were locked up, and sealed by Superstitions and Traditions of
men, and Worships imposed with violent force, although by them notwithstanding
all men at length are to be judged: These Books I say, are begun to be opened
before the face of the Firmament, so that all men universally shall look into
them, and read them, and upon their insight and reading of them, they shall be
astonished and humbled. Even as that good King Josias, when the Book of the
Law, sometime lost, was found again, and read before him, 2 King. 22. For the
time comes, wherein the work of the Law, as written by the hand of God, in the
hearts of men, shall be clearly laid open, and that by that saving Grace, which
now begins to shine forth to all men. As to the Second, concerning children of
a year old speaking, if that be understood of simple speaking, we have often
seen it in our Age: Even as (thirdly) That also, that sown places are suddenly
unsow^: and full sterehouses are suddenly found empty. But as to that, that the
women with child shall bring forth abortives, of 3 or 4 months old, which
shall remain alive, and be educated; and that ^ TRUMPET shall sound to be heard
over the universal world, to the terrifying of all the Inhanitants of the
earth; and that last earthquake whereby the (...) of (...) shall for 3 hour as
be sto^^ ^ed, has come to pass; this I cannot affirm. But these signs, I
judge, shall be, as the last labor and travel of this present world, to
produce, and bring forth that other world. And that these labors, and travels
shall mutually follow swiftly one another. Wherefore unless we will be
prevented and destroyed by the unlooked for coming of the Lord, N.B.
it will not behoove us to defer our repentance and reconciliation, unto the
last signs; but ought to lay to heart those former signs (which have been
showed, Esdr. chapter 5.) and that by so much the more diligently, in that some of
those last begin to appear.

But perhaps some man will say, That Book of Esdras is Apechrypha, and
therefore deserves no credit, Jerome himself rejecting it as fabulous. I answer,
Of the or dit to be given to the 4th. Book of Esdras.
The Reasons which Jerome brings for the confirmation of his opinion are
solidly confuted by M. Abraham Bartolus in his Preface to Esdras his Eagle (as
before that by Theodorus Bibliander, a Tigurin Divine) producing Demonstrations
out of Joseph Scaliger, and other Authors, sufficiently valid, deservedly to
gain credit to this Book. But suppose that this Book ought to be more
suspected; go to, let us see nevertheless, what Signs the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and his Apostles lay before us, by which, concerning the end of this
present world, and the coming of Christ, to set up his Kingdom on earth, sure
Prognostics may be had; which, if they will agree with the Prophecy of
Esdras, what hinders, but that this Prophecy may find belief? Let us therefore
hear what answer our Savior gave to his Disciples, when coming to him, asked
the signs of his coming, and of the end of the world: In those days (Mark
13.) or straight after the trib^lation of those days (Mat. 24.29.) there shall
be signs in the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, ( Luke 21.25.) Behold there
the signs in Heaven. Now if thou do desire to know what signs of the Coming
of Christ, and the end of the world shall be on earth, behold the Lord
presently subjoyneth in that cited place of Luke chap 21. v. 25, 26, 27, 18.
, upon the earth distress of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea, and the waves
roaring, meant hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things,
which are coming on the earth; for the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And
then shall they see the Son of man coming in a Cloud, with power and great
Glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. Behold here a Prophecy above all
exception! and words of so certain and undoubted truth, that heaven and earth
shall sooner pass away, than one title of them. But what other thing does this
Prophecy sound forth, than what we heard but now, of the signs both in heaven
and earth out of Esdras? viz. In heaven, in respect of the Sun, Moon and Stars;
In earth, by reason of the terrible things, by which the minds of men shall be
greatly distressed, and made dubious. And although the Prophecy of Esdras may
seem in some particulars, somewhat to differ from Christ's predictions, yet
evidently it appears, that on both sides nothing else is intended, then the
restitution of the Jews, and by consequence that visitation of the Gentiles, or
that fiery Judgment on all peoples who have oppressed the Elect. Not that only
the Jews are to be accounted those Elect, which from the four winds (from the
four corners of the world) are to be recollected, and gathered together: No by
no means. For under that word are comprehended all pious and sincere
Christians, of what Nation, or rank soever; viz. who being no less then the
Jews, as dispersed sheep, under the oppression of false Christians, and other
Nations, do lie trodden underfoot, and are deservedly to be annumerated to the
truly converted Jews, and genuine Children of Abraham. But, that we take here
the word Elect, as more specially belonging to the Jews; the reason is this,
Because when our Lord Jesus Christ uttered these words, he had only Jews
standing before him, to whom he foretold those things which properly
appertained to their Redemption, by which they might acknowledge that the
Kingdom of God (which Dan. 7.26, 27. was promised to him) was now at hand, Luke
21.31. Unto them therefore says the Lord, When all these things shall begin to
come to pass (to wit, these signs in heaven and earth) then look up, and lift
up your heads and hearts. He does not say, when ye shall see all these things
fulfilled: for that would be too late, then to prepare for Redemption, but when
ye shall see these things begin, then lift up your selves, and elevate your
selves, above all earthly things; for your redemption is near.

Now Candid Reader do thou judge, whether by those things which we have before
minded, concerning all those signe^, and those we see done in our Age in Heaven
and Earth, and which we still expect according to the Lords Prophecy, it may
not justly be concluded, That even now, the Redemption of the Jews, and
consequently the coming of Christ to his Kingdom (2 Timothy 4.1.) and the
judgment by fire upon the world of u^godly (2 Pet. 3.7.) draws nigh. Neve
theless, for the greater confirmation of the thing, and that we may manifest,
that those things which we have minded, concerning the Restitution of the Jews,
and the end of this last Monarchy of the world, are not mere dictates of the
Stars, or a simple single Prognostication formed by the present Conjunction,
but the matters born upon strong and undoubted foundations: Come on, let us
hear also what the Apostles have delivered concerning this thing: and whether
the signs which they have given, are now past, or no; and what thence may be
concluded? And first let us see what Peter, handling of the last times, and
that fiery judgment wherewith the world of the ungodly shall be burnt, has
left us in writing. In the last days shall come scoffers, walking after their
own lusts; and saying, where is the promise of his coming, for since the
fathers fell asteep, all things continue as they were fro mthe beginning of the
Creation, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Note here a SIGN, That in the last days, i. e. near
the end of these days (when now the coming of Christ shall be at hand) shall
discover it self. To wit, that then scoffers shall come,
who walking after their own lusts, will know nothing of this coming of Christ.
And enquire I pray diligently, and make experience what answer thou shall bring
back, when once, by walking over the streets of the great City ( Rev. 11.8.)
thou shall talk with men; or with the Doctors and Ductors, the Leaders of the
people, as well among Christians, as others, concerning the appro^ching of the
time, wherein Christ will return on earth, to destroy the wicked, and to set up
his Kingdom of righteousness: thou shall heat whether their own mouth will not
betray them, that they altogether speak the self same thing, which is here
premonished concerning the scoffers of the last days: viz. All things so
continue, as they were from the Creation. That which now happens, the same
likewise has formerly happened, and therefore to conclude hence any certainty,
are toys and phantasms of man's own imagination. Which being so, that we are now
fallen into those times, when among all peoples, especially Christians (who in
times past were very hasty in their hope of setting up the Kingdom of Christ)
in all Churches, Cloisters, and Houses, all places are full of Scoffers, why do
we any longer doubt, but that now those days are near, in which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
to destroy the ungodly with all their works, that there may succeed in the room
thereof a new Heaven, and a new Earth, in which may dwell righteousness? 2 Pet.
3.13. Wherefore it ought not to seem a wonder to any man, that we so diligently
attend to these Signs of his coming, and do so interpret them.

But perhaps some body will say, Peter does not here speak of those things
which are aforementioned, viz. concerning the Conversion of the Jews, and the
total destruction of the 4th. Monarchy, and the setting up of the Kingdom of
Christ on earth; but of the time wherein the Heavens shall pass away, and the
Elements shall be dissolved, i.e. of the end of the world. Peter affirms
touching the Heavens, Earth, and Elements, are not properly to be understood
according to the Letter, as the collation of Scriptures does show. For Christ
will not by his coming destroy the works of his Father, Heaven, and Earth; but
the works of the ungodly, and whatsoever curse for man's sake came upon Heaven
and Earth, all this he will burn up with fire, and utterly purge out: as a
prudent Goldsmith, that labors to burn, not the Gold and Silver, but the Dross
and Dregs, which adhere to the Gold and Silver. But as for the substance it
self of heaven, and earth, and all that God has created, all those things
shall not be burnt by the coming of Christ, but shall only be renewed and
purged: that where before unrighteousness took place, now righteousness there
dwells: And where before, the violent possessed the Kingdoms of the world,
there now the meek shall inherit. Those heavens which the ungodly feign to
themselves, (as their hope and expectation) shall perish: and those Elements,
or Rudiments of divine worship (even as the word (...) that is, Rudiments.
is taken in this sense) wherein some foolishly stick all their life time,
shall be dissolved and burnt: yea the works of all men shall be consumed, that
a new heaven and a new earth may come forth; wherein may be beheld by all men
all things in the glory of their perfection (as a pure workmanship of God the
honor whereof may redound to him himself) as the Kingdom and City of God, the
house and habitation of God and men, and a certain manifestation of the
Righteousness, Majesty, and Love of God, etc. And if indeed all these things
ought to be so, and if it be true that with Peter, according to the promise
(ma^e Isa. 65.) we expect a now Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. it ought not to seem strange to us, if before that
be done, a fiery Judgment preceds on earth, to which these Signs in Heaven and
earth have relation. A judgment, I say, to deliver both Jews and Christians
hitherto oppressed; and to destroy all the destroyers; and to restore all
things on earth; and to destroy them that have destroyed the earth, Rev. 11.18.
Behold now we see what signs the Ap. Peter has set touching the coming of the
Lord; and how they have been fulfilled long since in an high degree: so that in
regard thereof nothing now remains to be expected, but the thing it self,
signified by those signs.

Now let us see moreover, what the Ap. Paul, that chosen vessel discourses
concerning the last times; and how he limbs out in lively colors the men that
shall live in that time. They shall be (says he, 2 Timothy 3.2.) Lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boast^rs, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthank full, unholy, without na^ural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
inconti^ent, fierce, desp sers of them that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God. Having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof. What seems to thee Reader? Are our
times described, or is it longer yet to be expected till this kind of men come
upon the Stage? If thou will acknowledge that we are indeed devolved upon or
into those times, wherein every where men are found to be Lovers of their own
selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, etc. And that they also who carry a form of
Godliness, and would be reputed for godly, do possess more of its external
form, than of the internal truth of it, denying the very power of Godliness,
which consists in spirit and truth; what wonder if we account the aforesaid
signs in Heaven for fore Messengers, and forerunners, of the consummation of
those days wherein the madness of all those men, shall be made manifest to all
men, 2 Timothy 3.9. that some when 'at length true right cousness, love of God,
and the sincere power of Godliness, may come in their room.

But that it may more clearly appear, that those things which we have mentioned
concerning the restitution of the Jews, and the end of the last Monarchy, and
have by this Conjunction of the Princely or chief Stars inferred that they are
at the door, are not mere Astrological Prognostics, but matters founded in the
Word of God: Let us go also to the Apostle John, that beloved Apostle, who was
wont to lie in Christ's bosom, and see what he says of this matter in the Book
of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which Christ himself by his Angel dictated
to him, and commanded him to write it to the Churches.

1. It is there read, that the time shall come, wherein the Saints of God shall
be made Kings and Priests to God, that as Kings they may reign on earth, chapter 1.
v. 6. and chapter 5. v. 10. which thing because it cannot be done without the Jews,
nor before the Kingdom of the Beast and of the false Prophet be overthrown, it
necessarily follows, that if ever that time ought to come to pass, wherein the
Saints shall reign on earth, those former things ought first to precede, or go
before; and if they now precede, and we are come to these last times, the
consequence is necessary, that thing to be at the door.

2. In Chap. 11. of this Book (of Revel. which is as a kind of, Compendium of
the whole History of the Church, or Temple of God, beginning from the treading
of it underfoot on earth, and ending in the opening of it in heaven) we read
that the treading of the holy City underfoot, the prophesying of the two
Witnesses in Sackcloath and Ashes, and the lying of their dead Bodies in the
streets of the great City, are limited to certain periods of Months, Days,
and Times. Which being run out, the end of the world will not as yet follow,
but only the restoration of the holy City trampled, the raising of the two
Witnesses to life, and that in the sight of their enemies. And after these
things will follow at length, that great Earthquake, whereby the tenth part of
the City shall fall, and 7 Companies of men shall be slain, as also the third
we, and the last Trumpet. Sufficiently clear therefore it appears to us who
already have seen, and do see the holy City of the Church trampled, and the
bodies of the Witnesses lie in the streets of the said City, void of life, that
nothing necessarily is more nearly to be expected, than that the fullness of the
Gentiles come in, and all Israel (witness the Ap. Romans 11.25.) be saved, and
Jerusalem rise again from her trampling ( Luke 21.24.) and shake off her dust,
and be clothed with her Glory ( Isa. 52.2.) but that great City spiritually
called Sodom, and Egypt, utterly to fall. And so much the rather, because now
all the most excellent Chronologers, and Searchers of times, and who ever
bestowed their labor on the computation of these 42 Months, the 1260 days,
or of the time and times and half a time, are become like a woman great with
child; which having passed the time of her reckoning, does necessarily expect
every hour, the pains and labors of travel. And seeing that the mean while
those signs in Heaven and Earth break forth, and offer themselves to open
view, who cannot conceive that the next change to follow as the expected birth,
of which all the Prophets and Apostles have prophesied, is now before the door;
and we are now duly warned, that we make our selves ready.

3. We read in the 16th. Chap. of Revelation, Of the 7 Vials.
of the 7 Vials of the wrath of God, to be poured out upon the earth, before
any man can enter into the Temple of the divine Glory, chapter 15.8. Surely 5 of
these Vials now, long since have been poured out. The 1. by and by after the
times of the Apostles, producing that evil, and malignant Uscer of false
Brethren, and rapacious Wolves, who by degrees brake forth, and brought upon
the Church many troubles and griefs, Rev. 16.2. The 2d. Vial was in the time of
Constantine the Great, about 300 years after the Birth of Christ, when the body
of the Church, which formerly had been a separated thing from the world, (as
earth from Sea) is now again mixed with the people of the world; as the earth
which is again swallowed up of the Sea. For then this Sea, by the pouring out
of the 2d Vial, is made as the blood of a dead man, and every soul, which lived
in that Sea, died by that plague, chapter 16.3. The 3d Vial was poured out about
the 600 year after Christ's Birth, in the time of Boniface the 3. who was by the
Emperor Phocas declared Head of the universal Church. For then the Rivers, and
Fountains of waters were turned into blood, i. e. those spiritual Orders of
Eremites, Moncks, and the like, who from the time of Constantine the Great, had
kept themselves separated from the Sea of the peoples, they also now began to
be conformed to this Head of the Church, and to be made partakers of this
predominion, which the Pope arrogated to himself, and of all violence upon the
consciences of men. Because therefore they also powered out the Blood of the
Saints and Prophets, therefore the most righteous God gave them blood to drink;
blood, I say, in comparison, that whereas they were before refreshed with
living waters, now they drink mere blood, as of a dead man in whom there was no
life or power. The 4th Vial was poured out, about the year after Christ's birth,
1100 or 1200, and continued to the time of Reformation, when the wrath of God
was poured out upon the Sun, i.e. the Sacred Scriptures, that only light, which
had remained after the loss of those aforesaid Saints. And deservedly is the
light of the Scripture compared to the Sun; because as the Sun is set in the
Firmament, that it may cistinguish between day and night, times of days and
years; so the S. Scripture (consisting of a sure word of Prophecy) is given to
that end, that it may teach us prudently to discern between light and darkness,
between the various dispensations of God. Moreover, that which Syrach, chap.
42.16. speaks concerning the Sun, that it does illustrate all things, and the
work thereof is full of the Glory of God; the same may we affirm concerning the
S. Scripture, that it is a light that illustrates all things, and is a work
full of the glory of God. For never any eminent thing happened, nor does yet
happen, or ever shall come to pass, but that (S. Script.) foresaw it, and
foretold it, so as if any man would have eyes deeply to view his work, without
all doubt he might see it full of the glory of God. Moreover, as there is in
the Sun heat, besides light, from which none can hide himself, Psalm. 19.7.
which heat warmeth, refreshes, and enliveneth this man, but torments, burns,
and kills another man: So in the S. Script. besides that light of discerning,
there is heat, or a certain vital power, from which no man can hide himself;
and by which some men are comforted, refreshed, and quickened; others are
tormented, burned, and slain. And when this is done ( viz. that men are not
warmed and refreshed by the use of the S. Scripture, but are burnt and
incensed) that thing no otherwise comes to pass, then from their evil
disposition, and the pouring out of this Vial of the wrath of God upon them,
whereby men by occasion of the Scriptures, wax hot one against another, and
with an inordinate zeal, as with fire, devour one another, as the Histories of
those times do abundantly witness. The 5th Vial may be said ^^ be poured out
about the year 1520, when the Romans Empire, to wit, the Throne of the Beast
began signally to be obscured, from whence there came much affliction upon the
Favorers and Adorers of the Beast, so as they bit their tongues for grief; and
which is more, by means of their grief and malignant ulcers, they blasphemed
God. The obscuring of this Kingdom consisted 1. In that about that time, very
many Cities, and Provinces, yea Kingdoms revolted from the yoke of the Roman
Religion. Nor was this only so, but (2.) This obscuring consisted also in many
tumults of war, which were raised by this change of Religion. Which obscuring
of that Kingdom at last, came to that, that now in the year 1619, by means of
the Bohemian war, the Axe began to be laid to the very root of that bestial
Throne: which (Throne) although it continue to this day, yet is not the
darkning past, but out of all doubt will be augmented, until that day wherein
the Beast shall be taken and cast into the Like of Fire and Brimstone.
Forasmuch therefore as these 5 Vials are already poured out, and the obscuring
of the Beasts Throne, is daily more and more increased, what I pray comes next
to be expected by us, but that the sixth Vial, which is now pouring out, shall
make way for those Kings that shall come from the East, of whom Baruch makes
mention, c. 5. v. 5. etc. that the Stone, out out of the Mountain without hands
(of which Dan. 2.45.) may cast down, break in pieces, and destroy all the
Kingdoms of the earth, and in stead of them, that stone may fill the whole
earth? And if this be that thing which comes next to be expected by us, what
marvel if we refer these signs in Heaven and Earth now concurring, to this
Matter? and that we look upon them as foretellers of the Jews Conversion, and
the subversion of the last Monarchy of the world?

4. We read also in Revel. 17. That a time will one day come, when the 10 Horns
of the Beast, on which the Harlet sits (which 10 Horns are 10 Kings, who have
long adored the Beast, and have committed fornication with the whore) shall in
that agree together, hat with hatred they persecute the where, and make her
desolate and ^^ked, chap. 17.16. And we know who is that Harlot, and who are
those Kings which have so long served her; viz. the Kings of France, Spain,
Poland, Hungary, Behemiah, England, Scotland, Portugal, Suedland and Denmark:
All which, together with the Pope (lifting up himself as the Head of the
Catholic Church) and their rise. And because we see that in many of these
Kings there has been long since a mind, that if they could, would long ago
have devoured her flesh: but concerning the rest of the Kings, which hitherto
have adhered to the Harlot, it is evident, that they also are gone into parties,
and dissent from her, and begin to prepare war against her: who thence may not
conclude the death of that Whore, Gerariae.
and by consequence, the destruction of that Gerarian seven-headed-Beast, to be
before the doors. And albeit there were no signs of this extant in Heaven,
yet to quick-sighted men, and they who believe the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, those signs of it on earth, which we see with our eyes, and touch
with our hands, N.B.
may be sufficient.

Behold now I have demonstrated that, that same faithful exhortation of the
aforesaid Book, Printed at Groaning, and written upon occasion of the instant
Conjunction of all the Planets in the fiery Sign of () Sagitary, is most worthy
to be heedfully observed, and to be laid up in the inmost Closets of our
hearts; seeing the matters there set forth, are not vain Phantasmes of man's
Brain,
of idle figments of superstitious Astrology, but a sure certain truth, founded
in Nature, and on the Scriptures; agreeing not only with the Tradition and
Experience of the Ancients, but also with the Predictions of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and of his beloved Apostles, Peter, Paul, and John.

Therefore I will conclude with the words of our Lord, full of Consolation and
Love, Luke 21.8, etc. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. 29. And he spoke
to them a Parable, behold the Fig Tree, and all the Trees, 30. When they now
shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves, that Summer is now nigh at
hand. V. 31. So likewise ye when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that
the Kingdom of God is at hand. Go to, let us lay aside whatsoever might hinder
us. Be we like to Servants, who with their Loins girt, and their Lamps
burning, expect their Master. Let us shake off the dust of the Earth, and lift
up our heads with our hearts heavenward; clearing our selves from all
Impediments, before it be too late; that is, before those last signs invade,
which shall unexpectedly slay the world. For those things which Christ
foretold, Luke 21. shall come to pass, are more than begun to be fulfilled. And
unless we make have, those, last Signs which shall immediately accompany
Christ's coming, will be now present, and come upon us unaware. Now the Figuree
has begen to put forth her leaves, now her branch begins to wax tender. Yet
truly those natural Branchek of that same Noble Olive Tree (of which Paul
speaks, Romans 11.) beg^n to be tender, (as I before noted, for I speak not of a
thing un^^p^rienced (acknowledging themselves to be great sinners, giving Glory
to God, and justifying him in all his Judgments exercised upon them; and
submitting themselves without any resistance, to all afflictions, reproaches,
and punishments, and anxiously expecting if at any time God will remember them,
and have mercy upon them. Moreover, do not those signs of the end of this
world, a^^ of the Beasts last violence, and of Government every where
overtu^hing it self, begin to bud forth? Therefore whosoever will not be upon
are destroyed, and perish with the world, it is of necessity that he hasten.
For most certainly the Summer is at hand, i.e. that glorious Kingdom of God (of
which all the Prophets have prophesied, of which also Christ so often monished
his Disciples, and they us; supporting us continually with that Consolation) is
now at the door. O blessed Summer, and with all Prayer to be desired; in which
all those excellent fruits shall be presented to the eyes of all, in Production
whereof God and Christ have labored so many thousand years! whereby at (...)
the most bountiful God may be truly acknowledged, praised, and sanctified,
among all peoples, and inhabitants of the whole world, for the works of his
hands, and for the unspeakable riches of his Grace, Truth, and Love, and
Faithfulness toward Mankind. O blessed Kingdom, where God alone shall be
Kingi^^^ which to him only, who has redeemed us with his precious blood
from among all peoples, all power and wisdom, and honor, and strength, and
riches shall be given with one consent, of all Creatures, whether Angels or
men.

The God and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who by the Gospel of his Son has
called us unto that Kingdom, open in us our understanding to lay these things
to heart, that conforming our selves wholly to these things, we may be meet to
have our part in the delicacies of this Summer, and the ineffable Glory of the
Kingdom of our Lord JESU CHRIST, Blessed for ever, Amen.

Add to the Book the Prophecy of Tobit, chap. 14. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

The Pourtraiture how the Planets stood above one another (every one according
to his Altitude) yet all of them under the same Sign Sagittarius, December. 1/12.

diagram of planetary postions

In page 40. lin. 9, 10. at the words [the destruction of that Gerarian
seven-headed Beast] read (if ye please) thus, [the destruction of that
Carrieress, Porteress, or drudge-bearer of the seven-headed Beast.]

FINIS.

