THE SENTENCE OF Samuel Johnson, AT THE King's-Bench-Barr AT WESTMINSTER, On
Tuesday the 16 th. of November, 1686. Who was Convicted the last Term for A
High-Misdemeanor, in Writing and Publishing Two False, Scandalous, and
Seditious LIBELS, Tending to SEDITION and REBELLION.
The First entitled an Humble and Hearty Address to the Gentlemen and
Protestants in the present Army, etc.
The Second entitled: The Opinion is this, that Resistance may be used, in
Case our Rites and Privileges shall be invaded, etc.
SAmuel Johnson, having been Tried and Convicted the last Term, for a
High-Misdemeanor in writing the abovementioned LIBELS; and being Convicted
thereupon, he was (by Rule of Court) brought down to Receieve his Sentence,
which is as follows, viz.

After Mr. Attorney General had moved for Judgment, Mr. Johnson told the Court
that he had moved for an Arrest of Judgment, forasmuch as he had several
Exceptions to make, all of which, he urged in his own Defense, using several
Evading and Extenuating Arguments, whereby to make the Court believe that he
intended no Evil in the Consequence of his Writing; but to teach the Army their
Duty to God and their Prince, and how they ought to behave themselves as they
were English Men, with many other weak Arguments, all which prevailed nothing
with the Court, but rather aggravated his Crime: In that he used some Texts of
Scripture in way of Comparison, which he would have insinuated to be his
Meaning in the intent of the said LIBELS; and that he had said nothing but what
was Lawful to say.

But the Court told him that his Exceptions were but a kind of a Paraphrase,
which did much aggravate his Crime, more than any way excuse him; and that he
did abuse the Scriptures, yea, and himself too, in making such Scriptural
Exceptions; and that it was a Crime of very Evil Consequence, that one in his
Station should offer to be Guilty of so Heinous an offense, that did tend so
much to incite and stir up the King's Subjects to Rebellion against him; and
that he should pretend to Write to the Soldiers who are under a Command, and
dare not Rebel; therefore it must be meant of others, yea, the main strength
of it, viz. His intention in the LIBELS was against the King himself, and
desired him to consider of what bad Example it was to others; and the great
abuse of Religion, and a discredit to the Clergy of this Kingdom, etc. with
many other aggravating Circumstances: All which, the Court said deserved very
great Punishment; the more, in that the offense was Committed by such an
Author, who should have been a Credit to Religion, and to all the Professors of
it; and that his Fault was so apparent to the World, that no one could be so
stupid, but to be sensible of it: Telling him also, that he should be degraded
from his Ministerial Function and Preferment, which the Court was very sorry
for, etc. Yet must pronounce this following Sentence.

And that is,

That he pay a Fine of Five Hundred Marks.

And that he stand in the Pillory three times, viz. On Monday next in the
Palace Yard at Westminster; and on the Wednesday following at Charing Cross;
and on the Monday after that, at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

And to be whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, and to stand Committed till all be
performed, etc.

This may be Printed, R. P. November the 17 th. 1686.

LONDON; Printed by D. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee-House near
Fleet-Bridge, 1686.


