A SERMON Preached at the Chapel Royal in the TOWER, Upon the DEATH Of her
Sacred Majesty, Our Late Gracious Queen MARY.

By a true Lover of the Church, the King, and his Country.

London, Printed by J. D. for R. Mount, and sold by John Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1695.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sermon was preached soon after the fatal Death which occasioned
it; and at the Importunity of some (whom the Author could not in Gratitude
disoblige) it was also printed: but not thinking it worthy of a more public
View, there were no more Books run off than what were presented to those who
were desirous to see it, except a very few to some particular Friends; by which
he has drawn this Inconvenience upon himself, that a greater number of his
Friends remain disgusted than he has had the opportunity of obliging by it:
For which Reason, as also because he is (by no incompetent Judges) informed
that it may be of use at this Juncture; but especially to do himself and it
Right, (there having happened several Mistakes and Oversights in the first
Impression) he is prevailed with to suffer it to go abroad, but under the same
Defects of Style and Method as before; hoping it may not (by those it is
designed for) be liked the worse because of the Plainness of its Dress.

ISAIAH XL. 6, 7, 8. The Voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All
Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field.

The Grass withers, the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord has
blown upon it: surely the People is Grass.

The Grass withers, the Flower fades: but the Word of our God shall stand
for ever.


I Question not, but upon the reading of the Text, you easily observed it to
suite but too well with the sad and bewailed occasion of this Solemnity; which
has given us (beyond any thing to us known) a doleful Instance of its Truth:
and all I can say will come infinitely short of the sad but clear Comment,
which the Breath of our Nostrils, She of whom we said, Lam. 4.20.
Nations shall rest under her Shadow, has given us upon it; who being dead yet
speaks, yea cries in a louder than the Prophet's Voice, All Flesh is Grass, etc.

All Flesh. It pleased the great Creator of all things to make at first three
sorts of living Creatures: Angels he made pure Spirits without Flesh, and
therefore only for Heaven, not to dwell on Earth. Brutes he made Flesh, without
Immortal Souls, and therefore only for Earth, not to pretend to Heaven. Man is
of a middle Nature, partaking both of Flesh and Spirit, and therefore made both
for Heaven and Earth. But as his Flesh is but to minister and serve his Spirit,
so he was made for Earth, but as his passage and way to Heaven, not that this
should be his Home or Happiness.

But how woefully have we perverted this Order, whose incessant Cares for the
Things of this Life sufficiently declare, that we believe our selves here at
home? One Man eagerly pursuing Sensual Pleasures, as if he had nothing to mind
or hope for but what the Beasts enjoy. Another Riches, and that with so much
Earnestness, as if he were to enjoy the same for ever; tho the Fool knows not
but this very Night he must part from them. A third hunting after Honor and
Dominion, so as to stick at nothing that may compass it, and yet little knows
how soon his Honor may be laid in the Dust. A fourth after Popular Applause,
which is nothing but a Blast, nothing more vain and uncertain than it is.
Whereas, if we did but rightly understand our State and Condition here, and
seriously consider that all Flesh is Grass, we would little value these things,
and at best, use the World as if we used it not: Use it no otherwise than a
Traveller does his Inn, and how is that? when he comes there, tho he finds
every thing ready, a Room well furnished, and all things therein not only
convenient, but delightful too; yet he is not so silly as to set his Heart upon
them, because he knows on the Morrow he is to leave them and be gone: And
there is no Man that travels homeward, that would multiply Businesses on himself
unnecessarily in the Way. When he is at Home in his House, he may find sundry
Employments to busy himself about, but in the Inn he cares for nothing but Rest
and Refreshment. So Men that are thoughtful or wise, 1 Pet. 2.11.
know themselves to be but Strangers and Pilgrims here, and therefore look for
a Country and City to come, and so think it no Wisdom to intermeddle too much
in the Affairs of that Country through which only they are to pass; but, as
Citizens of Heaven, send up their Hearts Desire where they profess their
Treasure is. This Lesson our Savior teaches when he tells us, Mat. 6.32, 33.
After all these things below do the Gentiles seek, but seek ye the Kingdom of
God, and the Righteousness of it. And St. Paul assures us, 1 Cor. 7.31.
the Fashion of this World passes away, and wishes us not to fashion our
selves to it.

Could a Traveller justly seize all the valuable things that occur in his way,
and convey them to his Home, so as to be of advantage to him there, his
endeavoring it might be the more excusable. And so in our Case, could a Man
carry the World to Hell to bribe the Flames, or corrupt his Tormentors, there
were something to be said for our Fondness of it; but the Psalmist has already
assured us of the contrary, His Glory shall not descend after him. Psalm. 49.17.
Or could he (tho at the Expense of all his Worldly Enjoyments) buy out his
Pardon, or procure his Peace, before he come there; this might well excuse our
grasping at it, but that is not to be done neither; Ver. 8.
for the Redemption of the Soul is precious, and cease for ever: And what
shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? Mat. 16.26.
For what material thing can equalize a Spirit? Many things may be had more
precious and fine than the Body, but all of them have no proportion to a
Spiritual Being. St. Paul, we know, counts all things but Dung; Phil. 3.8.
and can we think that God will take Dung in Exchange for a Soul? O! how
dreadful will it be at last to think, that for a little of the World, for the
Satisfaction of a Lust, for a few drossy Pleasures, and sensual Delights, which
have been here (not without the mixture of much Sorrow and Allay) enjoyed, you
have lost your Souls, and forfeited your Interest in those Mansions that are
above, where there are Pleasures for evermore: And all this (in a great
measure) because we believe not, at least mind not this Voice in the Text, All
Flesh is Grass.

Man has many Excellences and Advantages which give him a due Preference above
all other living Creatures; but as to his Flesh there is nothing extraordinary
in it. It Is of the same Substance and Form, says one, with the Creatures we
feed upon, altogether inclined to corruption, and nothing but Frailty and
Vanity it self. And we need go no further than the Expression in the Text to
evince it, All Flesh is Grass.

All that we see, all that we admire, all the most tempting Objects we gaze and
dote upon, yea, the whole World, and all that is therein, is all but Flesh, and
all Flesh is Grass.

But is this a Truth so Universal, that it admits of no Exception? tho it may
hold good, as to the generality of Men; yet are not the Princes and Monarchs,
and Heroes of the World exempted? Have not they something in them, that may
privilege them against the Insults, at least, of the King of Terrors? something
that they may (upon occasion) plead against the common Fate? The Prophet seems
to agree to all this, and in the very Text makes some difference between a mean
and a great Person, between a Subject and a Prince; but what is it? No other,
than is between green Grass and a Flower; which tho more beautiful to the Eye,
more sweet and pleasing to the Sense, is yet every whit as fading, as
perishing, and as subject to be trod under Foot, or to be scorched and withered
by the Sun, as the Grass is. As they grow together in the same Field, so they
are equally liable to be cut down by the edg of the same Sithe: and therefore
it is that the Prophet after the Voice had cried, All Flesh is Grass, adds, and
all the Goodliness of it is as the Flower of the Field.

By the Goodliness of the Flesh, he means its Youth, its Health, its Strength,
its Beauty, its Vigor, or whatever in it is most Valuable and Pleasing. By it
we may understand the state and condition of a Man that wants nothing, nay,
that abounds in all things the World can afford: As Riches, Honor and
Pleasure. Flesh, says the Prophet, in all the Glory of it, in the free and
full enjoyment of all things on the highest Pinnacle of Honor, seated on a
Throne, crowned with Diadems, and incircled with all the Badges of Royalty and
Grandeur; yet in the midst of all this Pomp and Splendour, it is still but Flesh,
and liable to such damping thoughts as these.

May not God this very Night, take me away like the Fool in the Gospel, from
all these things, or these from me? May I not, nay, must I not within these few
Years, it may be within these few Weeks, or Days, instead of my Honor be laid
in the Dust? instead of my Purple and Scarlet be clothed with Rottenness?
instead of my Luxuries and Delicacies, become my self the Food of Worms? Is not
the poor Soul in my Bosom, an Immortal Soul? Must it not have a Being, so long
as there is a God who is able to support it? And will not all I toil and moil
for here, all I covet and dote upon, all my beloved Bags and superfluous
Titles, my sweetest Pleasures, and my highest Preferments, my very Learning and
my natural Endowments, and every thing save my Sins (which I must then reckon
for) forsake me when I enter into that Immortality? I say, when a Man shall
take himself thus to task, and his Conscience summons him to such serious
thoughts as these; How will he be startled and amazed under the Sense of his
own Frailty, and his little hopes of a better State? And how dreadful will it
be for his Immortal Soul, to have nothing between it and Eternal Misery, but
that which will crumble and moulder into Dust, and leave the poor Soul that
trusted to it to sink into bottomless Calamities?

Nor do our earthly Enjoyments always continue with us even to the last; but
often leave us before we our selves go off. Riches make themselves Wings,
Honor is fading, Prove. 23.5.
Wit, Beauty, and Strength fail, all created Delights will quickly have an End;
and the Casualties that attend their very Enjoyment, does sufficiently discover
their Vanity and the little Stress that is to be laid upon them. One Rich to
day, and Poor to morrow; in Health, Sound and Strong to day, to morrow
Languishing and Expiring on a sick Bed; now advanced to the highest Pinnacle of
Honor, anon deprest and exposed to Infamy and Disgrace; attended by trains of
Parasites and Flatterers to day, to morrow deserted, slighted and forsaken by
all.

And as it is with Men, so it is with Things. Cities, Towns and Villages
Flourishing and Beautiful, Rich and Opulent to day, to morrow laid in Ashes,
and levelled with the Ground. So that there is no Flower more fading, no Bubble
more vanishing, no Dream more deluding, nothing more Vain, nothing more
uncertain than the World is. It Is all but Grass, or at best but as the Flower
of the Field; the Grass withers, the Flower fades.

But in the midst of all this Misery, Vanity and Uncertainty, the Prophet adds,
what may stay and support us, But the Word of our God shall stand for ever.

All that is in the World, all the Happiness that that Flesh which is but Grass,
can pretend to in its Passage here, is full of Vanity, Uncertainty and
Disappointments, and then usually fail a Man most, when he most of all relies
on them; which must needs be one of the greatest Defeats that can be. For those
things wherein Men fear Miscarriage, or expect Disappointment, they prepare
such a disposition of Mind as may be fit to bear it; but when a Man is
surpised with Evil, when that happens which he least expected, the Novelty
increases the Trouble: And the Scripture expresses the greatness of a
Judgment, by the unexpectedness of it; Isa. 6.3, 4.
When thou did terrible things which we looked not for. Their not looking for
it, rendered the Judgment so much the more Terrible. A Breach in an instant, a
momentary, a sudden Destruction, a swift Damnation, a flying Roll, a winged
Woman, are all Expressions to denote a severe Judgment. Now Men are too too apt
to promise themselves much Contentment and Satisfaction in the Fruition of
worldly Things; and to be herein disappointed (as they usually are) must needs
be a great Surprise, and occasion no small Vexation.

But the Word of God is an abiding Word, as founded on the Immutability of
God's own Truth: he that makes it his Refuge, relies on the Omnipotency of God
himself; and has all the Strength of the Almighty, engaged to help him. Asa was
safe while he depended upon God in his Promises, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8, 9.
against the huge Hosts of the Ethiopians and Lubims; but when he turned aside
to other Aids, and trusted too much in the Arm of Flesh, he purchased to
himself nothing but perpetual Wars. And this was that which established the
Throne of Jehoshaphat, and caused the Fear of the Lord to fall on all the
Kingdoms of the Land that were round about him; 2 Chronicles. 17.9, 11.
because he honored the Word of God, and caused it to be taught to his People.
When Israel and Judah did at any time forget to lean upon God's Word, and
betook themselves to correspondence with Idolatrous People, or other the like
Helps, they found themselves always bereft of Succor; and all their Hopes
deceived and blasted. Which should teach us not to rest upon our own Wisdom,
nor lean upon our own Strength, nor build our Hopes and Assurances upon Human
Foundations; but in all conditions lay hold upon God's Word, which shall stand
for ever, and support us in any Extremity, Psalm. 23.4.
and carry us through the Valley of the Shadow of Death it self.

And thus I have done with what I designed to offer from the Text: but to apply
it to the Occasion, I know neither how to begin, nor where to end.

The Voice cries so loud, and the Blow (tho for our Sins justly inflicted) is
every way so amazing, that the very Thoughts of it were enough to make a Man
lose all Method, though he had studied it never so carefully.

And therefore that I may neither confound you, nor lose my self, I shall only
glance at some few things that may satisfy us, what great Advantages we might
have reapt from her Life, had it pleased the wise Disposer of all things to
have continued it. And this will naturally tend:

First, To give us a due Sense of our Loss.

Secondly, To quicken us to such Duties, whereby (since it is impossible to
improve it to our Temporal Advantage) we may yet make the best of it, that our
Misfortune as well as our other Circumstances will admit.

The Loss of a good (tho private) Person, is at all Times, especially in bad
Times, a just ground of deep Sorrow; What then must be the loss of a good
Queen, who is a common Stock, in which Millions have a Share? A burning Lamp,
which shined and imparted its Light to three great Kingdoms? No wonder if the
exhausting of such a Store, the quenching of such a Lamp, should be Matter of
doleful Complaint.

And here I could willingly indulge both yours and my own Passion, that we
might sit down a while in Silence, and only by the Language of our Tears speak
our Sense of this heavy, this irreparable Loss: But all Passions, especially
that of Grief, need rather a Bridle than a Spur; and we have something else to
do, upon such an extraordinary Occasion, than to bewail our Loss after the
common rate, tho that is allowed us too.

A bright Star is removed; nay, our Sun is set: Well may Darkness overspread
our Horizon; Zech. 11.2.
A Cedar is fallen, well may the Fir-trees howl. A Cedar, which, had God so
pleased, might have stood and flourished much longer: But we often see the
loftiest Cedar cut down before the useless Shrub; And they frequently fall,
(says one) who while they stood, not only graced the Forest, but gave Shade and
Shelter to others too. And oh! that we had not now the Occasion to bewail the
Fall of the most flourishing Plant that graced our own or any other Soil;
verifying that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.31.
The Fashion of this World passes away, and we together with it. The Throne
leaves some, and others leave it: Heb. 12.28.
and as there is but one Kingdom which cannot be shaken, Eternal in the
Heavens; so there is but one King, who is the Immortal King of Ages, God over
all, blessed for ever. All the rest are but Flesh, and all Flesh is Grass.

After such a Voice, what can warrant any of you that you shall be alive while
to Morrow? Who can be Security for his own Life one Moment beyond the present?
You Will say, my Youth, my Strength, my Temperance, and my Vigor, these will
secure me: But was there ever any more healthy, more lively, more temperate, or
more vigorous than the Queen? How sprightly, how fair, how hail, how charming
was she but this Day three Weeks, and almost a Week after? And yet the King of
Terrors stole upon her, before her Self, or at least her Friends suspected,
being even (after some Days illness) looked upon as Safe, and past all Danger,
on Tuesday; and yet, beyond all Expectation, given over, and the Sentence of
Death pronounced by her Physicians before Noon on Wednesday: So vain a Thing is
Man.

But this can be no surprise to those, whole usual Exercise it is to die daily;
and as St. Ambrose conceived of Valentinian the Emperor, so may we of her
Majesty; The Evidences past in her Health, are fair Proofs of that Disposition
her Soul was in in her Sickness. But more of this anon: for tho all her earthly
Advantages are now become the Spoils of Mortality, yet She Is not to be laid in
the Dust like common Mold, nor deposited in the Shades with silence.

It Is true, in the blessed State to which she is now arrived, crowned with an
incorruptible Diadem, in the Company of Angels and Saints, and all her
Triumphant Ancestors; She needs no Praises of ours, but yet that which every
good Man may claim, is much more justly her Due; Commendation after Death,
being a just Tribute to a Religious Life.

Consult the Scriptures, and you shall scarce find one Godly Man laid in his
Grave without an Epitaph of Honor; view the Fathers, and you shall observe it
their Practice, to honor the Death of the Good, especially if Princes: and if
this had never been done before, it might be now allowed to Her, who was as
well the Best, as the greatest among Women. As to the latter, 'twere easy to
show it, in the Instances of her Illustrious Birth, (being descended from a
Royal Race of Kings, as well the greatest, as of the longest and most
uninterrupted Succession now in the Christian World) in her suitable Education,
in her natural and acquired Accomplishments; which rendered Her the Darling of
the Age, as well as the Glory of her Sex. But we must leave these, and many
other Advantages, with all Her great Actions, to fill up Chronicles; and they
will better become the History and Annals of the Time, than the Nook of a
Sermon.

The sweetness of her Temper, her Beauty, Wit, and Charms of Conversation,
which made Her, like Vespasian, Deliciae humani generis, and rendered her
Amiable and Dear to all that had the Honor to know Her, (tho they were Gifts
from Above) yet must they now be past over in silence, as being Praeda Mortis,
a Spoil unto Death and the Grave.

Which Consideration should cure the undue Esteem which too many Christians
seem to put upon them; being more ambitious to outvy others in every thing,
rather than real Holiness; which (after all is done) is the only Ornament that
Death cannot spoil us of.

Nor were the Endowments of her Mind any whit inferior to those of her great
Birth, and other Personal Advantages; her Apprehension more quick and lively,
her Judgment more penetrating and solid, her Elocution more fluent, graceful,
and every way more persuading than is usually found in her Sex. And what good
use She made of these Talents, I need not tell you; and it may justly upbraid
many other Ladies, even of the first Rank, who (I know not upon what pretenses)
omit improving them the same way.

I am sure she had more Business to divert her, more Plenty and Abundance to
entertain her, as much Beauty to tempt her, and more Favor and Honor to
entangle her, than any of them all, and live in the same Atheistical degenerate
Age that they live in: An Age wherein a sincere and serious, a religious and
devout Temper is exposed to Ridicule, and esteemed the most unmodish,
unfashionable, and useless thing that can be.

And yet all these Disadvantages, all these Temptations to raise her Pride, and
make her haughty, to render her careless, secure and indevout, served only to
raise her Ambition to behave her self more agreeable to her great Quality, by a
Carriage truly Exemplary, and every way Great; a Carriage that was in all
respects Religious, Honorable and Virtuous.

The great God of Heaven, the Creator and Disposer of all things, was chiefly
regarded in all her Behavior, and the first and main Principle of all her
Actions.

Hence sprung that awful Regard and Reverence of his Divine Majesty, which was
visible in all her Carriage; and I have heard that she used frequently to
express a great sense of the Folly, the Ignorance and Impudence of those (tho
esteemed Wits) who pretend to deny the Being of a Deity, when they had such
clear Convictions of Him, his Attributes, and Providence, in every particular
of the Creation, even such as were obvious and discoverable to their very
Senses. And as no Pulpit-Discourses pleased her better, than such as were
dexterously levelled against this unreasonable, this hellish Error; so for
prevention of its growth in an Age so fruitful in Evil, they were always
commanded to the Press.

It was upon this Belief, upon this Knowledge (as the best Foundation) that she
reared that noble Structure of Piety and Devotion, Uprightness and Sincerity,
Purity and Charity, and all other the Duties of Christianity, that shined so
brightly through the whole Course of her Life.

Dr. Wak^'s Sermon at Greys-Inn on the same occasion.
But by a Discourse just come to my Hands, I find my self prevented, and every
way outdone, as to what I offered upon these Heads; therefore I chose rather
to refer the Reader to it, and the rather, because that Revevend Author speaks
all, or most, from his own Knowledge, which may render it more authentic, and
more satisfactory too; and (as he himself observes) the Reader need not fear
his imposing on him, for he may defy him to flatter if he would.

There you may behold this great Queen delineated at large; you may see how
great, how good, how every way exemplary she was in her Life, and she is no
less so in her Death; being an Object not lightly to be laid to all our Hearts
not only as Subjects, not only as Christians, but as Men, as Mortals too;
warning all that have seen or shall hear of the sudden blasting of this Flower,
that all Flesh is Grass; and louder than any other Voice cries, All the
Goodliness thereof is but as the Flower of the Field.

There you may see how great a Friend she was to the Church, how careful of the
Welfare of the State, and how much she did contribute to the Happiness of both:
how religious, how pious in Public, how exact, how punctual in Private; how
constant in the Chapel, how frequent in the Closet, and how sincere and devout
in both.

I had once the Honor to be near her when she received the blessed Sacrament,
and I shall never forget with what Reverence, what Humility, what Zeal and
Intention she did participate of that Divine Mystery; which plainly showed she
was as sincerely as seemingly devout.

Her Affections seemed to be raised above their common pitch, and her Carriage
during the whole Action, was so Heavenly and so Divine, as if her Soul had
actually ascended to that God, to whom her Prayers were directed; and brought
to my Thoughts that Saying of St. Luke's concerning St. Stephen, when he saw
the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at God's Right Hand; His Face, says the
Text, was as the Face of an Angel.

And now she, that by such remarkable Instances of Piety and Devotion,
manifested the profound Reverence and Veneration she had for God, could not be
wanting in any regard to the rest of his Commandments; She that was so exact in
the Duties of the first, could not be defective in those of the second Table.
Her Righteousness was no less illustrious in that respect, than her Piety was
in the other.

Her Word was as sacred as any Oath, and no Inconvenience would make her flinch
from what she had once promised. She so much abhorred a dishonorable Recess,
that she had no great value for those, who by little Arts and Shifts would free
themselves from their Engagements, and thereby disappoint the Expectations they
had raised in others.

But I need not stay upon this: Her Virtues in this kind were so eminent, and
so conspicuous, that (considering the Orb she shone in) it was impossible they
could be concealed; and this it was that made her so justly admired, and so
entirely beloved of all.

She was of that Sweetness of Temper, of that Kindness, Affability, and
(considering her great Quality) of that Condescension and Courtesy in all her
Demeanor, as rendered her very dear, and her Conversation grateful and
desirable to all that had the Honor to be near her.

She was usually very pleasant and cheerful, but her Mirth was always managed
with Descretion, and bounded with Religion; her Prudence kept her within the
Limits of Reason, and her Piety restrained her from being vain; in both which
she was very Excellent, and very Exemplary.

She was in her Conversation (notwithstanding the Respect due to her Quality)
far from engrossing all the Discourse to her self: And when she did speak, she
still (according to the wise Man's Character of the good Woman) opened her
Mouth with Wisdom, Prove. 31.26.
and in her Tongue was the Law of Kindness. And she did so far excel all others
this way, that if a Stranger who had never seen her, had come in and found her
at work among her Maids of Honor, (as he often might) or in the Company of
other Ladies, without any Badges of Royalty and Distinction; he had been very
undiscerning, if (after a little Observation either of her graceful Mien, or
winning way of Address) he had not presently concluded, That Is the Queen. In a
word, she was so great a Proficient in all the Arts of Obliging, that she
reigned over the Hearts, as well as the Persons of all those who were happy in
the Honor of her Converse.

And now, she who was thus exact, thus perfect in all the Duties both of the
first and second Table, must needs excel in that which is the great Badg and
Character of them all, Charity; of which she was so complete a Pattern, that if
she out-did her self in any one thing, it was in this, which she extended both
to the Persons and Necessities of all.

Being all Goodness her self, she was apt to believe most People good too, or
at least, better than perhaps they were; Charity thinking no evil. 1 Cor. 13.6.
And she used this good Opinion of others, as an Instrument to make them what
she was so willing to signify she thought them: And so would make People good
by believing them to be so, and by this Engagement make them ashamed to deceive
or disappoint her Expectation and Thoughts of them.

And then, as to the Necessities of others, she was willing to her Power, yea
and beyond her Power, 2 Cor. 8.3.
to relieve them. God, 1 Samuel 2.30.
who always honors them that honor him, had given her Riches and Honor in
abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17.5.
as is said of King Jehoshaphat; yet her Heart was not puffed up by them, Ver.
6.
but lifted up under them in the Ways of the Lord. And the great Satisfaction
she took in them, was the Opportunity they afforded her of doing Good; and when
at any time they would not answer the great Designs of her willing Soul, Page
36.
the forementioned Discourse tells us what her Concern and Regret was.

She had a deep sense of the Wants of all Persons, and would catch at the least
hint of any proper Object of Charity when at any time mentioned, and never
declined relieving any Indigent, either Families or private Persons, when
recommended to her.

Nor was her Charity confined only to such here, but extended to Ireland too;
and not only to those there, who had suffered for their Religion, or for
espousing her Interest, but even to the Irish Orphans, that is, the Children of
such Parents who died in actual Rebellion and fighting against her, and that
after they had robbed, and stripped, and killed, and murdered many of her loyal
Subjects; yet to their Children was her great Charity designed. And she was (to
my knowledge) very solicitous to have some Fund settled for their Support, that
they might be brought up in the Protestant Religion, and maintained while fit
to be put to Trades, or otherwise disposed of.

This was Charity indeed, the doing Good for God's sake, without any other than
a Christian and truly Pious Inducement, 1 Timothy 6.19. Luke 16.5.
to lay up in store a good Foundation against the time to come; and to make to
her self Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness.

She had a great Compassion for such Foreigners as fled for their Religion, as
being forward to do good to all, so especially to those of the Household of
Faith.

But she had a particular Concern for such indigent Persons, whose
Circumstances had been any ways considerable in the World; there being some
Objects of real Charity, which are not so to vulgar Eyes or Purses, on whom she
would confer, and whom she would surprise with great and suitable Assistances;
and to such she was generally kind in the very manner as well as measure of her
Charity, being as tender of their Modesty, as she was compassionate of their
Necessity; and by her sweet obliging way, made her Gift seem more a Present
than a Charity. But I should never have done should I insist on Particulars, or
say all that might be said of her in a private Capacity, as a Christian. And
how much more might be said of her in relation to others?

As she was the best of Queens, so she was the best of Mistresses, to those who
had the Honor to serve her; never (as I am informed) urging her Commands upon
them so much by her Power and Authority, as obliging them by her Kindness and
Condescension, treating them more like Friends than Servants. And as their
Quality did entitle many of them (as much as any of their Fellow Subjects) to
her Friendship, so she lost nothing by affording it, but did secure their most
ready Obedience upon stronger Principles than that of bare Authority, even
those of Love and Gratitude; which as they are most acceptable and pleasant on
all sides, so are they most faithful and most lasting. In a word, I have been
told, that her Carriage among them was so obliging and prudent, that she was
never known to say or do any thing unworthy of her great Self, or unbecoming
that great Wisdom and Discretion that appeared in all her Actions.

I shall now consider her as a Queen, and that but briefly, fearing to outstrip
my time. And first, As a Queen Consort, as a Wife; and here we may say as the
Scripture says, Prove. 31.11, 12.
The Heart of her Husband did safely trust in her, and she did him Good and not
Evil, all the days of her Life. Prove. 12.4.
Never was Woman more a Crown and Ornament to Man. She lived doubtless with a
great Sense of the Covenant of God that was between them, upon her Heart, and
might say, as her Royal Grandfather in his Message to his Queen, that she
never transgressed the Obligation of Fidelity or Affection to Him, no not in
Thought.

She was all Love, and all Obedience.

A great part of her Care, was to observe every thing that was most pleasing to
him, and she was in all respects what she ought to be, A Help-Meet. Genesis 2.20.
And the inexpressible Sorrow his Majesty groans under for her Loss, is a too
sufficient Manifestation of all this.

And upon this Head it might not be improper to add a word or two, as a just
and farther Vindication of her Majesty in the only thing her most malicious
Enemies could charge her with.

She, who was so generally and so justly beloved and admired by all, had yet
the hard Thoughts of some few biast and unreasonable Men, who pretended
forsooth to be dissatisfied with her way of coming to the Crown, and were
therefore so impudent as to censure her for it. But had there not been other
great and weighty Reasons, yea an absolute Necessity for it, as great as the
saving three tottering Kingdoms from sinking, and our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and after them our Estates and Lives from expiring: Had there been,
I say, none of these or any other Inducements, yet the Obligations she lay
under as a Wife (which by one of the first Sanctions in Holy Writ, Genesis 2.24.
are far greater than any due from a Child to a Parent) might very well have
excused her, and removed their Dislike upon that score, and so rendered her as
amiable and dear to them, as she was to all others.

And now we might consider her as a Queen Regent. And here again, as a farther
Demonstration of his Majesty's great Affection, when the aspiring Designs and
Attempts of a potent and haughty Enemy, forced him from her and us, and
necessarily required his Presence elsewhere, he entrusted the whole Management
of the State to her Care and Conduct; to which, tho she was (in his Absence)
qualified and entitled by Law, yet it was a high Testimony of his Confidence in
her Prudence, to leave and entrust it to her sole Care. Which Trust she
discharged with such Dexterity, such Exactness, and such admirable Wisdom, that
she never gave or left occasion for any Complaint, but rendered all more than
silent, satisfied; and not only satisfied, but applauding and admiring her
prudent and honorable Conduct.

And tho she loved, and even hugged her Retirements as her greatest
Satisfaction; yet when the Exigences of Affairs required it, she would deny her
self, and her particular Inclination, to comply with a Duty of a more public
Concern; and cheerfully sustained the hurry of Business, which was inevitable,
and always acquitted her self (with Honor and Applause) of the great Trust
imposed in her.

But never did any Man, after a long and uneasy Confinement, meet his Liberty
with more Joy and Satisfaction, than she did solace her self, when she had
escaped the Noise and Crowd of Affairs, which must needs have ruffled and
disturbed her Quiet, and (so far) lessened, or (at least) suspended the full
enjoiment of her Self.

And now by such a Regular, such a Pious and such a Righteous Life, we cannot
easily suspect She could be unprepared even for the most sudden Death; and tho
the Warning was indeed but short, yet we have no reason to fear it was much
surprising to one that always lived in expectation of it.

She was always (as I was informed) in the midst of her Health and Strength,
apprehensive enough of the Disease whereof she died; yet being seized with it,
she seemed not at all discouraged, and professed her self entirely willing to
acquiesce in the Will of God; and all the while of her Illness continued in the
same Frame; and notwithstanding a Complication of Distempers, notwithstanding
the troublesome Prescriptions of Physicians, and the no less troublesome
Applications of others; notwithstanding her own Pain and Disorder, of which
(her Constitution, and other Circumstances considered) She could not but be
very sensible, yet with an admirable Patience and Resignation to the Will of
God, with a great Contempt of the Vanities of the World, and with a holy
Indifference even to Life it self, she was ready to answer when it pleased God
to call; being impatient in nothing, nor importunate in any thing, save an
earnest desire that she might know her Danger: and when it was at last declared
to Her, O God, how like an Angel, rather than a Soul clogged with Flesh, did
She receive it! with such an humble unconcernedness, such submission, and such
evenness of Temper, as nothing could have given but an innocent and meek
Spirit, and a Conscience void of Offense, toward God and toward Man: And
resigned up Her great Soul in Death, with the same Courage, and the same
Quietness, that She had possessed it in Patience all her Life.

And thus lived, and thus died (who can speak it without Tears?) this Great
Queen, this Glorious Saint; tho not full of Years, yet full of mature Fruits
and Graces; when all Men judged Her worthy of a longer, but God, the only
unerring Judge, found her full ripened for a better Life. And after he had
prevented Her with the Blessings of Goodness, and set a Crown of pure Gold upon
her Head; after he had given Her the universal Esteem, Love and Admiration of
all that knew Her; the blessing of a good Name, and more than unspotted, a
bright and resplendent Reputation: After he had granted Her the Request of her
Lips, and shut not out her Prayer: After he had made Her glad with the Light of
his Countenance, and given Her a Heaven upon Earth, the Blessing of a calm,
purified, and well-assured Conscience. In a word, after he had taken out the
Sting of Death, and made it an easy Passage to Everlasting Life, he then took
Her from her Corruptible and Earthly, to an Incorruptible and Heavenly Crown.

And She is now safely arrived at that happy Place, where (as the Father
sweetly warbles) there is Vita Aeterna, Beatitudo Perfecta, and Summa Voluptas;
Fullness of Joy, Eternity of Life, and Perfection of Bliss. Where her Faith is
turned into Sight, her Hope into Fruition and Love, everlastingly satisfied
with the Presence of God, the Face of Jesus Christ, the Fullness of the Spirit,
with the Communion and Society of all Saints, and the Spirits of Just Men made
Perfect; where all the Cares and Troubles annexed to an Earthly Crown are now
done away; and where she is, and shall be for ever ravished in joining with
Angels and Saints, and all the Choir of Heaven, to carol forth Praises, and
sing Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, to the Lamb, and to God for
ever. The most glorious Employment, the most happy State that the greatest
Monarch, the greatest Angel ever arrived to: And tho it be every way her
Advantage and her Gain, yet it is still our Loss; and Her many Excellencies
beforementioned, may satisfy us what great Advantages we might have expected
from her Life, had it pleased the Almighty to have continued it.

And now let us suspend our Sorrow a while, and consider what may be justly
expected from our selves on this sad Occasion. And here I could lay before you
a Pattern worthy of your Imitation; such a Pattern, as in all respects this Age
perhaps has not produced; a Pattern that may for ever silence, what either the
greatest or the meanest Person can offer against the Reasonableness or the
Necessity of a Holy Life; and may sufficiently convince us, that there are no
insuperable Difficulties in Religion: for tho She was a Queen, yet she was a
Woman, of the feebler Sex, a great and a rich Woman; Mat. 19.23.
and how hardly can such be saved? A Woman of like Passions with your selves,
inwardly clogged with the same corrupt and sinful Nature, outwardly beset with
the like or greater Temptations; and yet she cast off the Weight that hung upon
Her, broke through the Difficulties that did incompass Her, and ran the Race
which was set before Her; and through Faith and Patience has obtained, and now
inherits the Promises, and that sure Reward, that Crown of Glory, that endless
Kingdom, which God has provided, and Christ has purchased and promised to
Her, and all them that love and fear him, and wait for his appearing.

I could likewise here show you, how idle and frothy are the Projects and
Purposes, the Designs and Resolutions which worldly Men are too too apt to
promise to themselves on the Hopes, and to build upon the Assurances of long
Life; than which there is nothing more vain, nothing more uncertain.

If ever any mere Mortal could, by any Privilege whatsoever, pretend or hope
for Exemption from the Arrests of an early Death; this Good, this Great, this
Young, this healthy Queen might: and yet all the Advantage She has now over
common Dust is, that to Her may David's Lamentation over Saul be more fitly
applied; O, how is the Mighty fallen! 2 Samuel 1.19.
how lovely and pleasant was She in her Life! and yet she is fallen, as if she
had not been anointed with Oil. And indeed nothing in the whole World could
have more convincingly assured us of this Truth, that all Flesh is Grass, than
her Fall has done.

But I hasten to what yet remains.

There are two Duties that seem specially and necessarily to be incumbent upon
us at this time.

First, What we are to do to sanctify, or at least how we are to demean our
selves, that God may sanctify this great Loss to us.

Secondly, What we are to do to lessen it, so as it may not prove fatal to us.

First, How we are to improve this, so as to have it sanctified to us.

This is certain, by such Dispensations as these, the Death of his Servants,
God does forewarn us of future Judgments; especially if they be such as are
great and eminent, whether in Church or State: We have now lost the Greatest in
both; and this is a fearful Sign that some heavy Judgment attends the Remnant
of the People. This is that whereof our Prophet speaks, Behold, the Lord, the
Lord of Hosts, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3.
does take away from Jerusalem, the mighty Man, and the Man of War, the Judge,
and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the Captain of Fifty, and
the honorable Man, and the Counselor; and all this threatened as the
Forerunner of heavy Judgments; such as the having Children for their Princes,
Ver. 4, 5.
their oppressing one another, Ver. 8.
and no less than the Ruin of Jerusalem, and the Fall of Judah. And the same
Prophet elsewhere tells us, That the Righteous perishes, Isa. 57.1.
and no Man lays it to Heart; and merciful Men are taken away, none
considering that they are taken from the Evil to come.

Thus was that good King Josiah dealt with; not long after whose Death,
followed the Captivity of Babel. In the Grave wherein he was interred, the
Liberty, Glory, and Peace of Jewry, lay also buried.

I would not willingly be the Prophet of our Woe; but whatever we may think, or
however we may flatter our selves, God never withdraws such great Lights out of
the World, but at the approach of some black and dreadful Tempest; which, if we
humble not our selves under his mighty Hand, and prepare to meet him in the Way
of his Judgments, will certainly overtake us. And therefore while it is called
to Day, let us not harden our Hearts, but look to the Things that concern our
Peace. Let us search and try our Ways, and turn again unto the Lord. We cannot
think he has made this great Breach, only to open a Passage to our Sorrow,
much less to furnish us with new Matter of Discourse: No, he designs that we
should glorify him in our Hearts and Lives, more than formerly we have done;
and therefore let it be our Wisdom and our Care, to hear the Rod, and who has
appointed it, to turn every Man from the Evil of his Way, before the Lord's
Wrath be further kindled, and to repent and relent for all our Transgressions,
that so Iniquity may not be our Ruin.

Secondly, Let us see how we may lessen this great Loss, at least so far as to
prevent its being fatal to us. And I conceive, the best Course we can take in
order to this, is to place a double Value upon Him, whom God in his Mercy yet
spares to us, our Gracious King. Let this heavy Stroke render his Life more
dear to us: Let us pray more constantly, and more fervently, for his Health,
his Safety, his Happiness, and his Success.

We may be induced strongly to this, upon these Grounds.

First, We are to do this for her Sake that is gone.

Secondly, For his own Sake.

Thirdly, And especially upon the Account of our selves.

First, For her Sake that is gone. While She lived, She loved, honored and
admired Him: She knew his Worth beyond what we do; and besides His many other
Accomplishments, which His very Enemies admire in Him, She knew, that in His
greatest Undertaking, His chiefest Aim was the Interest and Good of Europe; and
especially that part of it which needed most his Help, and to which He was in
all Respects most obliged to give it, Great Britain and Ireland.

In a word, She best knew Him, and therefore justly valued Him: And surely if
the Saints departed have any knowledge of what passes here below, we cannot
perform a more grateful Service to her Memory, than to value Him, to love,
honor and admire Him too.

Secondly, For his own sake. Remember he is a Prince that has yet got nothing
by us but Trouble, and Care, and Travel, and Toil, and Danger: A Prince, who
when we were in the extremest Danger, upon the Brink of being ruined and
undone, staked his Life, his Fortune, his All, to save us; in which Attempt,
(considering the Season, and the powerful Army there was to oppose Him, with
the other Difficulties he had to struggle with) the Discouragements were so
many, that none but a Courage, great like His, could have encountered them: And
indeed the Undertaking was so great, and the Means to carry it on in Proportion
so little, that we need not think it an Hyperbole in Him, who concludes, there
was a Power more than Humane in bringing it to pass, and the Issue seems to
confirm it: Insomuch that France her self, that laughed at the Attempt, was yet
amazed at the Success; and well she might, it being the likeliest step that was
ever made toward her Ruin. But to return.

Remember, He is a Prince, who after many Years Effeminacy, Luxury, Ease and
Softness, (wherein the English Valor so samed heretofore, lay withering and
fading, unactive and rusting) has renewed to us the Memory of those great
Kings who headed English Armies abroad; and has done more in his own Person,
than all the Crowned Heads of this, or (for ought I know) any other Age. What
Prince ever so often exposed to the Dangers of the Sea, as well as to the Plots
of Assassines, and the Arms of the Enemy by Land as He has been?

A Prince, that as always, so lately, and especially in the Reduction of
Ireland, has made good the Character of his Illustrious Family, in being the
Deliverer of oppressed Nations. In a word, a Prince who has every way
performed his Part, how much soever his Affairs has been clogged at Home, by
the unnatural Treachery of some, who like the true Seed of Nero, can rake with
delight in the Bowels of their Mother, and betray the native Interests of their
Country, to its most inveterate Enemies; not only holding a Correspondence with
them, but offering up Vows and Prayers for their Success, and discovering a
cursed kind of Laughter and Satisfaction, at the Losses and Misfortunes of
their own Nation; an Indignity which no Government in the World deserves less
than this, and none upon Earth would perhaps bear but this: But Mercy is a
God-like Temper, and it would ill become this Place to offer any thing against
it; and I doubt not but Heaven it self will take care to avenge such monstrous
Ingratitude.

I could further show you, with what Wisdom He unites and keeps together the
Confederates, against the Disturber of the Peace of Christendom, for which we
are (next after our Deliverance it self) as much beholden to Him, as for any
one thing whatsoever. For by this means the War is kept at a distance, and we
live free from all Disturbance; without which, what could England hope for, but
to be a Field of Blood?

It had long since been so, had not his Majesty interposed; we were ready to
sheath our Swords in one another's Bowels, while a third Party (under the
Pretense of Assisting one) was gaping for an Opportunity to devour both. Nay it
had been so, notwithstanding this Interposition, were not the Enemy kept at a
Distance by continuing Flanders the Seat of the War: and (after all our Noise)
all that is done to support our Allies, is no less than necessary to support our
Selves; it is to find the Enemy work on that side, that we may live in quiet at
Home; No common Blessing, if we consider what our Neighbors, both in Flanders
and Germany, and elsewhere, suffer by the Scourge of War. And notwithstanding
the malicious and unreasonable Suggestions of some who cry out, (tho with no
other Design, than to foment our Animosities and Divisions) that we are at the
vast Expense of a needless War, to maintain the Dominions of a Foreign Prince:
Yet all Men of Sense know, that the Preservation of Flanders is as much, nay
more, for the Interest of England than of Spain: If that should once fall a
Victim to France, we need not sure be told, at this time of Day, what would
soon follow.

And therefore, since we have no other Choice than to fight for Flanders, or
for England in Flanders, or in England, there is none but Men besides
themselves, or otherwise notoriously biast, that would choose the latter.

But I need insist no longer upon this. It Is but too plain, we ought to value
and admire Him for his own Sake:

Let us now see what Obligations lie upon us, to do it for our Own.

And what can in this case be less expected from a grateful and a brave People,
to so generous, so deserving a Prince? But that we contribute our Endeavors,
that we may neither be wanting to our selves, nor in Duty and Affection to him,
but that we share in his Dangers, and promote his Designs, and do all that in
every one of us lies, to keep him in a Capacity of meeting his Enemies with
equal Numbers, whom they dare never attack but with unreasonable odds.

This indeed is but what we owe to our selves, to our Country, our Families,
our Posterity, and beyond all, to our Religion; for all these are at stake, and
they are (let some pretend what they will) the very things we contend for in
the present War with France, which is endeavoring to get not only our Houses,
but the Houses of God into their Possession: and how they will use both them
and us, they have given us more than a Specimen by what they have done at home
in their own Country; where within a few Years, there were more than a thousand
places of God's Public Worship, where some hundred thousands of Protestants
served God religiously and truly; and yet the French, at least the Popish Fury,
has turned all those Churches into ruinous Heaps, and treated the poor Owners
of them (tho their Countrymen, their Neighbors, their Friends and Relations)
with more Scorn and Contempt, more Barbarity and Cruelty, than has been heard
among Turks and Infidels: So that it is every Man's Interest to engage in this
Quarrel; and were it not only so, yet a due sense of Honor might excite all
Persons of Character and Reputation, to follow the Example of their KING, who
has so often exposed himself for us, and who is still ready to sacrifice his
Life for our Safety.

I am sure there is no Man can tell me, what it was (for almost this Age past)
we desired more than such a King; what it was we longed for more than a Prince
without any private Designs, and beyond all suspicion, firm in the Nation's
Interest and Quarrel against France: This very Qualification had atoned for all
other Failings, and the want of it (for ought I know) has been, in a great
measure, the Source of all our Miscarriages; and not only mischievous to us,
but fatal to all Europe. And now that that God, who brings Good out of Evil,
has as it were mercifully complied with our Desires, and blessed us with a
Prince, who (besides his other Endowments) is of all other the best qualified
this way; a Prince whom that Monarch always feared, and has now more reason to
fear than ever: Shall we not lay hold of the Opportunity, and push on the
present War with the utmost Vigor?

Believe it, to talk or think of restoring the late King without a French Army,
(as some of our disaffected Scriblers would seem to impose upon us) or to think
that such an Army, if they could restore him, would then only take their leave
and ^e gone, (as others of them would persuade us) is a ^anity, ^ Madness that
may require our Pity, but seems to be past our Cure. And therefore to Cabal or
Plot, Censure or Murmur, or if we arrive not to this height of Undutifulness
and Folly, but only remain unconcerned, or stand only gazing and looking on, as
if it were no great matter how the War succeeded, must needs be because we will
not exercise so much Forethought, as to consider the dreadful Consequences of
miscarrying in it.

All wise Men will tell you, we had better be subdued by any Nation under
Heaven than the French; for besides that no other, considering our Situation
(as one has lately observed) has Naval Forces enough to secure such a
Conquest; so no other would insult and inslave us at the rate they would. If
the Turk should subdue us, he would (says the same Author) miserably
Tyrannize, but yet for a small Yearly Tribute, he would allow us the Exercise
of our Religion. If other Nations, either their Distance would slacken our
Bonds, or their Weakness would press us more lightly: But France is our next
Neighbor, very powerful by Sea and Land, able to load us with heavy Chains,
and to rivet them upon us: Besides, she has found us capable of being a Rival
to her Glory, and we know who it is at this minute that stops her Conquests,
who gives Check to all her aspiring Designs: nay, she has felt the Power of our
Arms in her Bowels, and has been This Conquest was undertaken upon just
Grounds, Edward II. King of England, having married Isabella Daughter to Philip
the Fair of France, whose three Sons dying without Issue, the Crown descended
to the Heirs of Isabella; and then it was when Edward III. in right of his
Mother claimed the Kingdom of France, that they made their Salick Law, which
could however bar only for the future, and not for the time past; and therefore
the King invaded France, and was very successful in all the Battles he sought;
but by reason of several Diversions at home, this Success was not pursued by
his immediate Successors; yet Henry V. (a Prince of a Warlike Temper) coming to
the Crown, and considering that not only Normandy, Guien, Aquitain, and A^j^u,
were the rightful Inheritances of the Kings of England, but also his just Title
to the whole Kingdom of France, derived from Isabella aforesaid; after he had
first by Ambassadors set forth and demanded his Right, he with an English Army
invades France, and having won several Battles, was at last married to
Katherine, Daughter of Charles VI. and thereupon declared and crowned King of
France in Reversion: Charles and Isabella his Queen to reign during their
Lives, and Isabella surviving Charles, at her Death made a Will, declaring her
Son-in-Law Henry V. Heir to all her Goods, and to the Crown; which gives the
Kings of England a farther Right to the Kingdom of France. And I am persuaded,
if the French King had half so much Right to England, as the King of England
has to France, we should be pestered with his Manifesto's and Scribles,
alleging his just Pretensions, as he calls all that he makes.
conquered by us, and has had such fatal Proofs of the English Valor, that she
would be sure to take care never more to stand in fear of her Ancient Enemies:
And upon these Grounds we are to expect no Mercy at her Hands, but the worst of
an Hostile Fury; and nothing less perhaps than our total Subversion would serve
their turn. Nay, when we consider how barbarously they use the People whom they
subdue, tho of their own Religion, without regard to Churches or Religious
Houses, or the very Sepulchers of the Dead, tho of Princes themselves; we may
believe our English Papists (hour they may flatter themselves) would meet with
no better Quarter than others. But for those Protestants, who, tho at ease in
their Fortunes, and enjoying all the Privileges of their Fellow Subjects, are
yet restless and dissatisfied, and weary of a Government, that is the only
Security of their Religion and Estates; surely, as they will be the easiest, so
they will be the most despised Prey of their Enemies, who, if they have any
Manhood, or any thing that is great in them, will show more Favor to the brave
Defenders of their Country, than to those who have so basely and treacherously
deserted and betrayed it.

But I know if I should discourse at this rate out of this place, or where I
might expect an Answer, I should presently be told, that I had used a great
many words to little purpose, and had run on all along upon a false Ground; for
that the great King of France has nothing of Self in all this, nor is he
further concerned, than out of a Principle of Honor and Generosity, to espouse
an Oppressed, and to restore an Exiled Prince. That he was neither oppressed nor
banished is plain enough; and on whose side the Oppression lay we all know; and
yet we will allow them, that that Monarch may seemingly with much Gallantry,
espouse his Cause till he see a fair opportunity of setting up his Own, but to
be sure no longer. Or, suppose he should not do this, can we however think that
he would not demand so great a Charge, as the whole Wealth of the Nation would
be too little to answer? And were it not better Policy in us (tho we had no
other Inducement) to supply him, even to a Moiety of what we have, who will
preserve the rest by keeping such Enemies out, and by cherishing and protecting
us in our Religion, and other Rights?

To be sparing in a case of such Necessity, is to be wanting, and indeed cruel
to our selves, and our Posterity; like the fatal Parsimony of the People of
Constantinople, who refused to supply their own Emperor (tho by way of Loan)
with a thirtieth part of that Money, which the Turkish Emperor deprived them
of, together with the Lives of the Wealthiest of them. Whereas by that
seasonable Supply they might, in all likelihood, have preserved their City and
their Lives too.

'Twere easy to show, what a poor thing Money is, in respect of our Religion,
our Lives, our Laws, and our Liberties; and it is not yet seven Years, since all
considerate Men and good Protestants amongst us, would have given more than
this War will cost us, to have been under the Circumstances we now are. But
(God be thanked) there is no need to insist upon this. Those worthy Patriots who
so freely and cheerfully find out Ways and Means to support the War, are highly
sensible of it. And all I have to offer upon their Accounts, is, to pray as
David, when the People, even beyond what he expected, offered so willingly
toward a Public Good; O Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel our
Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 29.18.
keep this for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart of thy
People. But to return, that I may leave nothing unsaid, to open the Eyes of
those who are not wilfully blind, I will for their satisfaction suppose, that
this extravagantly ambitious King (upon whom they so much depend) had no
private Design, but would only clear the Way to the Throne, and then fairly
draw off, without any other Consideration than the Satisfaction of his own
haughty and ambitious Humor: Let us, I say, suppose this, (tho indeed it is
next to impossible) yet even in this Case, might not the Prince whom he left
repossest, (I only presume to ask the Question) justly write himself James the
Conqueror? And tho I am not to determine how mercifully he might use us if left
to his own Conduct, (tho we must believe him more than a Saint, to forget what
is past) yet, considering how he has been influenced, and (considering his
Princicles) how he still must be, if ever Divine Judgment, as a Punishment for
our Sins, should suffer this to come to pass: The very Thoughts of what we
might expect, are so full of Horror, that I choose rather to draw a Vail over
it, and pass it in silence, than go about to display it; and if any Man be so
weak, or so short-sighted, as to wish or desire it, I am persuaded, that a
short Change with a Subject of France, would very effectually cure him of his
Malady and Folly too.

And yet our Case might be much more desperate than some of theirs, and no
better to be sure than that of the Protestant Subjects under that Crown; and
how it should be worse is not easy to imagine. And now,

Since those very Men amongst us, who seem most fond of the late King's Return,
do yet pretend they would by no means have him come with a French Power, as
being aware of the dreadful Consequences thereof: Since it is not possible he
should come by any other, or any other Way; the abused Affections of his
Quondam Subjects (except a few not worth the naming) being now settled upon a
Prince, who has gained them with the Hazard of his Life; a Prince, that is not
only Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone, and so our natural Liege Lord,
but of our Religion also, and therefore the dearer to us, as we are every way,
and especially in that the safer: This being so, it is not possible they should
think of recalling a Prince, under whose Administration they suffered so much,
and whose incensed Wrath would not be easily appeased; and whose Thirst for
unlimited Power, he would be sure to quench at our Cost; and therefore must
come by a French Power, or not at all.

Since such a Power, if they could set him on English Ground, (which I much
question) would either, in his Name, and under his Umbrage, do all for
themselves; or at their going off, demand such vast Sums as we could never pay;
and yet for not paying, would be exposed to all the Miseries that Scorn or
Cruelty could invent.

Since after they had done this, (or suppose they should not do it) they would
at best leave us in the Hands of a Conqueror, all incensed, full of Wrath and
Revenge, who used us not over-well when he had no Pretense to that Title; but
would now, be sure, (without usurping a Dispensing Power) make his Will our
Law, and impose whatever his own Resentments and Bigotry, his Wrath, or
Jesuitical Zeal, and the Cruelty of those about him, could inflict.

Since our Religion (with which nothing should come in competition) is by the
late happy Revolution, secured to us and our Posterity, being wrapped up and
safe, not only in his Majesty, (whom God long preserve) but in those
Illustrious Heirs of the Crown, her Royal Highness, and her Royal Son, in whom
we may one Day be happy.

Since our Laws are once more Sacred, our Privileges allowed, our Rights and
Liberties cherished: And since we are blessed with a King, by whose Prowess and
Conduct, by whose Justice and Goodness, we may (if not wanting to our selves)
be as Great, as Happy, and as Dreadful as ever.

Since this, I say, is so, it is not possible, unless we be in love with
Chains, and fond to see our Religion truckle to Popery, our Liberty to Slavery,
our Rights and Privileges to Courtesy; unless we desire to see our Lives
exposed, and our Estates offered as an Oblation to a superstitious greedy
Church; or as a Reward to the Soldier that shall destroy us: Unless, I say, we
are fond of these things, it is not possible we should desire, or ever long for
such an Administration as will certainly produce them.

And therefore if we have any natural Love for our Country, or any supernatural
Affection for our Religion, or any natural Instinct of Self-preservation, or
any Sense of Honor in acting sutably to such Principles; If a Royal Example
can incite us, or our own Welfare and Safety encourage us; let us, in the Name
of God, as we value any, or all of these dear Things, in all due Thankfulness
to the Author, and in all Loyal Duty and Affection to the Instrument of our
Deliverance, turn from our Sins, and unite and strengthen our selves against
the Common Enemy of our Religion and Civil Rights, as the only way to have our
Peace and Happiness restored and settled upon sure and lasting Foundations.

And this I conceive is the best Course we can take to lessen this great Loss,
so as it may not prove fatal to us; To stand by our King with our Lives and
Fortunes; to pray constantly, and to pray fervently, that God would protect Him
from the private Machinations and open Violences of his Enemies; that he would
preserve him to perfect that Great, that Glorious Work he has so generally and
so successfully begun, that so we may enjoy Him in Peace, 2 Samuel 21.
and esteem Him as the Israelites did David, the Light of our Israel; and as
they did Josiah, the Breath of our Nostrils. Lam. 4.20.
The serious Acknowledgment whereof, will not suffer us to be wanting in all
Duty and Affection to Him, whom God continue long over us; and let all that
love the Peace and Happiness, the Welfare and Glory of Great Britain and
Ireland, say, Amen, Amen.

Now to God only Wise, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most
due, all Glory, Honor, Power, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata, Page 13. line 14. for live, read lived. P. 14. l. 15. dele rather.


