CAMBYSES King of Persia: A TRAGEDY.

Acted by His Highness the Duke of York's Servants.

Written by ELKANAH SETTLE, Gent.

Aut Famam sequere, aut sibi convenientia finge
Scriptor --
Hor. de Art Poet. Licensed,

March 6. 1670. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange, 1671.

TO THE Most Excellent, and most Illustrious PRINCESS, ANNE, Duchess OF
BUCCLUGH and MONMOUTH: Wife to the most Illustrious, and Highborn Prince,
JAMES, Duke of MONMOUTH.
May it please your Grace;
SInce the great Characters, and Subjects of serious Plays, are representations
of the past Glories of the World, the arrogance of an Epistle Dedicatory may
pretend to some Justice, in offering the Heroic Stories of past Ages to their
Hands, who are the Ornaments of the present. -- Once Persia was the Mistress of
the Earth, the Royal Seat of the Monarchs of the Universe. Then, as that God,
the Sun* which they adored, lends his kind 'Rays to all lesser lights; so all
the Tributary Glories of Inferior Princes shined by reflection from the
Persian Crown. But now that Sovereignty must cease, and the Eastern Monarch
Cambyses can pretend to no greatness of his own, but comes to borrow Glories
from the Western World, in seeking a Patronage from your favorable goodness.
The same Cambyses whom History has represented to be^^ Blasphemer of the gods,
a Prophaner of Religion, and a Defacer of Temples, is by your power become a
Convert, and humbly pays his Devotion to that Divinity, to whose protection he
commit^ himself and Fortune. -- But whilst I thus boldly proceed to Dedicate
this trifle to your Grace, forget to ask pardon for the meaness of the
Offering, and the confidence of him that offers it; Crime unpardonable, were
not your Mercy as signal as your other Virtues: For when kind Heaven honors
the World with some Worthy and Illustrious Person, in which Rank your Grace
mus^^ claim an eminent place; who, besides your late Affinity, are Allied to
that Royal Race, to which England owes its three last Monarchs; Heaven, I say,
besides the Great Souls, High Spirits, and Noble Thoughts it lends such
Persons, endues them too with more Familiar Virtues; as Courtesy, Generosity,
and a Condescension to entertain the Addresses of Inferior Mankind, and to
smile on the Endeavors of the meanest of their Subjects, and Admirers. Else
they would be forced, like Planets, to move in a Sphere alone; and Greatest
Monarchs, should they admit of none below them, would make their Palaces but
solitary Prisons. The assurance therefore of these Virtues, which particularly
possess so large a seat in your Heroic, Breast, animate me to present this
Poem to your Hands, that it may take Sanctuary there, where in its Infancy it
received protection. As he that is born under some happy Planet, owes the
success of his whole Life to the Predominance of that kinder Star that ruled at
his Nativity. The Entertainment you gave it in loose sheets, when it first saw
light, encourages me to this presumption, now in its riper growth, to devote it
wholly to your Self, and under that Title to style it happy: Since thus
Guarded, I dare expose it to the World; and stand in less awe of Censures, when
your Influence protects it, For, as that timorous Pilot, in a Storm, was
Condemned for fearing Shipwrac^^ when his Vessel carried Caesar; this Poem ca^
fear no dangers when it carries your Name for i^ Defense. But besides the
fortunate and glorio^ Advantages this Piece may justly challenge from the
Favor of so Indulgent a Patroness, it entitles (...) to this happiness, the
opportunity this Dedicat^^^ gives me, of writing my self,

Madam,
Your Graces most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, ELKANAH SETTLE.
The Actors Names.
Cambyses, the true King of Persia. Mr. Betterton. Prexaspes, His Favorite.
Mr. Harris. Otanes, Father to Phedima, and Orinda, Heir to the Persian Crown.
Persian Princes, Generals of Cambyses's Army. Mr. Crosby. Darius, Contracted to
Phedima. Mr. Smith. Artaban, A Persian Lord of Cambyses's Train. Mr. Norris.
Osiris, a Young Captive Prince, Contracted to Mandana* Mrs. Long. Smerdis, an
Impostor, Usurper of the Persian Crown; Reigning in the Name of Smerdis,
Younger Brother to Cambyses, privately Murdered by Prexaspes: known only to
Prexaspes, and Patasithes. Mr. Medbourne. Patasithes, His Friend; left Deputy
of Persia, during Cambyses's Progress into Egypt. Mr. Sandford. Theramnes, A
Disguised Syrian Prince, now General of Smerdis's Army, privately in Love with
Orinda. Mr. Young. Phedima, in Love with Darius. Mrs. Jennings. Orinda, Her
Sister. Mrs. Dixon. Mandana, A Captive Princess, Heiress to the Egyptian Crown,
Daughter to Amasis, slain by Prexaspes, at Cambyses's Command. Mrs. Betterton.
Auretta, and Atossa, waiting Ladies to Phedima and Orinda. Two High Priests,
Persian Magicians. Captain of Guards to Smerdis. Villains, Ghosts, Spirits,
Masquers, Messengers, Executioners, Guards, and Attendants.
The Scene, Susa and Cambyses's Camp, near the Walls of Susa. PROLOGUE.
WIth no small pains our Author has this day
Brought on the Stage a damned dull serious play.
But what the Devil is he like to gain?
If Wits, like States, with a joint power might Reign,
A Poet's labor then were worth the while,
Could he plead Custom, and demand your smile.
But that was never in fashion. Poets ought
To write with the same Spirit Caesar fought:
Indiff'rent Writers are contemned, for now
There grow no Laurels for a common brow:
None but great Ben, Shakespeare, or whom this Age
Has made their Heirs, succeed now on the Stage.
As Eagles try their Young against the Sun;
The self-same hazard all Young Writer^ run:
They are accounted a false bastard Race
That are not able to look Wit in the Face;
And therefore must expect an equal Fate,
To be disowned as illegitimate:
Thus conscious of their weaknesses and wants,
They know their doom; as deserts to young Plants,
You no more Mercy to Young writers show,
You damn and blast'em e're they have time to grow.
Thus you have learnt the Turkish Cruelty,
When Elder Brothers Reign, the Younger dye.
But as those Turks, when they are for Death designed,
This favor from their Cruel Brothers find,
Strangled by Mutes, who fitted for the Fact,
Want Tongues to speak the Cruelty they Act.
Knowing the dangers of a public shame,
Our Rhimer hopes his Fate may be the same:
He humbly legs, if you must cruel be,
You Would make no noise when you his doom decree,
But if you damn him, damn him silently.
CAMBYSES.
Actus Primus.
Scena Prima.
Scene, a Pavilion Royal. The Curtain drawn, is represented Cambyses seated on
a Throne; attended by Otanes, Darius, Artaban, Prexaspes, Guards, Slaves, and
Attendants; with the Princess Mandana, and Ladies. Cambyses descends from the
Throne. Camb. THe trembling World has shook at my Alarms;
Asia and Africa have felt my Arms.
My glorious Conquests too did farther fly;
I taught the Egyptian god Mortality:
By me great Apis fell; and now you see
They are compelled to change their gods for me.
I have done deeds, where Heaven's high power was foiled,
Piercing those Rocks where Thunder has been toiled.
Now, like our Sun, when there remains no more,
Thither return whence we set out before.

Otan. Returning thus, Great Sir, you have outdone
All other glories, which your Arms have won.
Inferior Conquerours their Triumphs get
When they advance, but you, when you retreat.

Dar. All Worthies now must yield to you alone,
And disappear, as Stars before the Sun.
Thus Cyrus, who all Asia did defeat,
Because so near you, does not seem so great.

Prex. Cambyses, no: Your Honor there must yield:
Your Father Cyrus's fame has yours excelled.
Since in one Act he did all yours outdo,
In leaving such a glorious Son as you.

Camb. Though the utmost bounds of Earths large frame's my right,
Where e're the Tributary Sun pays light;
Though the whole World has my great Triumph bin,
Yet still I have a Conquest left to win;
Mandana's heart -- Mandana, cease to mourn;
Your tears do those fair eyes but ill adorn.

Mand. These eyes, thus decked in tears, become her fate
That wears them.

Camb. No; you must your griefs abate.
Tears have, like Tides, their Ebbs: And each kind flower,
After a sullen Cloud, and stormy shower,
Looks fresh, and smiles at the next Sun.

Mand. -- That Sun
Will never see my Father in his Throne;
That Sun that saw you Triumph in his blood,
That saw you (who on Aegypt's ruins stood)
Deface our Temples, and their Powers defy,
That lent me Chains, and gave you Victory.
As if you to such want of Foes were driven,
When the Earth you would Conquered, to wage War with Heaven.

Camb. Their powers that made my greatness so sublime,
Have made my Glory and success my Crime.
Forgive me that my Conquest was my fault,
And what the Impartial chance of War has wrought.
Forget his Death, and I Will your fare retrive,
Your King and Father both in me shall live.

Mand. You vainly your untimely favors place;
Thus treacherous Serpents wound those they embrace.
A sudden trembling shoots through all my veins,
And in my breast his murdered Image Reigns.
Such horror does my haunted soul affright,
That I must fly his cruel Murd'rers sight,
You, by instinct, who did his death design,
Assaulting of his blood, laid siege to mine,

[Exit Mand. and Ladies* Camb. Ye subtle Powers, that humane passions rule,
That take your private walks within my soul;
Whence is your Title, that this power you have
Thus to degrade a Monarch to a Slave?
And yet such charms from those bright Circles flow,
That I must thank her eyes that made me so.

Prex. A sudden sound of Trumpets strikes my ear

[Trumpets heard from within. Artab. It seems the Voice of some new Triumph
near.

Camb. Some Herald, or Ambassador, or some
Poor petty Prince, that does a supplyant come
To beg his Crown. Darius, straight inquire
From whence they come; and what it is they desire.
Give them such Entertainment as may show
Cambyses is their King, and Conqueror too.
[ Exit Dar. What shouts are these? Ha! louder yet! Go forth,
[Shouts from within. And tell them that I will allay their mirth.
[Exit Otanes. Is It my good nature makes the slaves grow proud,
To dare to be thus Insolent, and loud?
Loud, and ungoverned mirth, rash Acts performs,
Kind gales, grown turbulent, and high, are Storms.

Enter Darius, in haste. Dar. A Cloud of People does your Camp surround;
And their Triumphant cries echo this sound,
Long live King Smerdis.

Camb. Ha! What Is this I hear?

Prex. What may provoke your Sword, but not your fear.

Enter Otanes, in haste. Otan. The Tumult's loud: Their guilty Joys do show
They pay to Smerdis what to you they owe.

Camb. Does Smerdis then Usurp my Throne? My Lords,
We shall not want new Subjects for our Swords:
Though the rash Boy's ambition does not know
What dangerous height his pride has raised him to
Yet I will make him know from whence he falls:
Advance my Standard then to Susa's Walls:
And the next Morning our bright Sun shall rise,
Adored with blood, and Humane sacrifice.
[Exeunt Omnes, [ praeter Camb, and Prex. Does Smerdis live still, a reproach
to be,
Both to my power, and thy fidelity?
Subjects the breath of Monarchs should attend,
Obeying that on which their lives depend.
The wills of Princes, who then dares dispute,
Whose Precepts, as their Crowns, are absolute?

Prex. It Smerdis, Sir, does any Scepter sway,
Neptune has lent him that which rules the Sea;
For there he lies secure: there, where each Wave
May proudly pass Triumphant over his Grave.

Camb. How then, Sir, are the dead so powerful grown,
To make a Resurrection to my Throne?

Prex. You know I Am Loyal, and may trust he is dead.

Camb. Thou lie, Slave; one word more forfeits your Head,
How dare you tell me that he is dead, when I
Think it kind fortunes greatest courtesy,
That he still lives; and lives to wear my Crown?
For since the Conquered World's already won,
Thanks, ye kind Fates, that raise new Foes, to afford
Fresh subjects still for my Victorious sword.
Though Smerdis live to out-brave his Kings command,
It Is but to fall by a more noble hand.
And that which does my willing sword invite,
I now shall Conquer in Mandana's sight.
I Will Court her with the glory of my Arms:
Conquest and War, like Beauty, have their Charms.
[Ex.
Prex. How, not believed! Have I so often, for this,
Obeyed his rage, and bloody Cruelties?
When Rapes and Murders were but common sin;
Such heats of blood have but my pastime bin.
And, in requital, I Am thus far arrived,
I find a Tyrants Favourite's short-lived.
My Death he threatens; Since he does distrust
My faith and Loyalty, it were but j^^t,
That he should find me false who thinks me so:
Nor am I bred so tame, or born so low,
To be out-brav'd by Kings.

Enter a Messenger, who delivers a Letter to Prex. Mess. From Smerdis, Sir, and
trust
To find him grateful, as he finds you just.

Prex. Happy occasion. Now I may pursue
[Aside. Both my Revenge, and my Ambition too.
[Opens the Letter. Go tell your King, I must not stop my ears,
When Monarchs thus are my Petitioners.
[Exit Mess* Assist him! --
[Pausing upon the Letter. True. Statesmen should not regard
The Justice of the Act, but the reward.
The Median Crown! -- His promises are large,
And interest will greater faults discharge.
Now I will find fresh subjects for fame's wings,
To tell the World I rule the fate of Kings.
Though I cannot boast of Crowns, my glory is,
That Empires by my power do fall, and rise,
Perhaps the Frantic zeal oth' World may say,
I injure Heaven, when I my King betray.
Let Fools be just, court Shrines have homage paid
To Images, those gods in Masquerade.
Religion, Loyalty, and the aerie scrowl
Of gods, are strangers to a Scythians soul.
[Exit.
Scena Se^unda.
The Scene continues: Enter Mandana, sola. Mand. And will the angry gods for
ever frown?
Have I not lost a Father, and a Crown?
But that which most Heaven's cruelty does show,
Who shares my heart does share my fortune too.
The hand of War more cruel wounds never gave;
Osiris too is the proud Tyrant's Slave.
Could Providence this unjust deed design,
Osiris should wear any Chains -- but mine?
[She Weeps* Our Fate the malice of our Stars does prove;
If there be any Stars that envy Love.

Enter to her, Osiris. Osir. Do you remember those strict Vows you made,
And those soft Charms in whispers you conveyed,
When I, and Egypt both, did happy prove,
They in their King, I in Mandana's Love?

Mand. I do, Osiris; And remember too,
I always paid my promises to you.

Osir. Your Constancy confirms that happiness
Which your high favor did at first confer:
But souls so much divine can do no less,
As gods are constant, 'cause they cannot err.
This day, I hope, our Mutual Loves shall crown.

Mand. Yes, Sir, it shall, if Heaven will give us leave.

Osir. When you, Mandana, smile, Heaven cannot frown.

Mand. No, unkind fate does your fond hopes deceive.
You know, Osiris, that I made this Vow,
That, with my Love, I would my Crown bestow.
And from her Vow Mandana will not start;
I Will give an Empire, when I give a heart.
But since my Captive fate my Crown has lost,
Your hopes and mine thus equally are crossed.
To give you less, would seem too low a thing,
My heart alone's too mean an Offering.

Osir. In this decree you do too cruel prove,
To think that Fortune can give Laws to Love.
And to your Beauty you're injurious grown;
You cannot borrow luster from a Crown.
No, he who in Mandana's Breast does Reign,
Is taught all meaner Empires to disdain.

Mand. Osiris, no, your too fond zeal mistakes,
Love will admit no Slaves -- but what it makes.
Love by our miseries would sullied be,
Eclipsed, and Clouded in Captivity.
Our Fate the Crowning of our Love controuls.

Osir. We have but Captives fortunes, not their fouls.
Their fouls to the highest pitch of greatness rise,
That can the empty frowns of Fate despise.
In our dark fortune Love will shine more bright:
As Diamonds borrow luster from the night.

Mand. No, no, you must your hopeless Love forgo.
You must, Osiris, -- Love will have it so.

Osir. And can you give what I shall never enjoy?
Can Love a Lovers happiness destroy?

Mand. If e're my Stars my ravished Crown restore
[She Sighs. Till then, expect that I can give no more.

Osir. You are too cruel.

Mand. No, I am too kind.
This resolution in my breast is signed. --
Proffers to go out, at which Osiris offers to speak. I do command you, urge no
more.

Osir. You may
Command my Death, you know I must obey.

Mand. No, my Osiris, live, and live to be
More happy, then you can be made by me.
Yet from your Breast,
Let not Mandana be so far removed,
But still you may remember -- that we Loved.
[Exit.
Osir. Oh, my hard fate!
She does deny me Love, yet bids me live:
Yet it is her kindness does this sentence give.
How strangely is my Happiness destroyed?
Her too much Love Love's ruin has decreed:
As Lamps, that surfeit when they are overcloy'd,
Do perish by that Oil on which they feed.
[Exit.
Scena tertia. The Scene, a Palace.
Enter Smerdis, and Patasithes, with Guards and Attendants. Pat. 'Twas by
Heaven's pleasure, and our wills decreed,
To place the Crown of Persia on your head.
Let dull successive Monarchs idly wait
To be enthroned by the flow hand of Fate.
And Phoenix-like, expect their rise, and power,
Only from the ashes of an Ancestour.
You by a Nobler force have Empire gained,
Wresting the Scepter from Cambyses hand.
Thus on his ruin you his Throne ascend,
And make the means as glorious, as the end.

Smerd. The Fate of Crowns depends on common chance,
Fortune and power may to a Throne advance.
But to confirm that Crown our power affords,
Requires our souls more active than our Swords.

Pat. You must yet Act unseen, and veil your power,
Until your Thunder's in your hand secure.
Till then, Sir, you your Majesty must shroud,
Like Lightning, taking birth first from a Cloud.
Till you like that, a full-blown glory wear,
And gain at once, both reverence and fear.

Enter Theramnes. There. Your Subjects joys grow loud, as is your fame;
Persia speaks nothing now, but Smerdis name.
And their excessive joys so high advance,
Their Piety's joined with their Allegiance;
Rendering that Homage, which to Heaven is due,
Adoring less the rising Sun, than you.

Smerd. It Is this must make my Sov'reignty complete;
Those joys that speak them Loyal, speak me great.

There. You Conq'rours have outdone: your name affords
The subject of more Trophies, then their swords.
Great Cyrus glories must submit to you;
He Conquered Nations, you their hearts subdue.

Smerd. This is but half a Conquest; who defends
A Crown, conquers his Foes, as well as Friends.
And now our cause for speedy action calls;
Cambyses is in sight of Susa's Walls.
Go then, Theramnes, muster all our Force;
Our Syrian Infantry, and Persian Horse.
P^epare such strength, that it may be expressed
That we can conquer, if he dare resist.

There. I do not Conquest doubt: whilst Monarchs are
Themselves above placed in a higher sphere;
You, like the Heavens, your sacred powers dispense,
You Will give us Conquest by your Influence.
[Exit.
Smerd. See how the fond deluded World mistakes,
And what false light my borrowed glory makes:
Yet such as dazles Persia. This disguise
Has raised so thick a mist before their eyes;
That my best Friends, Theramnes, and the crowd
Of wondering Subjects, all are in one Cloud;
And their mistaken Faiths so far advance;
That they seem Rivals in Allegiance.
Like their Devotion who the gods implore,
Men first believe, and then they do adore.

Pat. Thus Kings and Beauty in this Title share,
It Is the adorers eye makes Beauty fair.
The Persians thus by their Allegiance show,
You're the true Prince, if they but think you so.

Smerd. I by such Arts do the Worlds Empire sway,
As the Worlds frame does Natures Laws obey;
Moved by a Cause admired, but never known.
Secrets of State and Heaven agree in One.
Thus I, and thus the gods themselves disguise
Their highest designs in darkest Mysteries.

[Exeunt. Scena quarta.
The Scene continues: Enter Phedima, and Orinda. Orind. Love in my breast
should with slow progress move,
Were there no other interest in Love.

Phed. Why, what more can there be?

Orind. -- Yes, I would have
My Beauties Captive be my Honors slave.
Brave Conq'rours scorn the prize they win, whilst they
Aim only at the fame of Victory.
But your too humble Love takes a low flight,
When you thus dote upon a Favorite:
Can your Darius --

Phed. -- Can Darius seem
Unworthy then of Phedima's esteem?
'Twere Impious to wish my passion less:
His merits, not my Love, have their excess.

Orind. Love, like a pleasant Dream, disturbed or crossed,
The fancy wakes, and then the pleasure's lost.
My presence then will but injurious prove,
[Scornfully. Silence and privacy are fit -- for Love.
[Exit.
Phed. And can she be so cruel, to reprove
Her heart which to Darius does incline?
Whom all the World can do less than Love,
At least, if I may judge all hearts by mine.

Enter Smerdis, who having a while gazed upon her, advances to her; she seeing
him, draws her Veil over her Face. Smerd. Madam, too late you do my sight
deprive,
What Is in a moment born, an Age may live.
This makes you think (that since your power is such)
Where an assault has won, a siege too much.
Having the assurance of your Conquest found,
You hide the Weapon now you have given the wound,

Enter Patasithes, unseen. Pat: Ha! this strange language does mysterious sound;
It is a Riddle which I cannot expound.

Smerd. Yet you must pity those chaste flames you raise,
The gods themselves smile on their Vo^aries.
And yet the Heavens, when they vouchsafe to smile,
Suffer no Clouds to interpose the while.
But your injurious Veil permits no glance
Should my fond hopes with the least glimpse advance.

Phed. Stranger, what means this language, and how dares
Your ill-bred confidence assault my ears?
This boldness merits more than my disdain
And frowns can punish.

Smerd. -- Yet your self restrain
The Power of both, whilst you thus Veiled, confu^e
That punishment your frowns should execute.
The (...) Lightning never wounds, when thus
A (...) of Clouds is drawn 'twixt that and us.

[Unveiles her* Phed. A Persian Ladies honor is profaned,
Who bears this usage from an unknown hand.
What frenzy has possessed your soul?

Smerd. -- Your eyes
Do ill to make my heart their sacrifice;
And then condemn him who does offer it.

Phed. My scorn's too little, where the affronts so great.

[Proffers to go. Smerd. Hold, cruel fair, and your just anger stay,
With such repentance I Will my fault repay:
That I will show my Love is so sublime,
That it can expiate a Lovers Crime. --

Pat. Ha! how does his distracted fancy rove,
Preferred to Empire, to submit to Love!

[Aside* Smerd. -- I pressed too far, I must confess, yet though
Your coyness threa^ned, it invited too.
Thus curious, we int' angry Comets pry,
Which but, at best, threaten ill destiny:
When our inquiry does not reach so far,
To know the aspect of a milder Star.

Pat. The Infection spreads. No longer I endure
To see that which I must prevent, or cure.
Love, like the stars that rule't, should active move,
You are too idle, Sir, to be in Love,
[ To Smerd. Come, Sir, she is yours.

Phed. Ye gods!

Smerd. -- Hold, Sir, you wrong --

Pat. I only tell you, that you talk too long.
Lovers should not such tedious treaties hold,
Love is a thing that is sooner done, than told.
But you mistake; Love takes a Nobler course,
Conquests are not by parley won, but force.
Here, take her then.

[Thrusts her rudely to Smerd. Phed. Defend me, Heavens.

Smerd. -- Rash Man,
Hold your rude hands; you all that is good profane;

Phed. Audacious --
[ To Pat. -- Oh, I understand you now:
[ To Smerd. Have you Confed' rates and Assistants too?
How dares your salvage fury grow so rude,
To force that Virtue which you cannot delude?

Smerd. Dispell your fears, your Virtue is secure,
Since your protection is in your own power:
Thus doubly guarded, by the powers of Heaven,
And by those powers Heaven to your charms has given.

Phed. No, Ravishers; no more this language use,
The success failing, you the guilt excuse.
Your sting-less fury wants the power to hurt,
You know you are within the Persian Court:
Your Violence chose an improper stage:
This sanctuary guards me from your rage.
[Exit.
Pat. See with what courage she her cause protects;
You but the King, but she the Tyrant Acts.
But she derives her power from your tame fears:
She knows that Lovers dare not give offense:
Thus fear makes gods; who deify'd the stars,
But only those who feared their Influence?
If you then Loved, why did you not enjoy?
Can a Kings Modesty his hopes destroy?

Smerd. Such base and unjust deeds would but proclaim
Mean Impostor greater than I am.

Pat. It Is Kings make Justice, and not Justice Kings,
And in that name you may Act greater things,
And still be just. The Persian King's design
No Woman more than for a Concubine.
And in that only name she should not have
The Courtship of a Mistress, but a Slave.
You then should force her whom you could not move.

Smerd. Force may support my ^mpire, not my Love.
Beauty, like Majesty, is sacred too:
And must it then be thus profaned by you?

Pat. Your thoughts and passions are too humble grown,
You do forget you're seated on a Throne.
[Exit.
Smerd. Can Patasithes so inhumane prove?
He gave me Empire, but destroys my Love.
This is that Phedima I Have seen before;
What I then but admired, I now adore.
My privacy my passion then confined;
A flame too noble for so low a mind.
Now nothing my Love's freedom can control;
My Empire's limits do enlarge my soul.
[Exit.
Scena quinta.
Scene continues: Enter Theramnes, and Phedima. Phed. Their rudeness was so
great --

There. -- And do they live?
Not you nor Heaven can this offense forgive.
Against you there can be no venial Crimes:
Your anger ought to kill where it condemns.
And I Will be the Executioner. But teach
Me where I may those rude offenders reach:
And I will force their guilty blood to more
Than blush for their bold Crime.

Phed. -- That cannot be;
For they are men I never saw before,
Strangers alike to Honor, and to me.

There. Do but describe them then, and you shall see,
To find them revenge shall, in your name,
Quick-ey'd as Envy be, and swift as Fame.

Phed. By all I can describe I understood*
Their Virtues are inferior to their blood.
By the Habit which they wore they seemed to be
Some of the ^^rsian chief Nobility.

There. My ^^^'rest in the Persian Court shall show
How much my zeal in your just cause can do:
To find those Ravishers such search I Will make,
That in their very eyes their guilt I Will track:
I on my honor ^ow I Will use such Arts,
Who e're they are, to reach their guilty Hearts.
[Exit.
Phed. Theram^es, stay -- Alas, he is gone too far.
How fierce and swift the wings of Honor are!
I fear that he will some rash Act perform,
Hurried like waves that swell into a storm.
And yet his zeal I cannot but approve:
Friendship a second Rival is to Love.

Finis Act. primi.
Actus Secundus.
Scena prima.
Scene continues: Enter Smerdis. Smerd. LEt Heaven whatever Fate for me design,
It Is Smerdis must make Smerdis glory shine.
My stars can but their utmost powers dispense:
But I Will Act things above their influence.

Enter to him, Theramnes pensively, not seeing Smerdis. There. It must be done.
I Am bound by Honors Laws,
And more, it is in Orinda's Sisters cause.
I want not courage, and I dangers scorn:
Aside. Yet on mine Honor such an Oath I Have sworn,
That I want power to perform my Vow.

Smerd. What serious thought sits on Theram^^s brow?
Come, in your looks some great design I read:
Or some request ^or which your eyes do plead.
Name it, it shall be done.
Nothing shall mak^ me from my promise shrink,
For I dare Act whatever you dare think.

There. You cannot Act that kindness which I want.

Smerd. You cannot ask that which I cannot grant
At your request.

There. -- Sir, in a Ladies cause
I am engaged by Honors sacred Laws,
In her Revenge to Act a Champions part,
To right her wrongs on her Offender's heart.
But I shall be as blind in my pursuit,
As is that Justice I would Execute.
Nor can your power, where the Objects are unknown,
Direct my hand, nor reach them with your own.

Smerd. Theramnes, you a Prince's power mistake,
Monarchs the secrets of the skies can track,
And search Heavens counsels; ho^ then can mankind
Act in a Cloud that which we cannot find?
I Will find them if they live. -- But, Sir, her name
Who does this Justice, and your courage claim;
The time, the place where they did Act their Crime?

There. The Scene it was your Palace, Sir, the time
This Morning, and her name is Phedima.

Smerd. That only name does all my spirits awe.
[Aside. Then as I promised in your cause I join:
There amnes, draw your Sword, as I draw mine*
[Draws. To give the blow will direct you where;
And that you may not mis^his Heart -- strike here.
[Points to his Breast. That you more boldly may her cause defend,
Know her Offender is your King and Friend.
What, does your courage shake, and must you pause
When Honor calls you in a Ladies cause?
Or is it your fear that does resist your Vow?

There. Though Vows are sacred, so are Monarchs too.
It Is not, Great Sir, the want of Courage stays
My hand, it is Reverence over my Valor sways.
Theramnes dares not think, much less act that
Which the most salvage Lions tremble at.
For Lyo^s dare not against their Prince Rebel.
They want the power to hurt, and I the will.

Smerd. These slight excuses are too weak: you must
Per^orm your Vow, or be proclaimed unjust.

There. A stronger ^ye that promise does remit,
And I am now more just in breaking it;
No ties of Honor ever yet could be
So strong, as the strict bonds of Loyalty.

Smerd. Then on your Loyalty I command you do
What Honor and your Vow has bound you to.

There. And can you give so cruel a Command?
It Is Death against my King to lift my Hand.

Smerd. And what is worse, it is Death (...) disobey.

There. But dying thus I dye the nobler way.
Theramnes dares not strike, but he dares dye
When you will have it so.

Smerd. -- My Cruelty
You do mistake. Theramnes, you shall live:
For that which I command, I can forgive.

There. But you command what Heaven cannot permit.

Smerd. The wills of Kings and Heaven together meet.
You Have made a Vow to reach my heart, and Heaven
To that great act it is free consent has given.
Your friendship, not your sword shall act that part,
For you unarmed, Theramnes, reach my Heart.

[Embraces him. There. Your favors are advanced to that vast height,
I fear that I shall sink under the weight.

Smerd. Sir, since you are engaged by Honors Laws,
To perform Justice in this Ladies Cause;
Go use all Arts and Arguments to bring
Her to the presence of the Persian King.
Inform her that He knows those Ravishers,
And that their Insolence has reached his ears.
Since Justice to the right of Kings belongs,
Tell her He shall be proud to right her wrongs;
And, as their Judge, do Justice in defense
Of Beauty, and of injut'd innocence.

There. I go.

Smerd. -- And with success return, and may
Those Stars that govern Love direct your way.

[ Exit Theramnes. This generous contest gave me means to try
Theramnes's Friendship, and his Loyalty.
And happily I have contrived to obtain
The sight of my fair Conqu'rour once again.
But oh, I can but think how I must now
Be both the Judge, and the Offender too.
But though I justly then deserved her frown,
Because she did not know I wore a Crown:
Now I more Nobly will her passion move,
I Will make my Crown an Agent for my Love.
If she esteem her heart a gift too great,
I then will purchase what I cannot entreat.
Enter to him, Prexaspes in disguise, lead in by the Guards. Capt. of the
Guards. This Fellow, Sir, we in the Palace saw;
And that which we from his deportment draw,
His too suspicious looks, and garb descry
A guilty fear, the mask of Treachery.

Smerd. Audacious Rebel, Slave, what bold design --

Prex. Sir, my design is just.

Smerd. -- And so is mine.
And of my Justice thus I Will give you proof:
See instantly the Traytor's Head struck off.

[To the Guards. Enter Patasithes. Prex. TO express that I dare dye for you,
that breath
That rules Prexaspes life, may give him death.

[Undisguises himself. Smerd. Prexaspes!

Pat. Ha! Prexaspes!

Smerd. -- Fatal chance!
Your care has witnest your Allegiance.
[To the Guards* Withdraw.
[Exeunt Guards. Dear Friend, your doom is changed, and now
I must condemn my guilty self, not you.

[Embraces him* Prex. In this disguise I from the Camp am come,
To tell you I have sealed Cambyses doom.
Lead by my Counsel, Sir, he does design
A three days Truce before the siege begin.
To which you must consent. --
Things must appear as smooth as calmest Seas;
And Susa wear the flattering smiles of peace.

Pat. Monarchs and Statesmen have these mutual ^yes,
They by each other do advance, and rise.

[Whilst he speaks, they whisper. Prex. I Will gain you entrance.

Smerd. -- Well, I do consent.

Prex. Your being unknown all dangers will prevent:
The Tyrants life shall with his Empire end.

Smerd. A Monarch's Patron, and an Empire's Friend.

[Exeunt. Scene continues: Enter Theramnes, and Phedima. There. And Madam, that
you might see Justice done,
I promised to conduct you to his Throne.
But pardon me, if I have gone too far,
When honor and my Friendship makes me err.

Phed. Honor and Friendship too have their excess;
But since I may my Innocence express,
And in their Justice my revenge pursue,
Theramnes, I submit to follow you.

[Exeunt. Scena Secunda.
The Scene opened, appears Smerdis seated on a Throne, attended by Guards, and
other Attendants. Enter again, Theramnes, and Phedima. There. He to their trial
will the Offenders bring --
Look there, and see your Judge, the Persian King.

Phed. Sure you mistake the Throne, or I the Prince.

There. His Majesty that error will convince.
[Exit.
Smerd. Fair Excellence,
[Steps from the Throne. It Is true, the name of Prince I changed have
For that more glorious Title of your Slave. --
But I recall that breath -- I should transgress
Against your Beauty, were my greatness less.
He must be more than Prince, and Monarch too,
That so great Beauty dares adore as you.
Hence it is your Royal Lover, Persia's King
Presumes to make his heart your Offering.
The Noblest Present that his Love can make,
And yet the lowest you can stoop to take.

Phed. The Persian Monarch's Love! Now I Will proclaim
My Constancy to my Darius's flame.
My courage in this cause shall act such things,
Aside. I Will prove my Faith by my disdain of Kings.
I Will treat him so, that Fame shall witness be,
None ever Loved, or ever scorned like me.
Are you the Judge to prosecute the Laws
Of Justice in those bold Offenders cause?
Why then, kind Judge, do you forsake your Throne,
E're you have the Trial heard, or Justice done?

Smerd. Your bold Offender does repent his Fact,
And I but ill his Judge's part could Act.
To beg his pardon I resign my seat,
From being his Judge to be his Advocate.

Phed. But lest his Crime should want a just Revenge,
As you change yours, I will my Office change,
From his Accuser to his Judge; whilst I,
To Act your Justice, will your seat supply:
[Steps into the Throne. Enter Patasithes, unseen. For since he Loves, I Will use
a Mistress's power,
With all the rigor of a Conqueror.

Pat. Ha! what strange Interlude must here be shown?
A Woman seated on the Persian Throne!

[Aside. Phed. This difference Kings with common Captives have;
Only the Title of a Royal Slave.
And how can Beauty rule a Nobler way,
Then to command thus -- whilst their Slaves obey.

Pat. It Is she; I Will stop -- But stay, I Will use no force.
I Will check her pride by a more subtle course.

[Aside. Phed. Although you Monarchs are exempt from Laws,
As wanting higher Powers to Judge your cause:
Yet that you, Smerdis, may have Justice done,
Since you want Laws, I Will Judge you by my own.

Smerdis, what can you say in the defense
Of your late rude, and salvage violence;
When, Ravisher, your guilt so high was grown,
TO attempt my Virtue, and to blast your own?

Smerd You know I was not Author of that Fact:
H^nour nor Love durst never such stains contract.
For they Heavens favor would but ill implore,
Who first profane the Deity they adore.

Phed. Honor and Love are but respective things;
Greater or less in Subjects or in Kings.
In which if Kings transgress, the more sublime
Their greatness is, the greater is their Crime.
And though you're now transformed into a Prince,
That Title does but heighten your offense.

Smerd. Such Beauty does so well become the Throne,
Be pleased, fair Judge, to accept it as your own.
Where you shall Reign in glory, and give Law
To him that wears the Crown of Persia.

Phed. I scorn your Throne, and him that proffers it:
My powers too great, an equal to admit.
[Descends from the Throne. No, Smerdis, Phedima is not so low
As to descend unto a Throne, and You.
Two lights together cannot equal shine,
Mine will Eclipse your glory, or yours mine.
And 'twould a lesser Honor be, to have
A King my Equal, than a King my Slave.

[Exit, and after her, Smerdis. Pat. Is Love an object for his mind which should
Be now employed with thoughts of War, and Blood.
Cambyses now may his revenge pursue,
And easily conquer, where Love can subdue.
Love does debase all Courage, and he is,
Like tame Beasts, only fit for Sacrifice.
But I Will invent a Cure.
[Studies. -- Well, I Will remove
Her safe enough both from his power, and Love.
Love is a Passion for luxurious peace,
When idleness indulges the disease,
But not for Active souls. I Have found the way
To turn that current which I cannot stay.
[Exit.
Scena tertia. Scene, the Palace.
Enter Smerdis, with a Letter. Smerd. He that so well a King can counterfeit,
Should scorn to stick at any smaller cheat.
From his own Copies too I have so near
Pursued Theramnes Hand, and Character,
That the most curious, nay, Theramnes's eye,
Did he but see it, could scarce the cheat descry.
Well, it must take. I shall so happy prove,
Both to find out, and to confound their Love.
Enter Theramnes, who seeing Smerdis, offers to withdraw. Theramnes, stay.

There. -- I fear I am too rude.

Smerd. Theramnes, no, a Friend cannot intrude*

There. But I have pressed into your privacies.

Smerd. Friendship above all private business is;
Unless it be the high concerns of Love,
And Honor. But there we two equal prove
Rivals in both.

There. What means my King?

Smerd. -- I mean
Only one Beauty over us both does Reign.

There. No, you whose Empire's greatness is above
All Rivals, should admit none in your Love.
And think you that my confidence aspires
To Court that Beauty which my King admires.

Smerd. Think you I can believe you never saw*
The eyes and charms of the fair Phedima.
Or can you utter so profane a word,
To say she can be seen and not adored?

There. Love, like Religion, never chose one way*
That all should to one object homage pay.
The Sun does to the World his sight afford,
But by the Persians only is adored.

Smerd. Because the rest oth' World are ignorant,
And do the knowledge of his Godhead want.
But you who know how great Divinity
In Phedima's most sacred breast does lie,
Cannot but adore her.

There. -- Yes, I can do more:
I am beyond her Beauties charms, and pow'^.
In this one glory I out-rival you;
Those eyes which did the Persian King subdue,
Their powers too weak to Captivate my heart.

Smerd. His Love's too strong to be compelled by Art,
Or forced to a Confession.
[Aside. -- 'Twas the excess
Of passion made my jealousy transgress.
But now I Am satisfied, That I may prove
I don't suspect your Loyalty, nor Love,
I will entrust this Letter to your care,
But you must first on your Allegiance swear.

There. I swear. And in obedience to your will,
Whatever you command I will fulfill,
That to a Subjects care you dare entrust:
Since your commands can be no less than just.

Smerd. Present that Letter then to Phedima.
And if she chance to ask by whom 'twas writ,
Beware you do not tell her, but withdraw,
Lest that she should refuse the reading it.
Then carefully forbear to visit her
Until such time that she an answer sends;
For by that means I shall my suit prefer;
And you will thus oblige your best of Friends.
And then, Sir, whatsoever her answer be,
(For through your hands 'twill come) present it me.
Exit Theramnes with the Letter. Though he so resolutely did maintain
He did not Love, their Love is but too plain;
How could she else such cruelty have shown
To him who with his Love proffered his Throne?
Her passion has some more than common tie,
When proffered Crowns cannot shake her constancy.
And that Theramnes is the Object too,
What was it else made him so rashly Vow,
When he but late Acted her Champions part,
To right her wrongs on her Offenders heart.
When the slight wrongs could only cause afford
For a Woman's anger, and a Lovers Sword.
But yet this Letter will my doubts remove.
I shall discover their intrigues of Love.
^f so --
By treacherous smiles I will his ruin Act,
As stranded Vessels in a calm are Wrackt.
[Exit.
Scena quarta. Scene, a Chamber.
Enter Phedima, and Orinda, with A^ossa, Auretta, and other waiting Ladies.
Orind. Sister, you are so fortunate, to have
The Persian Monarch for your Beauty's Slave!

Phed. No, in my Love Ambition has no part
Monarchs may rule an Empire, not a heart.
Whilst my Darius lodges here, my breast
Too narrow is for any other guest.
May Smerdis still the Persian Scepter bear,
And may he still Reign every where -- but here.

[Points to her Breast. Orind. Does then your Breast no other thoughts produce?
Love, like Wars Combats, should admit some truce.
Your pardon, Sister, if so bold I prove
To tell you what Ori^da thinks of Love.
Atossa, sing the Song I taught you.
A^ossa sings. She that with Love is not possessed,
Has not for that the harder heart:
I think the softer, and more tender breast,
Would dull, would dull, would dull, and damp the dart.
Away with melancholy fits,
Whose strange effect our eyes disarms,
Deposes Beauty, and distracts our wits,
Whilst we grow pale, grow pale, and lose our charms.
Love does against it self conspire;
Such languishing desires imparts,
That quench the fuel, yet preserve the fire,
Clouding those eyes, those eyes, whence Love takes darts.

Enter Theramnes, with a Letter. There. This Letter your perusal asks.

Phed. -- From whom
Do you, Theramnes, in Embassage come?

There. My message, Madam, you will find writ there,
Both in the Subject, and the Character.
[Exit.
[ Phedima opens the Letter, and reads to her self, and seems disordered.
Orind. What strange disorders in her looks arise?
How she casts darts of fury from her eyes?

Phed. Shame and confusion has so filled my breast,
That I want patience to read out the rest.
Sister, do you proceed, look, and see there,
What you will blush to read, and I to hear.

Orinda reads the Letter. Theramnes, to the Constant Phedima.
SInce our mutual Vows of Love have raised me to a pitch above hope or fear, to
such an assurance of your affection, that I find the greatest Monarch in the
World cannot supplant me in your esteem, nor raise his Love on the ruins of
mine; You then, who have given my passion life, have given it also confidence
to request the speedy crowning of our desires, to avoid the trouble of more
numerous Rivals, which your Beauty cannot but daily add to your former
Conquests. But since the immediate service of my King will not permit me as yet
to wait upon you, be pleased to send me an Answer, but such an one (as I doubt
not but you will) as shall proclaim me, as I am, your most faithful, so your
most happy adorer,

Theramnes.

Phed. Proud Traitor to my Honor and his own:
His confidence swells to a height unknown,
To dare --

Orind. Why? Sister, Lovers dare do more.

Phed. Lovers! why? did he ever speak before?
Or utter the least syllable, or word,
TO express I was the object he adored?
Contracts, and promises, which I have given?
Per^idious Liar both to Me and Heaven!

Orind. But perhaps he your kindness has mistook;
For Lovers track their Fates in every look
Their Ladies do impart; and every glance
Does to an unknown height their hopes advance.
The Languages of Ladies smiles suffice
For Lovers to read contracts in their eyes.
Did you never smile, or some kind favors show?

Phed. Yes, what my Friendship did oblige me to.
But could his proud thoughts so ambitious prove,
To dare to think my Friendship was my Love?
No, Traitor, no. Theramnes, you shall find,
Choosing a Mistress, you have lost a Friend.
But that which my disdain and anger moves,
Is not so much because Theramnes Loves:
The effects of Beauty Beauty can forgive:
And we can pity those we cannot relieve.
But that which merits my just scorn, is this;
That he should think my Conquest easy is*
Whilst in this Letter which you now have read,
He does for Triumph, not for Conquest plead.
As if a Ladies breast no courage held;
But our ^ame souls were only taught to yield.

Orind. Your furious anger too much freedom finds,
Silence becomes the passions of great minds.

Phed. Sister, I Have done. Auretta, go and burn
This Letter. Thus I Will Triumph in my scorn.

Auretta. Condemned to the fire! That Sentence which you give,
[Aside. Too cruel is, I Will grant it a reprieve.

[Exit Auretta, with the Letter. Phed. But seeing he an answer does require,
I Will be so kind, I Will grant him his desire:
But such an answer as shall make it known
I understand his merits, and my own.

[Ex^unt. Scena quinta. Scene, a Pavilion Royal.
Enter Cambyses, and Prexaspes: Camb. -- Enough -- I am convinced of Smerdis
Fate.
It Is well my blood does not disturb my State.
How sits the Cloud upon Mandana's brow?

Prex. She does no time but to her tears allow.

Camb. Marble sheds tears, but cannot softer grow*
Her heart's still hard, and ever will be so.
You said you for her griefs a cure designed.

Prex. Sir, to divert these troubles from her mind,
I have designed, after a Martial dance,
A masque of Captive Princes shall advance,
Adorned with Chains, and Coroners of gold:
Seated upon whose necks you shall behold
A Prince Triumphant, decked with Martial spoils,
Amidst your Trophies, and great Cyrus toyls.
Hid in the Trophies of this Pageant King
An Eagle on the sudden shall take wing,
A Crown fixed to her Talons. As she flies,
And hovering mounts still nearer to the Skies;
When at the utmost height she finds her Chain
Does her intended Liberty restrain;
Her Fetters shall her towering flight recall,
Forced down, she at Mandana's feet shall fall,
And there depose her Crown.

Camb. -- Conduct her in,
And let this glorious Scene of Love begin.
[ Exit Prex. Thus I Will describe my passion. Love sounds best,
Like ^racles in Mysteries expressed.

Enter Prexaspes and Mandana. The King and Mandana seated, a Martial Dance is
performed; the Dance ended, the Scene opens, and the Masque is represented; at
which Mandana rises, and offers to go out: at which Cambyses follows her, and
the Scene shuts. Camb. Stay, cruel Princess, stay. Are your fair eyes
Afraid to look on their own Victories?
Or, are you startled at your own great power,
To see your Slave in the Worlds Conqueror?
Who from your influence does his greatness take,
And Conquers only for Mandana's sake.

Mand. O Fatal Beauty! was it Mandana's eyes
That made you win her Crown, and Sacrifice
Her Fathers blood?

Camb. -- Your losses I Will restore,
With Crowns more bright than Amasis e're wore.

Mand. No, Tyrant know, my soul's not sunk so fa^,
To stoop to my great Fathers Murderer.
Have I my self no better understood,
Then thus to found my greatness on his blood?
Your proffered Crowns cannot my thoughts control,
You have subdued my Empire, not my soul.

Camb. Madam, how dare you thus provoke his hate
Who Is the disposer of your Crown, and Fate?

Mand. Ay, Sir, you of my Life and Throne dispose;
And those are trifles I could wish to lose.
But know, proud King, my Virtue I Will secure:
My Honor is above a Tyrant's power.
[Exit.
Camb. Captive, farewell* Since you so stubborn prove,
I will take care you shall be taught to Love.
A gust of passion has uncalm'd my soul;
My blood does with a livelier motion roll.
A fierce assault my drowsy soul does storm;
And bids my Love wear a more manly form.
My Reason now shall my blind passion guide;
I Will be a Vassal to her Eyes, not Pride.
Since then my mildness could not win a smile,
I Will learn to court her in a rougher style.
Enter O^anes, Darius, and Artaban. My laboring thoughts must now make truce.
My Lords,
Will there be an employment for our Swords?
How strong's their Garrison, how great their Force?

Otan. Their number, Sir, is fifty thousand Horse:
And twice that number is their Infantrie.

Camb. Then they are fit to be overcome by me.
You then must know from whence this War does spring,
And who would be my Brother, and your King.

Dar. Who, but your Brother, durst your seat supply?
A baser blood could never have thoughts so high.

Camb. You are mistaken, Sir, he wears no Crown,
Unless that some kind god has lent him one.
Smerdis is dead.

Otan. -- How dead? And by whose hand?

Camb. It was by his, and 'twas by my command.

[Points to Prex. Otan. Then the War's done; you have robbed us of our Foe.

Camb. Ay, Sir, of him I robbed you long ago:
It Is not my Brother that does wear my Crown.

Artab. Your Brother dead, yet Smerdis in your Throne?

Dar. Who then is he dares that high Title claim,
Usurping both your Empire, and his name?

Camb. False Patasithes, whom I raised above
Either my Subjects Envy, or their Love,
Has in requital robbed me of that Throne
Under whose luster he so bright was grown.
Thus the Moons kindness does the Suns requite,
Eclipsing him from whom she takes her light.
His Kinsman Smerdis he does subtly bring
To represent my Brother, and your King.
Enter to them, Smerdis, disguised. What Is he that to our Presence does intrude?

Smerd. Sir, it is my Loyalty that makes me rude.

Prex. It Is he, Great Sir, who in our cause does join,
The chiefest Agent in our Grand design.

Camb. And do you know that Smerdis, Sir, that would
Lay claim both to my Empire, and my blood?

Smerd. Dread Sir, to me he is so near allied,
He from my breast cannot his secrets hide.

Camb. But are you sure he is your trusty Friend?

[ To Prex. Prex. As sure as all the ties on Earth can bind.

Smerd. On this, great King, we have founded our design*
The charge of Susa's Western Gate is mine.
And that which to our safety does conduce,
You know the cons'quence of a lazy Truce.
Truces which seem but Martial Masks, and are
The Crimes of Peace dressed in the garb of War.
Know then, during this Truce, his Forces be
Armed only for their ease and Luxury*
You then this Night shall with your Army wait;
I Will give you entrance at the Western Gate.
Then on the East I Will give a false Alarm,
That e're his Party shall have time to Arm,
You shall have forced your Passage, won the Town,
Seized the Usurper, and regained your Crown.

Camb. Well, I Will this Night, advancing in their head,
To Susa my Triumphant Forces lead:
None but my Sword my quarrel should decide.

Dar. Conquest and you, Sir, ever were allied.
But, Sir, the breach of Truce a stain will be
To the bright glory of your Victory:
'Twill an Eclipse to your great Fame produce.

Camb. Why, Sir, was it not I that made the Truce?

Dar. It was.

Camb. Then what I made I may destroy:
In this design you must your Swords employ.

Dar. When you command, the cause we do not weigh.
You Have taught our Swords to Conquer, and obey.

Camb. See that our entrance be with care prepared.
[ To Smerd. We shall not want success, nor you reward.

[ Exit Cambyses, Otanes, Darius, and Artaban* Smerd. Naught but his death
shall for reward suffice;
For when he enters Susa's Walls, he dies.
It Is the last Conquest that his Sword shall have,
To win that ground on which he makes his Grave.
Brave Friend.

Prex. His death shall make our Friendship good*
No ties so strong as what are writ in blood.

[Exeunt* Finis Act* secundi.
Actus tertius.
Scena prima. Scene, The Palace:
Enter Smerdis, Patasithes, and Captain of the Guards. Capt. THe Guards are
set, the Ambuscado laid.

Pat. All preparations for the deed are made.

Smerd. You know your charge in this design, go wait,
And give him entrance at the Western Gate.

[Ex^unt Pa^asithes, and Capt. Enter Theramnes, with a Letter. There. Great Sir,
your Royal pleasure is obeyed:
Your Letter I with my own hand conveyed.
And this, I guess, her answer does declare:
For though it does no superscription bear,
From hence it is yours I do the more presume,
Your Titles being too large for so small room.

Smerd. Yes, they are large --
When they beyond the name of King extend,
To that more glorious Title of your Friend.
[Embraces him* You know your charge, Sir, in this Nights design.

There. Rivals in Empire cannot together shine.
This Night Cambyses dies. Whilst Smerdis is
Crowned for our King, he for our Sacrifice.
[Exit.
Smerd. Now, if I find he does her Love enjoy,
[Opening the Letter. Her kindness then her Lover shall destroy.
I know his courage, and I will take care
In this Nights cause he shall engage so far,
To meet his Death. It Is a small Crime, to prove
False to my Friendship, to promote my Love.
Reads the Letter. Phedima, to Theramnes.
PRoud Traitor, since your confidence has raised yo^ to a pitch above fear or
shame, to dare to profane my eyes with such a scrowl of Blasphemies, in taxing
Phedima of a Contract to Theramnes; Since your guilty passion has made this
your first address, know, that you have raised your Love on the ruins of your
Friendship; and that your guilt may be your punishment, may you Love still, and
to that height, that I may triumph in my scorn, and make my cruelty able to
give deeper wounds than my eyes: Love, and despair. But since your eternal
Banishment can only give a stop to all future Crimes of this Nature, never
dare to see me more.




This does dissolve my fears. These lines do show
Smerdis is happy now, but cruel too;
To be thus jealous of so brave a Friend.
But since I did against Friendships Laws offend,
I Will Act such things as shall my fault redeem;
Kings can both Act and expia^e a Crime.
And though Theramnes Friend did the offense,
Theramnes King that Crime will recompense.
[Exit.
Scena secunda. Scene, the Camp.
Enter Darius, and Osiris. Dar. During this Truce we will to Susa go
To pay a debt I to my Princess owe.
Two Sovereigns, young Prince, have each their part,
The King my hand, and Phedima my Heart.
But, Sir, your Friendship shares part in my Breast:
I cannot give y' all, but trust you with the rest.
This Visit too is not alone designed
TO a Mistress, but your second self, a Friend.

Osir. My Rival, Sir, name him, what Friend is he?

Dar. I am unknown to him, and he to me,
Strangers to each.

Osir. -- This is a Riddle too;
A Friend, and one you never saw, nor knew.

Dar. But, Sir, I am no stranger to his Fame:
Theramnes's Virtues do my Friendship claim.

Osir. But whence arise this mystic sympathy?

Dar. 'Twas Phedima's fair hand that made this tie.
His worth, his deeds, his service she commends:
That 'twere unjust we should be less than Friends.
She gives him such a glorious Character,
That being his Friend, I do but second her.
And then her Letters tell me, how that she
Has given him such a Character of me,
That he already is impatient grown,
Till both of us are to each other known.

Osir. Friendship a stranger progress never made,
That by a Mediator is conveyed,
You court Theramnes's Love, a Friend unseen;
As Kings by Proxies Court a Foreign Queen.

Enter Messenger, who delivers Darius a Letter. Dar. From whence?

Mess. From Susa, Sir.

Dar. -- Then may it prove,
[Kisses the Letter* Some kind and happy Embassy of Love.

[Opens the outside Letter, and reads. Auretta, to her Lord Darius.
THe greatness of your generous favors, and the confidence you have been
pleased to place in me, has obliged me, having found this Letter escaped from
my Ladies hand, to present it to yours, as a token that I am still your most
faithful confident of your passion, and Advocate in your Love;

Auretta.

[Opens the enclosed, and reads. Theramnes, to the Constant Phedima. The
Prologue's strange -- but I Will suppress my doubt;
And stay my wonder, till I Have read it out.
[Reades to himself, and seems much disordered. Osir. What sudden change does
in his Face appear?
Such looks Darius brow never used to wear.
It must be something more than common blasts
Of Fortune can raise storms within his breast.

Dar. -- Your most faithful, and most happy adorer,
Theramnes. [Reads aloud. Are these the plagues of Love? Am I betrayed?
Has she a Contract with Theramnes made?
And can Heaven suffer it? Sir, if you dare
Ou^-face the worst of Treasons, read them there.
[Gives the Letter to Osiris. Try if your courage does not start to see
A more inhumane Barbarous cruelty,
Than Heaven, or Hell, -- Furies, or Fa^e, -- or all,
[Ragin^^^. But Woman can invent, -- but these are small,
And petty sportive Crimes in them, to prove
False, and disloyal to their Oaths, and Love.
Is this the Man she praised? Is Love so blind,
I could not see my Rival in her Friend?

Osir. She does your merits wrong. But it is the Fate
[Having read the Le^^^ Of Lovers, Sir, to be unfortunate.

Dar. But since Darius such hard fortune bea^s,
I will outdo the malice of my stars.
I Will be more cruel than my Fate, I Will make
My just revenge my injured cause partake.
Revenge the only pleasure of despair:
Him from her breast, or her from his I Will tear.
I Will end my wrongs by his or my own Fate;
Losing her Love, I will deserve her hate.
His blood, or mine, my fury shall a^one:
I Will cause his fall, or crush him with my own.

[Exeunt. Scena tertia. Scene, a private Walk*
Enter Phedima, and Orinda. Phed. Theramnes sure durst not commit a Fact,
Should forfeit all his Honor in one Act.
The Virtues of his breast so numerous were,
He could not in one moment raze out all;
Great Virtues, like great Empires, ruined are,
They by degrees must sink, before they fall.
To dare to write that which he needs must know
Was false, and I must needs resent it so.

Orind. No more -- I see Theramnes walk this way.

Phed. Then, to resolve my doubt, Orinda stay,
And tax him of his Love, and by degrees
Search out the grounds of his late injuries;
And sound his heart, and how he does resent
My Cruelty, and his late banishment.

Exit Phedima, within the Scenes, to over-hear them* Enter Theramnes. Orind.
^heramnes, let me but one question move.

There. Your pleasure, Madam.

Orind. -- Did you ever Love?

There. What does she mean! that she whom I adore
Should ask me that I never durst speak before*
Assist me, Courage, that I may but prove
So Valiant, as to tell her that I Love.

Aside. Orind. What, does your answer need so great a pause?

There. And can you doubt the effect, who are the cause?
How can you think that he who sees your eyes,
Can be exemptd from their Victories?
To doubt I love you your own power suspect:
From such bright charms who can his heart protect?
Strangers to Love must Strangers be to you:

O^ind. See how his confidence flatters me too.
But I perceive his Art, he by this pause
Seeks to divert me from my Sisters cause,
By forcing me to a blush on my own score,
Aside. That I may tax him in her name no more.
His guilt's so great, that he is ashamed to hear --
But shall --
-- Sir, these expressions needless are;
[to him. I know your Love.

There. -- What could my stars do more,
Then that Orinda knew my Love before?

[Aside Orind. Since you your self a Captive do confess*
Theramnes, then leave it to me to guess
Your Conqueror.

There. How cunningly she would my passion hear,
Yet seems ashamed that I should tell it her!
Aside. Well, in such language I Will my passion dress,
She shall not blush to hear what I Will express.

Orind. But of what date has this your passion been?

There. Since the first day I had my Conqu'rour seen.
In a deep silence, and as great a fear,
In vain I spent a long and tedious year.
And like that year now it is whole course is run,
There find my self where I at first begun:

Orind. And could your passion to this height advance,
And you not dare to give it utterance?

There. My passion, Madam, I could never disguise
So much, but she might read it in my eyes.
Beauties tha^ in our hearts nourish a fire,
Like to the gods that do those flames inspire*
Their Servants silence seldom do mistake,
But know their wishes, though they never speak*
Thus I have uttered it.

Orind. -- And only thus?

There. Perhaps some few sighs an escape have made:
But those I chec^t as too ambitious,
^earing they had my high-plac'd Love betrayed.

Orind. Did you never write to her whom you adored?

There. My passion never such courage could afford.
I never did, nor durst.

Orind. -- Falseman, I saw
That Letter which you wrote to Phedima.
Where you so boldly did your Love defend,
And to he^ heart so great a right pretend,
As if you there had been so long a guest,
That nothing could remove you from her breast.

There. What does she mean? Unless she jealous be
I Love elsewhere, and tryes my constancy.
Aside. If it be so, how can I happier prove?
For where there is jealousy, there must be Love.

Orind. Speak, did you not presume to tell her, how
You claimed her Love by Contract, and by Vow?
Can you deny't? or think I never saw,
Theramnes to the Constant Phedima?
Did I not see it by your own hand conveyed?

There. Too late I find I Am by my King betrayed.
[Aside. 'Twas from another hand that Letter came:
[To her. I neither the Author, nor the Subject am.

Orind. False man, did it not bear your name, and ca^
Your confidence deny you are the man?

There. O pardon me, if Arguments I want
To clear my self of what I Am ignorant,
As well as innocent. That I may prove
I never aspired to your fair Sisters Love:
Nor ever could, nor durst; let this suffice,
I owe my Conquest to Orinda's eyes.

Orind. Oh, now I find -- this answer merits more
Than all your rudeness on my Sisters score.
Since thus your guilt too must extend to me,
Know, I can frown, and scorn, as well as she.

[Proffers to go out. There. Stay, cruel, stay, and frown again, so fair
A Beauty charms even in her frowns does wear.

Orind. Since your Audacious folly's grown so great,
Yes, I will stay; but only to repeat
That sentence which my Sister gave before,
Theramnes, never dare to see me more.
[Exit.
There. Condemned never to see Orinda more!
And am ^ banished on my Princes score?
To which of these two shall I faithful be,
Thus streighten'd betwixt Love and Loyalty?
For there I to my King have silence sworn,
Performing which I gain my Mistress's scorn.
On the other side, should I, in my defense,
Accuse my King, and prove my innocence:
Should^ disclose by whom those lines were writ;
And by mine, my Kings Treachery requite:
On this side then Theramnes would but prove
False to his Honor, to promote his Love.
But I Will be true to both, and act such things,
As shall express that I can outdo Kings.
[Exit.
Enter Phedima, and Orinda. Phed. Sister, his Conquest to your eyes is due:
And Loving you he cannot Love me too.

Enter two Villains, unespied by Phedima, and Orinda. 1. Vil. We are to seize
the Princess Phedima:
And she has took a private Walk this way.

2. Vil. And Patasithes gave us charge, that we
Should take the safest opportunity.

1. Vil. Oh, here is the prize; let us seize'em,

2. Vil. -- Stay, I Will go,
And see first if the Coast be clear, or no;
Lest by some sudden rescue they escape.
[Exit second Vil.
1. Vil. They Are object's more for pity, than a rape.
Had not our Patrons bounty made us bold,
Beauty wants power when we are first charmed with gold.

Ph^d. Denying that he writ it, does express
He has no hopes in it, nor expects success.
Then, Sister, the design must only be
A deed of malice in affront to me. --
But that he scorns. No, it is some counterfeit,
And by some other envious hand 'twas writ.

Enter again, the second Villain. 2. Vil. I Have viewed around, and I can only
spy
One man within the prospect of my eye.

1. Vil. One single man shall not disturb our prize,
For if he chance to come this way, he dies.
[They rush, and seize the Ladies. Both Ladies, Help, help. Inhumane Ravishers.

Enter Theramnes. There. What sudden cry's this that invades my ears?
Ha! Ravishers! and my Orinda too!
My Sword must plead what my Love could not do.
Draws. Unhand'em, Villains. Beauty never is
Ordained for such a rude embrace as this.
Unhand'em, or you dye.

1. Vil. -- That you shall do:
Our Swords shall act that kindness, Sir, for you.

[Both Villains dra^ upon him. [The Ladies step in between them, to part them*
Phed. Hold, Villains, Hold.

There. Give me leave.
My Title their base number does surpass;
I need no other Second, but your cause.

[Puts the Ladies by, and fights* [ Phedima and Orinda run out, crying, help.
Enter to them fighting, Darius. Dar. Since Honor does to the weakest part
incline,
Against such odds it makes the Quarrel mine.
Draws, and fights on Theramnes's side; the two Villains are worsted. Give them
their Lives.

1. Vil. -- We scorn a base Repri^ve:
We Will either Conquered dye, or Conqu'rours live.

[Fights on, two Villains fall. There. It Is your assistance has the glory won,
Your generous aid, Sir, has my Sword outdone.

Dar. I Am happy in performing Honors Laws,
But shall be happier when I know the Cause.

There. 'Twas in two Ladies Quarrels that I drew
That Sword that is now made fortunate by you.
Beauties, whose pow'^ful infl'ence is so great,
To guide our Swords, we could not but defeat
An Army in their Cause,

Dar. Know you their Name?

There. Strangers to that, are Strangers too to Fame.
Phedima, and Orinda.

Dar. Ha! in their cause!

There. -- Fortune could never afford
A cause more Noble to Theramnes's Sword.

Dar. Theramnes! Oye gods! Thanks to my Fa^e.
[Aside. That at this hour has made me for^unate.

There. The happiest chance that our kind stars could send,
That we their Lives and Honors should defend.

Dar. In their defense you have your courage shown,
But you will show it better in your own.

[(...). There. This strange assault I cannot understand.

Dar. My meaning's legible -- here in my hand.

There. That Language is too hard to b'understood.

Dar. It will be plainer when it is writ in blood.
Draw, Traitor.

There. -- First, you will give me leave to know
From what strange ^oot this sudden rage does grow.

Dar. Your parky does but my Revenge delay.

There. Then take your Conquest this more humble way.
Pr^ffers his Sword. For Honor holds my hand from a design
Against his Li^e who bravely gave me mine.

Dar. Honor a Refuge for your fear procures.
That debt you owe my Sword, pay it with yours.

There. Such a rude payment --

Dar. -- Such a weak pretense
Serves but to yield a Coward a defense.

There. My patience cannot to that name submit,
I Am sorry you must have the proofs of it.

Both fight. Theramnes dr^ws off from Darius in fighting, and offers to speak.
There. Sir, do but hear --

Dar. -- Must you a parley make,
Thus to take breath, when it is the last you will take?

[Fights on, and gives Theramnes a mortal wo^nd. Enter to them fighting,
Osiris, Phedima, and Orinda. Phed. What new assault is this?

Os^r. -- Darius, hold.
Your fury' against this Stranger is too bold.

There. Darius!
The only man on Earth whom I designed
To be my Friend, my Murderer I find.

[Aside* Phed. Darius!
What Fatal cause enraged you to this strife,
To use your Sword' against my Protector's Life?

There. My Blood runs slow: Fate now Acts it is last part,
[Aside* And Deaths cold hand moves faintly over my heart.

Phed. I Am bound in Honor for that aid you lent.

There. That Bond you Cancel in the acknowledgment.

Phed. My freedom you releast, a gift so great,
That I must owe a Ransom, not a Debt.
[To There. But, Sir, what rage armed you to this bold deed,
[To Dar. Against Theramnes, whom the Fates decreed --

Dar. Against Theramnes whom you have decreed
Should in your Love too happily succeed.

Phed. Are these the gronds? Your jealousy remove,
He Is Rival to your Courage, not you^ Love.
His Valor 'twas that did my Honor guard,
Which your ^ude fury did but ill reward.
From these bold Ravishers, whose blood he spilt,
Points to the two Villains. Rescued my Life, and recompensed their guilt.

There. My lingering spirit^ do still faintly hault;
Death sure has laid a siege, not an assault.

[Aside. Dar. Since you mistake his Love, you shall not err,
^'le show you't in a plainer Character.
Have you forgot so soon since you first saw,
Theramnes to the constant Phedima?
Dare you read this?

[Gives her the Letter. Phed. What is it I dare not do?
[Looks upon the Letter. Has false Auretta then betrayed me too!
[Aside. This pamphlet I have seen, and read, and more --
But did Theramnes ever see'^ before?
Know you this hand?
[Gives the Letter to Theramnes. -- And do you know this Breast?
[To Dar. Suspicious man, dares your weak faith digest
Such base low thoughts of me, to dare to think
My Virtue can grow less, or Courage shrink?
Your Crime had been more venial, and less strange,
TO have thought my Beauty, then my soul could change?
Whatever I durst Act, I dare defend.

There. Is this the kindness of my King and Friend?
[Aside. It bears my Name, but not my Character.
[Throws away the Letter. My passion is not written there, -- but here.
[Points to his Breast. In Phedima's fair eyes such glories shine,
As may command all hearts to yield -- But mine*
But from her Charms I did my Breast defend:
And I am not your Rival, but your Friend.

Dar. And can you your own Name deny, and see
That Letter witness of your perjnr^e?

There. That Letter, Sir, is forged and counter^eit.

Dar. By whom?

There. You must not know by whom it is writ.

Dar. Then will ^ force --

There. -- You shall not, Sir, nor must
I break my promise, nor betray my trust.
Since Honor does my sec^ecy enjoin,
Rather than break my Vow, I Will own it mine.

Dar. Then will I force that breath to be your last.

^ There. That Fatal sentence is already past.
Dispute no more of that forged Character:
But what your Valor, Sir, has writ, read here.
[Points to his wounds. Yet though your Sword has made my blood ebb low,
My courage still to the same height do flow.
And still my breast is large enough t'afford
Room for your Friendship, as it did your Sword.
No more your groundless jealousies pursue;
My Conquest to Orinda's eyes is due.
But I want breath, not words, for my defense,
To prove Theramnes's injured innocence.
Yet if I win your Friendship, I cannot call
This my defeat, who conquer when I fall.
[Falls. And may Theramnes now so happy prove,
Who in his life could not deserve your Love,
To win Orinda's pity when he dies,
[ To Orind. In Life your Slave, in Death your Sacrifice.

[Faints away, as dead. Phed. Now see what your mistaken rage has done,
And Triumph at the Conquest you have won.
Look there, and tremble, if you have a sense
Of horror equal to his innocence.

Dar. He Is gone! too late thy innocence appears:
The current of my rage now turns to tears.
Osiris, run, call all the help that is near,
Whilst I my helpless griefs echo to the Air.
[Exit O^iris. Yet the kind gods have not placed Heaven so high,
But that our sighs and prayers may mount the Sky.
Was this the only way to reach his heart,
Where he too generously gave me part?
Could I thy Innocence no sooner find?
Is cruel Jealousy, like Love, too blind?
Enter Osiris, with Attendants, who take up the Body of Theramnes. Thy blood by
my unhappy hand was spilt,
Love, like Religion, in the excess grows guilt.
Thus Love turns Jealousy when too sublime:
As Superstition is Devotion's Crime.
Use all the Arts that may restore his breath,
To Osiris, and the Attendants, who carry off Theramnes. Or beg, at least, one
hour's reprieve of Death,
That ^ to his parting soul in tears may tell
My griefs, and take my long and last farewell.
[Exeunt Osiris, and Attendants. But hold, one debt more to his Virtue's due:
Osiris, stay -- with my dead Friend I Will go --
To the other World -- thus -- thus.

[Goes to fall upon his Sword. Phed. -- You are too bold:
Hold your rude hands.

[Stays him. Dar. -- And does she bid me hold?

Phed. Yes, Sir, she does; she dares not see you dye.

Dar. Your kindness then recalls my destiny.

[Passionately. Phed. Darius, live --
-- For by your hasty fall,
[Changing her voice. Your Death would be too mild, and pain too small.
Your blood would be too Prodigally spilt:
Live, only to be punished for your guilt.
O^, if the experiment of Death you would try,
It Is fit you know yor sentence, e're you dye.
Death is but half the rigor of your Fate,
Living you merit, dying, force my hate,
And fall unpitied. Now strike, if you dare;
Try if your courage equals your despair.
Then she whose kindness did your hand recall,
Will be more kind -- she will smile -- to see you fall.

Dar. Oh, now I dare not dye. A strange reprieve,
When cruelty has power to make me live.
Before, her kindness did recall the stroke,
And now her frowns my sentence do revoke.
Beauties have this prerogative alone,
Their power is equal, when they smile, or frown.
My guilt deserves the greatest punishment,
Tortures can yield, or Justice can invent.
And I could willingly endure the weight
Of all that I deserve, except your hate.

[ Orinda, whilst they have been spe^king, having casually taken up the Letter,
and viewed it, hastily brings it to her Sister. Orind. What Seal is this?

Phed. The Arms of Persia!
Know you that Seal?

[Gives the Letter to Darius. Dar. Till now, I never saw:
It was the Signet of the King.

Phed. -- This Seal
Does then Theramnes's Innocence reveal.
For, in your absence, Sir, the Persian King
To me has made his heart an Offering.
And had I broke my Vows to you, I Would been
No longer, Sir, your Mistress, but his Queen.
When I that Royal Present would not take,
He thought 'twas for some happy Rival's sake.
Knowing th'esteem ^ to Theramnes bore,
He judged my cruelty was on his score.
From thence, like you, his jealousy he took,
Whilst he our Friendship for our Love mistook;
Then forged that Letter in Theramnes's Name,
To trace our passion^, and disturb our flame.
Then judge, Sir, whether I inconstant prove,
Who for your sake reject a Monarch's Love:
Since you now see I am below a Throne,
And have refused the proffers of a Crown.

Dar. You have too much my burdened soul or'e^charg'd*
My guilt's too bad a theme to be enlarged.
But now I find my Crimes will have no end:
At once I Have wronged my Mistress, and my Friend.
But you have so much of Heaven, you can forgive*

[Kneels. Phed. Yes, Sir, I could, could but Theramnes live.

Dar. I with my tears will wash away my Crime:
With my loud sorrows I Will reach Heav'^ and Him,
I Will pay such Incense for my black offense,
(...) ^ take whiteness from his Innocence.

Phed. Darius, rise -- His Prayers, and Love's too strong*
And I am too kind to be cruel long.

Dar. Thus you repeat those Triumphs you have won,
Your mercy conquers as your eyes have done.

Phed. But see you pay such Honors to his Grave,
As may deserve that pardon which I gave.

Dar. Since prayers no^ tears cannot his Fate recall,
But so much Virtue by my hand must fall;
This to his dust is but a lawful debt,
Who shined in glory shall in glory set.
I will erect new Trophies to his Fame,
What from his Life I took, I Will pay his Name.

Orind. My grief with yours, as Rivals, shall contend:
[ To Phed. I have a Lover lost, you but a Friend.

Exeunt. Scena quarta.
Enter Prexaspes, and Mandana. Prex. Can you refuse Cambyses's Love, who would
To purchase yours wade to new Crowns in blood?
It Is strange that he cannot your heart subdue,
To whom the Conquest of the World is due.

Mand. Thy soul, and his, in this were Rivals still*
You never overcome, but when you kill.

Prex. But, Madam, what I read in those fair eyes --
Has poison in it. There Is something in that Form
[Aside. Disturbs my soul, and does my courage strom. --
Madam, your Beauty. -- Oh, turn it away.
Should ^ on that bright Object longer stay,
Lead by my wandering fires, I should my senses quit;
And lose my self by gazing after it. --
Madam --

[Continuing ^ith his eyes fixed upon her. Mand. Is not your Message yet expressed?

Prex. Your eyes will not give me leave to tell the rest.

Mand. I must confess his Love I would not hear:
Death's frowns I can, his smiles I cannot bear.
Prexaspes, name no more Cambyses's flame.

Prex. Then, Madam, I may tell him, in your name, --
I am his Rival. --
[Aside. Her subtle Darts have made my heart their Prize,
That sure my soul's transparent, as my eyes,
To let her Image in. --
But tell me, can your Breast so cruel prove,
To banish from your heart all thoughts of Love?

Mand. Now, my Osiris, I remember thee.

[Aside.] [Sighs. Prex. Her altered Visage wears a Mystery.
A broken sigh, joined with a fainting look!
Just so my Love its sudden birth first took.
Her Actions copy mine: sure my disease
Aside. Infectious is, and does new Subjects seize.
For the fame signs argue the same desires:
Perhaps she feels my pains, and meets my fires.
If so; Thanks to my Stars* Since nobly you
My heart have won, so nobly use it too.
What, start? You think it is Cambyses.

Mand. -- No.
Both thee, and thy inhumane deeds I know.
Could I but think, that Love could be a guest
To thy black soul, and harbor in thy breast;
The very name of Love 'twould odious make.

Prex. You must seem cruel for your honor's sake*
No more of this --

[Advancing up to her. Mand. -- Stand off. Your aim you miss.
What, stoop to him that Murdered Amasis?

Prex. That was Cambyses's fault.

Mand. -- No, Slave, thy hand,
Thy hand did Act what he did but command*

Prex. But his command did to your Life extend,
Which I did from his cruelty defend;
And 'twas my favor that you did not dye.

Mand. No, Barbarous Villain, 'twas thy cruelty.
Ye sacred Powers above what was my guilt,
That with my Fathers blood mine was not spilt?
My Death Heavens Fatal kindness did prevent;
Reserving me for greater punishment.

Prex. What, can it be a punishment to rest
In the Protection of a Prexaspes's Breast?
It cannot be, Mandana. Come, I see
You Have learnt the Female slights of Modesty.
[Advances up to her, and proffers to kiss her hand, at which she steps from
him. What, a retreat?
As it is in Natures Laws, so it is in Love;
The effect's the same if the Earth or Sun do move.
And so our Love the same effect procures,
If your heart move toward mine, or mine toward yours.
Come then --

[Rudely stepping to her* Mand. This Language, Sir, I cannot hear*
I can my Death, not thy addresses bear.
To thee Mandana's Breast thus kind can prove,
To entertain thy Sword, but not thy Love.
What, art thou slow, and do thou sluggish stand,
When beloved Murder does invite thy hand?

Prex. Captive, take heed lest you provoke my hate.
It Is but ill policy to tempt your Fate.
You trust my Love, and therefore you presume --
But, Madam, know your scorn has changed your doom.
Naught but your Love your ruin shall recall:
For they who once from my high favor fall,
Never leave sinking, till they reach their Graves.

Mand. 'Twixt Love and ^age, like meeting ^ides, he raves.
[Aside. That Death he threatens gladly I Would obey:
That Life I owe to Amasis, ^'de pay.
Yet Amasis --
Do but this fault (if it be one) forgive,
If for Osiris I could wish to live.

Enter Cambyses, who meets Prexaspes going off. Camb. Prexaspes, is Mandana yet
more kind?

Prex. I cannot meet her in so good a mind.

Camb. Since my late frowns and threa^ings could not move
Your Breast, I Will treat you with a milder Love.

[ To Mand. Prex. She thinks
I Am some tame Lover of the common sort,
Whom they use cruelly to make'em sport:
Aside. No, she shall find my Love does higher fly:
I Will either ^each her how to Love, or dye.
[Exit.
Camb. I of my frowns a Nobler use should make,
To awe the trembling World, make Empires quake,
And check Heavens Thunder. It Is not fit my brow,
^he terror of the World, should threaten you.
No, you shall find Cambyses, for your sake,
As mild and calm as Loves soft char^s can make.

Mand. Camb^ses, no; rage, and be cruel still:
Tyrants are only kind, then when they kill.
My Death's the only kindness you can do:
My life I hate, since it is preserved by you.

Camb. Hold: You're ungrateful* Though you have (...),
Thus, thus Cambyses will your favor win.
You shall enjoy Osiris -- Do not start:
It Is he alone that lodges in your heart.
To win your favor this brave deed I Will do;
Be cruel to my self, and kind to you.
Fame shall no longer to the World impart
That I want power to win a Ladies heart:
For since all other means succesless prove,
To gain your kindness I Will resign my Love.
^ to my Rival will with Honor yield;
As the retreating Parthians win the field.
Osiris, Madam, is for you decreed,
He is -- I, and the gods have so agreed.

Mand. Oh, now I fear --

Camb. Now for his Arms prepare*
Draw back that Curtain.
The Scene opens, and on a Table appears the Body of Osiris, beheaded; and an
Execution^^ with the supposed head in a vessel of blood. Take your Lover --
there.
Since you all lesser offerings despise,
Take there, take there your Beauty's sacrifice.

Mand. Osiris murdered! And can Heaven be
An idle gazer on his destiny?
Gods, can you suffer this; and yet lay claim
To this low'^ World? Or, is your Thunder tame,
To let the Tyrant live? Are not y' afraid,
Who here below all Virtue has betrayed,
When there is none left on Earth he may pursue,
The next blow he intends will be at you?
Oh, no, this stroke by your consent was given,
To rob the World, to add new Stars to Heaven.
[Weeps. O Tyrant -- Tyrant is a name too good
For him whose soul's so deeply stained in blood.
Inhumane Murderer, had you learnt the sense
Of Virtue from Osiris's Innocence;
Or borrowed so much blushes from his blood,
You had not robbed the World of all that is good.
But, Sir, I hope you don't this Virtue want,
[Sinking her voice* But what you're pleased to promise you will grant.
You promised that Mandana should this day
Enjoy Osiris.

Camb. -- Ay, and so you may.

Mand. Tyrant, why then does not Mandana fall,
To mix her blood with his?

Camb. -- Madam, you shall.
Unless you instantly resolve to prove
More just to the great Persian Monarch's Love.

Ma^d. I Will do more than Love, let but your breath
Pronounce my Fate, I Will thank you for my death:
And I^le embrace it too as your kind gift,
And the only happiness on Earth, -- that is left.
[Weeps. Come, in my Death let me your favor find --
What, must Mandana court you to be kind?
[Raising her Voice* I do conjure you strike, by all your guilt,
Your cruelties, the blood your Rage has spilt;
By all that sacred debt of Love I owe
Osiris, nay, and more, my Hate to you.
What, are the furies vanish^ from your soul?
What sudden tameness does your arm control?
Or is your fierceness calmed, your rage subdued,
Stifled with Murders, and or'e-cloy'd with blood?
My Virtues are not ripe enough to afford
A Subject for a bloody Tyrant's Sword.

[Weeps. Camb. Since Death would such a signal favor be,
You shall wait longer for your destiny.
Monarchs should not their favors rashly place,
But --
Consider e're they pass their Acts of Grace.
No, you shall live, and live till you have known
The infl'ence of an angry Monarch's frown.
Your tears shall otherwise b' employed, to mourn,
That your Pride durst Cambyses's favor scorn.
[Exit.
Mand. I dare not look (my soul's so much amazed)
Where I before for ever could have gazed.
Oh, that I could but weep away my sight,
To share with Thee in an eternal Night.
Or, that I could but melt in tears away;
That when our rising Sun proclaims the day,
With Morning dew I by his Rays might be
Exhaled, and snatched up to his Heaven, and Thee
[Exit.
Finis Actus Tertii. The Curtain falls*
Actus quartus.
Scena prima.
The Scene drawn, Cambyses is discovered seated in a Chair sleeping: The Scene
representing a steep Rock, from the top of which descends a large Cloud, which
opening, appear various shapes of Spirits seated in form of a Council, to whom
a more glorious Spirit descends half way, seated on a Throne; at which, the
former Spirits rise and Dance: In the midst of the Dance arises a Woman with a
Dagger in her h^nd; at which the Scene shuts. In the time of this
Representation this Song is sung from within, as Supposed, by Spirits. YE
subtle Powers that rule below,
Only where ^orrour dwells,
Whose deep dark Cells
Admit no other light,
Then that by which you mortal Fates do write,
The events of all your knowledge does foreknow.
The Prince of Fate's already set,
That Prince who does in Constellations write
Those glorious Characters of light,
The destinies of all that is great.
Chorus. To council then, to council strait,
With all your Ministers of State,
TO attend the ^igh decrees of Fate.
[ Cambyses rises from his Chair, as newly waking, and seems disordered. Camb.
A Fatal Dagger, and a Woman's hand!

Enter to him, Prexaspes. Prex. This Night, great Sir, your Presence does
demand.
It Is now the appointed hour, your Forces wait
To gain admission at the Western Gate. --
Sir, you forget your self; one moments stay
Hazards your Crown, and loses you the day.

Camb. Tell me no more of hazards, nor of Crowns. --
Cambyses threatened by a Woman's frowns!

Prex. Remember, Sir, your Honor it is does call,
Your Empire's safety, and the Impostor's fall.
And now is the time. What, can you tardy be
To wait on Triumph?

Camb. -- Let Triumph wait on me.
I will not go.

Prex. -- Not go! what powerful cause
Can force your courage to retreat, or pause!
Or can you leisure rof debate afford,
When Conquest, and revenge invites your Sword?

Camb. No, I shall meet my Fate; but thanks to Heaven,
My Friends above have timely notice given.

Prex. Ha! meet his Fate! He dreams of Treason too:
Some superstitious god has told him so.
[aside. Can you fear dangers, or can dangers be
An envious Cloud 'twixt you, and Victory?
Or is the power of Heaven so dreadful grown,
That fearing that, you can forget your own?
No, Sir, you must this glorious deed fulfill:
Let gods be gods, you are Cambyses still.
Since you are with Prophetic thoughts possessed:
Seeing Cambyses make no answer, he proceeds. What mystic fears have thus
disturbed your breast?

Camb. My laboring fancy lead me to the brow
Of a steep Rock, that shaded all below.
From thence I saw a low-hung Cloud appear,
Swollen big with mists, and loaded with the Air:
Which with ingender'd Tempests seemed to roar;
Reeled, sunk, and staggered with the weight it bore.
A numerous issue from its bowels flew;
Whilst the Cloud broke, and melted to a dew:
In which the wanton Spirits bathed and played,
And greedily upon their Mother preyed.
Then from above --
I saw the Prince of Fates his Arm display:
Lightning and Thunder ushered in his way.
His Scepter moved, bowed his Imperial head;
The lower Fates with Reverence obeyed.
Their Volumns instantly were brought, and He
Opening the Fatal Legend, pitched on Me.
Then, in the Council a dispute did grow,
Whether Cambyses mortal were, or no.
But they in vain their arguments did bring,
The Prince of Fates said, No; I was a King.
Straight in the midst I saw a Woman stand,
Grasping a bloody Dagger in her hand.
She by her looks their Sentence did condemn;
And by her posture threatened Me, and Them.
Then, as I waked, methought, I saw the dart
Snatched from her hand, and levelled at my heart.

Prex. And can a dream Cambyses's spirits daunt,
Riddles as dark as are the Nights they haunt?
Your groundless jealousies unjust appear;
Thus greatest Valors smallest dangers fear,
As Lions tremble at a spark of fire;
Shall it be said, Cambyses did retire,
Or shrink from that brave cause he should maintain?
Dreams are but the unshap'd Monsters of the brain.
And Monster-like should only be abhorred:
No more delays, you must employ your Sword.

Camb. Urge me no more.
Should I to Susa go, Fate has designed
I from a Woman's hand my death should find.
Are these your stratagems? you had forgot
To keep your projects close, I Will spoil your plot.
My Power has over their policy this odds;
I Will stay at home, and disappoint the gods.
I Will baffle your Divinity. And since
They have resolved it, I'lemy Stars convince.
Their borrowed infl'e^ce common Fates may sway:
Cambyses has a greater power than they.
Stars are like Galley-slaves, chained to a sphere,
And Subject-like only Heavens Vassals are,
To move by Laws, act what th'higher power decrees:
I can move where I will, act what I please.
Cambyses rules Cambyses's destiny:
Nor am I taught how to obey, or dye:
Prexaspes, see Mandana hither brought:
I Will by my Love divert this sullen thought.

Prex. And must a Dream his Sanctuary be,
Protected by this Ridling Prophecy?
No, though his stay has my designs overthrown:
I Will take his Life, though I expose my own.

[Aside.] [Exit. Camb. Though they have thus foretold my destiny,
Perhaps my Stars have dreamt as well as I.
[ Prexaspes enters with Mandana, and Exit. Mandana, you have my resolution heard;
The choice is easy, speak, are you prepared
To be my Mistress, or my Sacrifice?

Mand. When it is your Royal pleasure, Sir, she dies.

Camb. No, no, I will a milder sentence give:
It is my Royal pleasure you should live;
And live in my embraces too.

Mand. In his --
In his embrace that murdered Amasis!
And more, that bloody Tyrant that decreed
Osiris's cruel Fate; that barbarous deed,
A deed enough to infect the breath of Fame:
At which thy lesser treasons lose their name.

Cam^. And am I dallied with? your doom is sealed:
cambyses's sentence cannot be repealed,
Prepare to Love or dye; choose, and be free,
My speedy kindness, or my cruelty.

Mand. Your cruelty my courage cannot bear,
Mandana then will in your kindness share.
I blush to say I offer up my heart;
But yet obedience is a Captives part.

[Passionately* Camb. Welcome kind Princess: All the powers above
Shall envy at your kindness, and my Love.
If there by any powers above my own,
For they that call 'emselves the gods, have none.
For if they had --
They had not to mankind this favor given,
To Enjoy a blessing greater than their Heaven.
We Princes to our selves our greatness owe;
They are but Kings above, we gods below.
Now you are kind.

Mand. And why are not you so?

Camb. Can you my kindness doubt? no, you shall find
It Is you alone have taught me to be kind.
With the next Sun you shall your Reign begin;
To morrow you shall be proclaimed my Queen.

Mand. No, Sir, that is not all --

Camb. -- Oh, it is not all.
Our Love does for a stricter kindness call.
The night, the night, Love's chief Triumphant hour,
When blushes over our pleasures have no power:
When Lovers Revel in each others arms,
Confining to one Circle all their charms;
To an embrace. This to your Beauty's due,
First, I will crown our Loves, and then crown you.

Mand. Oh, no, Sir, this is but a barren grant:
I still the crowning of my wishes want.
The favor I would have, is this -- to dye.
Raising her voice at the two last words. Tyrant, your Love's the greatest
Cruelty.
Cambyses, no, you do mistake my part;
It Is thus alone I Will offer up my heart;
Not to your lust, but Fury's Sacrifice.
Command my Death: then though your Sword denies,
On Earth, that Empire which my birth had given;
Mandana will commence her Reign in Heaven,
With my Osiris, in that glorious seat
Where Cruelty, and Tyrants never meet.

Camb. How, Captive, am I scorned, and scorned by you?
To show what injured Majesty can do,
Your death to this dispute an end shall bring,
I Will act no more your Lover, but your King.
Your Beauty shall no more my Arm control,
I Will find a nobler passage to your soul.

[Proffers to draw his Sword to kill her. Mand. Cambyses, hold! come, I will
milder be;
My kindness shall prevent your Cruelty.

[Kindly. Camb. Then use me thus no more, and you shall know
What Heaven and Monarchs when they are pleased can do.

Mand. Your Sword for nobler Actions is designed:
To you then, and my self I Will now be kind.
I Will rob you of my Death
[Draws her Dagger. -- Camybses, no,
[Raises her voice. Your Sword, Sir, shall not condescend so low,
To be a Woman's Executioner,
My hand alone that guilty stain shall bear.
Rather then let a King that guilt contract,
Mandana her own murd'rers part will Act.
In dying thus her kindness will be shown,
She Will save your honor, and defend her own.
Now Tyrant, dare to violate her fame,
To stain her Virtue, or to force her shame;
This, this, shall guard her from your injuries,
Pointing the Dagger t^ her own Breast. For when her Honor you attempt, she
dies.

Enter Prexaspes. Pr^x. Welcome this happy opportunity,
[Aside, Mandana, hold, you rob the World, and Me.
Runs to her, and snatches the Dagger from her hand. And to my Gracious
Sovereign I bring
This Present as a Subject's offering --
[Advancing to Cambyses, as if he designed to present him the dagger. Your
Death, proud Tyrant -- Dye, Cambyses, Dye,

[Stabs him. Camb. And by Prexaspes's hand!

[^roffering to resist, but si^ks into his chair. Prex. -- Yes, Sir, it is I.

Mand. Oh, Murderer! Help! Guards.

Prex. -- That will not do:
Madam, the Guards are safe, and so are you.

Camb. Ungrateful Traitor, must my glory be
Unravelled by so base a Slave as thee?
Did I for this my favors thus dispense,
And give thee being by my influence?

Prex. Ay, Sir, and 'twas from you I understood
This dextrous way of letting Monarch's Blood.

Camb. Oh, that I could but so much power recall,
As but to rise, and crush thee in my fall.
[Proffering to rise, but cannot. Or borrow so much kindness from my blood,
To swell so high to drown thee in a flood;
Oh, lad I so ^uch poison in my breath,
At once both to pronounce, and give thee death.
I would r^venge my wrongs -- but it is too late:
And Heaven it self is a Consederate.
I do forget 'twas by your wills decreed,
I by that Dagger, and that hand should bleed.
Bu^ since, ye gods, ye did my Fate proclaim,
And ravished from me both my Life, and Fame,
To let me tamely fall; may you pursue
That just revenge which is to murder due.
But if you fail to right my wrongs, and me,
May you want Temples, Altars, Flames, and be
From Homage and from Sacrifice debarred,
And, that which makes you gods, be never feared --
My passion with my blood now milder flows:
Your dying Prince for your last pardon sues:
[To Mand. sinking his voice. Now all your scorn and Cruelty must cease,
Death, that disarms my Love, concludes its peace.

[He dies. Mand. His unjust Fate has over my wrongs prevailed;
Farewell, dead Prince, death has thy pardon sealed:
Though thou were wicked, yet thou were a King.
But, Traitor, whence did thy black fury spring:
[To P^ex. Who in your Prince's blood your hands embrue?

Prex. Madam, His Death must copyed be by you.
Now is the time, proud Girl, in which I Will prove,
The just Revenger of my injured Love.
[Holding the Dagger toward her bre^st* Since you a greater Tyrant are than He,
It Is just that you should share his destiny.

Enter Otanes, Darius, and Artaban. Otan. It Is some strange cause our King thus
long has staid.

Prex. Returned so suddenly! ha! I Am betrayed.
Yet my Revenge I Will end. --

[Goes stab Mandana. Dar. -- Prexaspes, hold
[Stays him. What unshap'd fury makes your Arm thus bold?

Prex. The King, the King --

Dar. Otan. and Artab. Speak, what?

Prex. -- There murdered lies:
Oh, Fatal blow both to our hearts, and his.

[Weeps. Dar. and Otan. Cambyses Murdered!

Prex. -- Oh, inhumane deed,
For which all Persia, with our King, does bleed!
[Weep^* See here the Fatal Dagger, and see there
Mandana's hand, Cambyses's Murderer.
[Weeps again* Oh, horror! Envious Heaven!

Dar. -- Mandana's hand,
In our great Monarch's bloody Murder stained!

Mand. Perfidious Liar, must my innocence
Be thus abused, and made thy Crime's defense?
Ye gods!

Prex. What does she mean!
The dismal horror of a deed so soul,
Has raised so black a Cloud over her soul;
That she forgets the Royal blood she spilt,
Stifled and stupify'd with her own guilt.
What fury made you this black deed pursue,
[To Mandana* Against him that had no fault, -- but Loving you?
How could your hand --

[Weep^* Ma^d. How can your impudence
Accuse Mandana of your own offense?
Did not thy hand, thy hand, proud Traitor, give
That wound he from no other could receive?
None but thy hand that cursed deed durst do,
To shake all Persia at one Fatal blow.

Otan. Ha! this stange parley, and dispute does breed
More wonder then the strangeness of the deed.
Prexaspes, let the story then be told,
That may this cruel Mystery unfold.

Prex. Know then, my Lords, entering this fatal place,
I saw distraction painted in a Face
'Twixt guilt and horror; as I nearer drew,
By this faint light I straight Mandana knew.
I saw her in a trembling posture stand,
Grasping this bloody Dagger in her hand.
'Twas then, 'twas then my eyes the Night abho^'d,
The Night which did her guilty shades affor'd,
To that black deed, at which our rising Sun
Must blush to see what her bold hand has done.
[Weep^ Then from her hand I straight the Dagger snatched,
And soon a speedy Justice had dispatched;
But that your entrance did my Arm restrain;
And stay my zeal to my dead Sovereign.
[(...) Else I'ad performed the second Tragic part,
Righting his wrongs upon his Murd'rers heart.

Mand. Oh, perjured Slave! dare you tempt Heaven, and know
The gods and Justice have ^ Power below?
Thus to outface their vengeance? --

Prex. Ha! Was this murder then a bastard guilt,
To Father thus on me that blood she spilt?
But I forget, they who dare kill their King,
Want not the Face to dare say any thing.
Well, since I must my Loyalty dispute,
Let this, my Lords, all jealousies confute:

[Shews them the D^gg^^. Dar. Mandana's Dagger! Oh, prodigious Fate!

Otan. The sacred Relic of the Egyptian State,
Worn by Succession from their Kings of old:
Of which their Priests a wondrous rise have told;
Which their Religious Legends do pretend
God Ammon did to their first Monarch send;
Which since has by his Heirs been kept, to be
A Badge of the Egyptian Majesty.

Prex. What caused her rage is plainly understood;
The deep resentments of her Father's blood,
Her Slavery, and her lost Crown, and more,
The hate she to Cambyses's Passion bore.

Dar. Mandana --
Oh, ye gods, that men should be
So much mistaken in Divinity.
Who could have thought, that she who is adorned
With Divine Beauty, has a soul deformed?

Ot^n. Guards, there within.
Oh, Madam, have you so ill understood
The ties of Majesty, and your high blood?
To shed his blood, and thus profane your own;
Remembering you were born unto a Throne.
Enter Guards. But now forgive me, Madam, that I must
To our dead King, and to our Laws be just.
Impute my Rigor to my Loyalty,
That forces me to tell you, you must dye.

Mand. To show how gladly I accept that breath,
I Will rob you of the Sentence of my Death.
Guards, I Am your Prisoner. Conduct me straight.
There where Mandana may embrace her Fate:
Death is the only happiness I court.

Prex. The plot was well then, since she likes the sport.

[Aside* Mand. Osiris, now Fate has this favor given,
To let me dye, to visit thee, and Heaven.
Yet though the name of Death has made me proud,
When I am dead may Heaven remove the Cloud:
And may my better Stars restore my Fame
To its first whiteness, that my injured Name
May grow unsullied, as my Innocence.

Dar. And may kind Heaven forgive you your offense.
The mildness, Madam, of your Death shall show
What pity we to such perfections owe.
Conduct her safely there where she may be
[To the Guards. Debarred from nothing else but Liberty;
Until her Death your Office shall discharge.

Mand. Until her Death shall her freed soul enlarge,
I come, Osiris, and may some kind Star,
That smiles on Lovers, guide me to they sphere.
There our divided souls shall meet, and be
A part of the Celestial Harmony.

[Exit, lead out by Guards. Dar. The Fares are still malignant to the great:
They rise in glory, but in blood they set.

Exe^nt Artaban and Guards, bearing out Cambyses. Otan. The ashes of a King's
no common dust:
Nor is it fit their memories should rust.
It is not just Cambyses's wrongs should be
Idly recorded to Posterity.
Since the World needs his injuries must hear,
They shall be uttered in the voice of War.
His Empire's freedom, and the Impostor's fall,
Summons our courage, and to Arms does call.
But since his Brother by your hand did bleed;
[To Prex. Before we further in this cause proceed,
It Is just we first from you more fully know
When 'twas, and where you gave that Fatal blow.
Surpised!

[Prexaspes starts. Pr^x. It needs my wonder must create,
Never to know, and yet to Act his Fate.

Otan. Did you not hear it from our Kings own breath,
And yet are ignorant of Smerdis's death?

Prex. By all that is true, no more to me is known,
Then that he lives, and wears the Persian Crown.

Dar. Can we believe Cambyses would disclaim
His only Heir, that should preserve his Name?
Besides, it against Natures Laws would be
T'accuse himself of a false Cruelty.

Prex. The Laws of Nature, and the ^yes of blood,
Are things Cambyses never understood.
No, 'twas his Brother that he would destroy;
He envied him that Crown he did enjoy.
He then would have you that revenge pursue,
Which now Death will not give him leave to do.
Smerdis still lives -- but you a Wa^ must bring,
And out of Loyalty depose your King.
Take heed --

Otan. We know too well, Cambyses's breast
Was swayed by passion, and false Interest.
But could he before you and us declare,
You were his Brother Smerdis's Murderer?
If it were false, he could not but suspect,
To clear your self, you would his guilt detect.

Prex. Then, to convince you, I with shame confess
My Loyalty was great, and Virtue less.
To quench his thirst I blood too often have spilt,
The Confident and Actor of his guilt.
And he might think who blood for him had shed,
Would not refuse, barely to say, I did.
Thus he to assure you of his Brothers death,
Took this advantage to confirm your faith.
He knew --
Rather than any stain his fame should touch,
I would say any thing, who had done so much.

Otan. We are convinced --

Dar. Long may thy Brother live, and live to be
Heir to thy Conquests, but not Cruelty.

Prex. Prexaspos, well, by Treasons thou did grow,
They made thee great, and shall preserve thee so.

[Aside.] [Exe^nt. Scena Secunda. Scene, the Palace.
Enter Smerdis, and Patasithes* Smerd. Cambyses dead!
The Heavens themselves two Suns at once cannot bea^:
Not Earth below, two Monarchs in one Sphar,
Persia's too narrow both for him and me,
His glorie's shrunk, to give mine Liberty.

Pat. No doubt, it is to Prexaspes that you owe
Your Empire's safety in this happy blow.

Smerd. To him the deed, but to my self the cause:
State-interest binds stronger than State-laws.
With such high proffers I Have obliged his trust,
As can do more than make a Statesman just.
You know I Have promised him the Median Crown:
I give him Honors to secure my own.
We Monarchs to our selves our Fortunes owe:
Our Agents Act but what we bribe 'em to.
Poor Mortals thus may the Gods honor raise,
By building Temples to exalt their praise.
But it is the gods themselves that do afford
Those Mortals breath, by which they are adored.
Enter to them, Prexaspes. My best of Friends.

[ Embraces Prex. Prex. -- Next to Cambyses. He
Leaves you his Empire for a Legacy.
Knowing how weighty Crowns and Scepters are,
I Have been so kind to ease him of that care.
But, Sir, he did before his death convince
His Nobles, that you were not the true Prince.
But by such Art I did their Storm assuage,
That for the present I have calmed their Rage.
And in your cause such Arguments did bring,
That they believe you Brother to our King.
But, Sir, you know that Statesmens jealousy
Does only sleep, then when it seems to dye.
At each distaste, and every small mistake,
Their Jealousy when it is disturbed, will wake;
And then their fury will break forth to deeds:
You are not safe then whilst they wear their Heads.

Smerd. It Is not consistent with my Empire's good,
To stain my name with the chief Persian blood.

Pat. He by mild deeds must represent the King,
S^btl^ as Serpents, but without their sting.

Smerd. That Act would seem too cruel; the same Arts
That won 'em, must preserve my Subjects hearts.

Prex. To save your Honor then that deed I Will do.

Smerd. Name it, my safety shall depend on you.

Prex. Theramnes's late concealment gives you just
Suspicion of his Loyalty, and trust.
If then your pleasure would confer that grace,
To constitute me General in his place;
I will invite 'em to my Tent; and they
For the entertainment all their Heads shall pay.
Then to suppress all future Mutinies
That may from this Tyrannick Act arise,
Their Deaths I Will publish, and the cause proclaim,
Forging such heinous Treasons in their Name,
Persia shall do not less than think it just;
And to my Justice, as their Guardian, trust.

Smerd. But grant the Persians should not think it so;
But the Act condemn.

Prex. -- Do you condemn it too.
And if your Subjects murmur, or Rebel,
'Cause by my hand the Persian Princes fell;
Then instantly, to satisfy their rage,
And show you did not in my guilt engage,
Degrade me from my Office, and inflict
All punishments that may seem just and strict.
And I Will submit to the Sentence, thus you will seem
As far from the consent, as from the Crime.

Smerd. Well, your Commission shall be forthwith signed,
My Army's conduct to your charge resigned.

Prex. May Heaven success to Persia's Crown afford
Whilst you the Scepter bear --

Smerd. -- And you the Sword.

[Exeunt. Scena tertia. Scene changes to the Garden.
Enter Phedina, and Orinda. Phed. Sister, you now can by Experience prove
What lately you defied, the Power of Love.
It Is strange the dead Theramnes should obtain
That Conquest, whom alive you did disdain.
What rash Infection does your soul invade,
That you, who scorned him living, court his shade!
A Love like yours was never heard before:
TO embrace his Memory, and Name adore.

Orind. Sister, since I have all assaults withstood,
He by no common force my heart subdued.
Such glorious pains my Captive soul endures:
My Love's beyond such abject thoughts as yours.
Your humble passions court each fond desire,
And your Breasts tamely of themselves take fire.
You make your hearts too mean a Sacrifice,
Taking infection from your Lovers eyes.
He did more Nobly to my heart aspire:
He gave me fuel e're he gave me fire.
His Wounds, his Death, his Glory, and his Fame,
They moved my pity, and that raised my Flame.
Nay, of his Love he Nobler proofs has give^n:
When his late wounds had made him ripe for Heaven,
His dying breath, before his soul retired,
Bequeathed his Love to me, and then expired.
His dying breath his passion did proclaim:
Thus, Phoenix-like, expiring in a Flame.
Then it is but just that I should faithful be,
Thus to preserve so brave a Legacy.

Phed. But your affection is from hopes debarred:
When you can Love, and not expect reward.
Love's kindnesses are lent, not given; for when
There is no hopes to be repaid again,
It should expire. Dead Lovers bankrupt prove,
Death does exempt 'em from all debts of Love.

Orind. No, Love is seated in their souls, and they
With them their passions to the Skies convey.
For when kind Heaven does entertain their souls,
And to the sacred list of Stars enrowls,
In Heaven they pay those debts on Earth they owe:
They shine and smile on us that stay below.
They still their Loves and favors do dispense,
Acting their kindness in their Influence.
And when in Heaven we both together meet;
There we out ties for ever shall unite.
No objects then my passion remove,
Till it grows up to an Immortal Love.

Phed. Sister, till now I thought there could not be
A Love like mine, but you out-rival me. --
But stay, my Father's here; let us retire,
And there hear out that passion I admire.

[Exeunt. Scena quarta. Scene continues:
Enter Otanes, Darius, and Artaban, Attended. Otan. It Is strange! our entrance
to the King denied!

Dar. Now my Prophetic fears our doubts decide!
He durst not give us entrance, since he knows
He to his being unseen his safety owes.

Otan. Then must we to his power obedience yield,
As men to unknown gods do Temples build?
Let dull and credulous ignorance advance
Faith and Religion, not Allegiance.
Must we be only governed by a Name?

Enter to them, Prexaspes with Guards, the Guards stand off at a distance,
unseen by Otanes and Darius. Prex. Prexaspes must Prexaspes's Crimes proclaim.
And now, my Lords, I do confess my guilt,
The blood of Smerdis by my hand was spilt.
And it is the Impostor that Usurps the Throne:

Otan. And dare Prexaspes his bold Treasons own?

Prex. Yes, Sir, he dares; and thank Heaven too, that thus
Has by my Treasons made me glorious.
Though my late fear did make my duty fail,
And from your knowledge Smerdis's Death conceal:
Now I Am above the fear of punishment:
I dare my guilt confess, and crimes repent.
Smerdis by me was murdered.

Dar. -- And by you
Smerdis the Impostor is protected too.

Prex. My Lord, he is: and I so high am grown,
To be advanced and raised next to his Throne.
View here what large extent my power affords:
[Shews his Commission. Their Arms are mine, and all the Persian^ Swords.
Be not surpised at this, I never before
Points to his Guards, at which the Lords start. Till now, my Lords, the Sword
of Justice bore.
Thus I proclaim that Justice I design,
It Is your command shall rule their Swords, and mine.

Otan. Your generous proffer does surprise us more,
Than the strange news of your large power before.

Prex. But you shall wonder more at what I Will do,
When I am lead by Loyalty, and you.

Dar. But by what Arts have you the Impostor won?

Prex. By the same Arts I Will pluck him from his Throne.
Since my guilt (...) from Smerdis's blood arise,
I Will make his Rival's blood his Sacrifice.
The Noblest Valor from Allegiance springs:
Who was the fall, will be the rise of Kings.

Otan. Justice and Glory in this Act will join:
And as your Seconds in this brave design,
Our Lives and Fortunes shall assistant be,
To the height of Courage, and of Loyalty.

Dar. In order that we may this deed fulfill,
We first will execute the Impostor's Will,
Cambyses's solemn Exequies: whilst all
Our Army waits upon his Funeral;
And all the Persian Subject's wandering eyes
Are idly fixed on our Solemnities;
Then to the height we our design will bring;
Proclaiming you the Persian Heir, and King;
[ To Otan. And Smerdis the U^urper; then surprise
The Royal Palace, the Impostor seize;
The City Gates, the Tower, the Forts secure:
All that may strengthen or enlarge our power.
And in one moment all their Force suppress
That shall oppose our glory, and success:
And by this brave design we in one day
Shall Conquer, and redeem all Persia.

Dar. It Is bravely spoken, now you're worthy grown,
To be proclaimed Protector of a Crown.

Prex. But one thing, Sirs, must not escape your ears:
You are the only men that Smerdis fears.
But I, to carry on our just design,
And that we might without suspicion join,
Assured him that your Faiths I did convince,
That you believed him the true Persian Prince;
I told him you were Loyal, and you would
In his defense venture your States, and blood.
Pretending then 'twill with his glory stand,
T'unite both Armies under one command;
It is his pleasure that you should resign
Both your Commissions, and subscribe to mine.

Otan. Still we expected this; it is his pretense
To force us to a blind obedience.

Prex. I therefore in compliance think it fit
You to the Tyrant's pleasure should submit,
Lest he suspect your Loyalty, and mine:
And by that means we frustrate our design.
Nor that I Would have you think that it is my aim
To rob your glories to enlarge my fame.
No, all that I aspire to, is, to be
The Author of an Empire's Liberty.

Otan. We yield, and hope, resigning our command
We do but place it in a Nobler hand.

[Both give him their Commissions. Prex. And with your Arms I will your
Trophies raise:
The Conquest shall be mine, the Triumph yours.
As men build Temples not for their own praise,
But dedicate them to some higher powers.

Dar. Go instantly to our chief Officers,
[To his own Train. Tell them that it is the Persian Kings design,
Consulting both his interest and theirs,
Both Armies should under one conduct join.
And bid them, in our Prince's name, and ours,
Proclaim Prexaspes Gen^ral of our powers.

Exeunt all the Trains of Otanes and Darius. Prex. Now to assure you that this
high command.
Is not placed idly in Prexaspes's hand,
I Will give you this first trial of my power.
Guards, seize those Traitors --
[Guards seize Otanes, Darius, and Artaban, -- It Is your Fatal hour;
Your Stars will have it so.

Otan. Dar. and Artab. Hold your rude hands.

[To the Guards. Prex. You do forget resigning your Commands;
You must obey.

Dar. Inhumane Treachery!

Otan. False Traitor to the Persian blood, and me.
All. Unhand us, Villains.

Prex. -- Sirs, it is too late:
You have no time to dally with your Fate.
Your Heads must off, and I must see it done;
My Lords, you all shall set before our Sun.
On my command let your obedience wait:
[To the Guards. Conduct them to the appointed Scene of Fate.
I Will add this honor to your destiny,
[To them* Prexaspes will in Person see you dye.

Otan. Are we your pastime?

Dar. Bold Traitor, how can you so salvage be,
To Act, and then to smile at Cruelty?

Prex. No more, be serious, I Have no time for sport:
Consider that your dates of Life are short.

Otan. Per^idious Murderer, and may just Heaven --

Prex. Be gone, perform that charge which I have given.
[Exeunt Otanes, Darius, and Artaban, forced out by the Guards. Since both
Commissions now are in my hand,
And I do all the Persian Arms command;
Those Swords which are committed to my trust,
Prexaspes will take care they shall not rust.
[Exit.
Finis Actus quarti.
Actus quintus.
Scena prima.
The S^ene drawn, Otanes, Darius, and Artaban appear bound and Chained in a
dark Prison. Otan. Prexaspes! Oh, tame easy Faiths, that we
Could trust that salvage Scythian's Loyalty;
A Monster worse than Africa ever bred:
Whose Breast, like Deserts, is inhabited
By naught but Poisons.

Dar. Your mistake does seem
Rather a gallant Virtue, than a Crime.
For in great Minds this generous instinct Rules:
They by their own Copy all others souls;
Acting like those diseases, where the eye
In its own colors does all objects dye.

Enter Prexaspes. Prex. My Lords, the King is gracious, and has sent
To try how you can brook Imprisonment.

Otan. Imprisonment we think our greatest bliss:
There we can see neither thy Crimes, nor His.

Prex. Am I by those that wear my Chains contemned?
I thank ye, Sirs, ye have your selves condemned.
Guards, there within.

Dar. -- Yes, Traitor, thou shall see
That we despise our Deaths as much as thee.

Enter Guards, and Executioner. Otan. Must we not know the cause for which we
fall?

Prex. The cause! ha ha -- Yes, Sir, you shall.
It is Prexaspes's pleasure you should dye.

Dar. Is this the Justice of your Cruelty?

Prex. Justice! Justice is but the breath of power*
When every rising King, and Conqueror
Does make that Justice, which his Power makes Laws:
My Power proclaims the Justice of my Cause.
And in your deaths my pleasure I fulfill;
It Is just you dye -- to satisfy my will.

Otan. Is then your thirst of blood the only cause?

Prex. These idle interruptions make a pause
Onley to give you breath: for dye you must:
And it is just you dye -- because it is just.

Artab. And is this all?

Prex. -- I can some reasonsshow.
You're Traitors to your King and Country too.
You, Sir, have twice attempted to set fire
On Susa. You, Darius, did conspire
To seize the Palace and the Treasury.
You, Otanes, have sworn Confed'racy
With Persia's Enemy the Scythian King.
All these, and other Treasons I could bring --
But you shall dye; then to the World they all
Shall published be to justify your fall.

Otan. Blasphemous Liar!

Artab. Is not our Murders which you have decreed
Sufficient, but our honors too must bleed?

Prex. Your Lives and Honors must no longer shine:
But be extinguished to make way for mine.
Smerdis must be deposed by me alone,
And then Prexaspes steps into his Throne.
That my ambition may arrive to this,
First, I Will take off your Heads: then strike at His.

Otan. Though Smerdis be he whom I most do hate;
Could I but beg one days reprieve of Fate,
I Would be the first should thy designs betray.

Prex. Ay, Sir, so in the other World you may.
These will be pretty stories for the dead:
And for that end you first shall lose your Head.
Strike him.
[The Executioner bows down his Scymitar in sign of denial. What, disobeyed? Or
is it blood you fear?
[To the Executioner. Since my design wants an Interpreter,
And your tame soul cannot construe my intent,
Slave, thou shall dye, to try the experiment.
To you, my Lords, this Honor I Will afford,
To fall by me, and this Almighty Sword.
[Draws his Scymitar. Stand fair* -- Stay, one thing I forgot; I Am told
You leagues of Friendship with Theramnes hold.
[ Darius hearing Theramnes's Name, ^ight. A sigh I know to such a Friend is
due:
But be not troubled, he shall follow you.
Friends must not part. I Would thoughts to have had him here,
And for your sakes and mine, I wish he were,
That he might see this Arm.

Advances to strike off Otanes's head, at which the Executioner undisguises
himself, and appears to be Theramnes; at which the Guards seize Prexaspes, and
disarm him, and unbind Otanes, Darius, and Artaban, and restore their Swords,
and bind Prexaspes. There. Thou have thy wish.
He sees that Arm, and so shall thou feel his.

Prex. Traitors, unhand me; slaves, what, do you know
Who'tis you should obey?

There. -- Yes, Sir, they do.
And so shall you know too.
Your Guards are mine,
And your life, Traitor.

Prex. Curse on your design.
And cursed be all the Stars that ruled this day;
That could, or durst Prexaspes's life betray.
Am I at once of all my hopes deprived?

There. Your greatness grew too fast to be long-lived.

Dar. Theamnes living! and preserved to be
The Author of our Lives and Liberty!
What sudden change does all my thoughts surprise?
Or dare I trust the witness of my eyes?
How stiff I am, and undispos'd to move,
These pleasant charms unwilling to disprove.
Like him who Heaven in a soft dream enjoys:
To stir and wake his Paradise destroys.

Otan. As Ship-wrackt men who on some shore are cast,
Look back upon the dangers they have past.
Their horror so much of the wrack retains,
The scarcely know their safety, nor the means.
This miracle of Honor done by you,
Kind Sir, obliges, and confounds us too.
The explication we from you must know.

There. To Love and Friendship you your safeties owe.
Theramnes could not see him ^all -- nor I
[Points to Darius. Could live to see Orinda's Father dye.
Hearing that you in Prison were detained,
By my Usurper, by Prexaspes's Hand:
His b^ack intentions rou^'d my soul, alarmed
My sleeping spirits, and my courage armed.
I was resolved in spite of Fortunes hate,
Either to follow, or prevent your Fate.
But being from all other means debarred,
My only means was left to win the Guard.
Which their old General with ease did sway:
They had not quite forgot whom to obey.
'Twas by their help I am so happy grown,
To save your Lives, on which depends my own.

Dar. The greatest wrack my wondering soul endures,
Is how you have preserved your Life, not ours.

There. Know then, when you did of my Life despair,
And left me to brave Megabyses's care;
That famed Physician, whose great skill can prop
Men's sinking Frames, and Humane ruins stop;
His Art the power of Destiny controuls,
Gives Laws to Nature, and Reprieves to souls.
When he had by his subtle knowledge found,
My parting Life still struggled in my wound:
Then what strange skill, what unknown Arts he used,
What powerful balms he to my wounds infused;
(Great Miracles are still great Mysteries)
That were too hard to tell; let it suffice,
He forced my flying soul to a retreat:
And re-inforc'd my senses in their seat.
But then hearing your dangers, I prevailed,
To Have my death published, and my Cure concealed.
Till in your Service I a proof could give,
I had done something to deserve to live.

Dar. You do too much my burdened soul o'recharge,
For to bear this I must my soul enlarge.
My joys are but too weighty for my heart.

Artab. To make'em lighter let us bear a part.

Dar. No, Sir, this is so great a happiness,
Dividing of it cannot make it less.
Brave Friend.

[ Embraces Theramnes. Otan. But now I have a cause affords
A Nobler Subject for all Loyal Swords.

There. Name it; for what cannot Theramnes do,
When he is employed for Loyalty, and You?

Otan. It Is, the deposing Smerdis.

There. -- How, be^ray
Him who the Scepter, and my Sword does sway!

Otan. Wha^, an Impostor?

There. -- Hold, this must not be,
Can you forget what is due to Majesty.
Were It not from you -- Do not abuse your Friend:
He is my King, and him I must defend.

Dar. He whom you serve that borrowed Title wears,
Shame to a Throne and to the Name he bears.
Alas, that Traitor the true Smerdis slew.

[Points to Prex. Prex. Ay, and intended the same Fate for you.

There. And, what is an Impostor then maintained
To wear a Crown, and by my guilty hand?
A base low Traitor too: and could my Sword
A Sanctuary to his Crimes afford?
But, Sir, can you forgive me this offense?

Otan. Your Sword can your Sword's errors recompense.

There. Once more the Executioner's my part:
My Sword shall now do Justice on his heart.
To right my wrongs I in your cause will join.

Otan. We cannot fail in such a brave design.

Dar. But for this Action we must be prepared
To strike like Thunder, e're the blow be heard.

Otan. But e're I go, I must his sentence give:
Traitor, thy punishment shall be to live.
[ To Prex. Thou in this Prison, and these Chains shall lie;
I love you not so well, to let you dye.

[Exeunt all but Prexaspes. Prex. Curses pursue Theramnes. All is gone.
I Am fallen into a Prison from a Throne.
And, what is the worst of miseries, I still
Keep the desire, though not the power to kill.
I should not wish my ruin to recall,
Had I but sunk an Empire in my fall:
And made all Persia in my ruin ^hare:
That when Posterity my deeds should hear,
It should such horror from my name contract,
Trembling to hea^ what I made sport to Act.
But now must calmly dye. Had I but first
Like Earthquakes through the trembling World dispersed,
Shook Natures frames, and all Mankind overthrown,
I then could dye -- not to survive alone.
But now must tamely perish. -- Well, I see
The gods themselves act by State Policy.
They therefore spightfully my Fate decreed:
'Cause if my rising glories did proceed,
They knew my power to that vast height would sway,
Prexaspes would have grown more feared, than they.

[The Scene shuts upon him. Scena Secunda. Scene, the Palace.
Enter Smerdis, leading Phedima. Smerd. My Faith's confounded by my happiness:
It Is the height makes the object seem the less.
Have you this blessing really designed? --
Not, Madam, that I doubt you can be kind:
But he --
Whose happy doom an Oracle has given,
May doubt the intent, though not the power of Heaven.

Phed. You urge too much what I Have too plain expressed:
And force my blushes to make out the rest.

Smerd. Pardon my doubt. 'Twas my excess of joy
That did my sense of happiness destroy.
This day, fair Excellence, prepare to be
Possessor made, both of my Throne, and Me.
All glories do to Love inferior prove;
As glory waits on Crowns, so Crowns on Love.

[Proffers to lead her out. Phed. But, Sir, to Heaven I solemnly have vowed,
That till the gods have their consents allowed,
I never would yield my Love. Whom they design,
Must take his Title from their Voice, not mine.
Permit me then to execute my Vow,
First, pay my debts to Heaven, and then to You.

Smerd. To th'^ Temple then we instantly will haste,
And there I Will hear my happy sentence past.
To their consents I will the gods conjure;
What common charms cannot do, yours will procure.
And Heaven that does all lesser Victims prize,
Cannot but accept a Lovers Sacrifice.

[Exeunt* Scena Ultima. The Scene opened, appears a Temple of the Sun,
uncovered according to the Ancient Custom, with an Altar in the middle,
bearing two larg^ burning Tapers; and on each side a Priest standing. Enter to
them, Smerdis, leading Phedima. 1. Priest. Hail, King of Kings, third of that
Royal Name,
Heir to great Cyrus's Empire, and his Fame.

2. Priest. Hail, Mighty Monarch, whose high Race begun
From the World's Conqu'rour, and our god the Sun.

Smerd. Summon your god-heads. I demand from Heaven,
In one Petition more than e're was given.
I ask not Crowns, those I esteem less dear:
Crowns I can give, -- for I bestow one here.

[Bowing to Phedima. 1. Priest. Sir, since your greatness, and her Beauty is
So near allied to their Divinities,
You by such ties do the gods Friendship bind,
Heaven were unnatural, were it unkind.

Smerd. I then would know whether the gods approve
That I should be made happy in that Love
Which they themselves inspired. If by their Voice
They will consent to this our Royal Choice;
I Will store their Altars, and I Will make'em shine
With the most glorious of all flames, -- but mine.
All this, and greater things than this I Will do,
With such Magnificence, that Heaven shall know
Who it is it has obliged.

1. Priest. The Powers of Heaven
Need not these bribes: Their favour's freely given.
Do but with patience, Mighty Sir, attend,
Until our Rites, and Powerful Charms we end;
And you shall know, how kind their pleasures are,
When you, great King, are their Petitioner.
You subtle Spirits that do fly
Around the Regions of the Sky;
And as a spy, or as a Guest,
Can pierce into the closest breast,
And make discoveries of all
Events that in your Circuits fall;
Swift as your own winged Lightning send
Your nimblest Herald to attend
This Royal Pair: That they may know
What Fate Heaven does their Loves allow.
You who in borrowed shapes appear,
And cheat the eye, but not the ear,
Within this Aerie Circle here,
[waves his wand round. I do conjure you to appear.
Obey our Charms, as we obey your powers,
And tell that Monarch's Fate, whose Fate tells ours.

A Glorious Spirit descends behind the Altar, and speaks. Spir. To show how
Heaven does your desires approve,
The immortal gods in kindness to your Love,
Have for your wounded heart this Fate in store,
After this happy day to bleed no more.
For Persia's glory their high powers design
Your Love shall like these sacred Tapers shine.
[Points to the Tapers on the Alt^r. And to complete what Heaven intended has,
Your Love and hopes shall end in an embrace*
And to your Beauty the just gods ordein
[To Phed. You only for the Persian Monarch's Queen.
Your Merits have form Heaven this favor found,
Your Love and You shall both this day be Crowned.
But what my Message has not full expressed,
Your Fortunes and success shall speak the rest.

[Asceds again. Smerd. Let Heaven and Fortune keep the rest in store,
Till my soul's large enough to wish for more.
Now, Madam, I with boldness dare declare
When Heaven is kind, that I presume you are.

Phed. If it is my Fate, that cannot be repealed
Which Heaven has granted, and the gods have sealed.

Sm^rd. That our advancing joys may never retreat,
Now let our Nuptial ties our Loves complete.
As Smerdis advances, leading Phedima toward the Alter, a soft Music is
heard, supposed, in the Air. What pleasant Musick's this that charms my ears?

1. Priest. Some Aerie Consort from the lower Spears.
A sacred Tribute which the gods do pay,
To add a glory to your Nuptial day.

Here two glorious Spirits descend in Clouds, by whom this Song is sung. 1.
Spir. KIngs from the Gods, and from our Elements
Derive their greatness, and descents.
Since they are sparks of Heaven
It Is just they have from us this Title given,
To share our Power and God-heads too,
As being Heavens Deputies of State below.

2. Spir. No, no, it is otherwise decreed,
Heavens Councels do more cautiously proceed.
Monarchs, as Rivals to the gods, should find
Heaven must not by State-laws be kind.
The gods for their own greatness sake,
None but themselves immortal make.
The glories and the power of Kings,
Are fading things;
Like the objects of soft dreams desired,
Courted, Enjoyed, and in the embrace expired,
And vanished whilst they are admired.
Then Smerdis, Smerdis, Smerdis, it is high time to wake.

The Song ended, the Music turns into an Alarm, at which a bloody Cloud
interposes between the Audience and the Spirits; and being immediately removed,
the Ghosts of Cambyses, and the true Smerdis appear in the seats of the former
Spirits. Smerd. Ha! Smerdis, and Cambyses! whom the one
I of his Title robbed, to 'ther his Throne.
But sure the gods mistake 'emselves, to think
That Smerdis's courage can at shadows shrink.
Are these the Tragic Masquers of the Sky,
Whose Aerie nothing only cheats the eye?
Let wandering fires and meteors make them stray
Who do not know their Guider, nor their way:
But such weak trifles cannot Smerdis fright:
Your gods too late my envied greatness spite.
I have outdone the utmost they dare do:
Mock on -- Smerdis defies your gods, and you.
I am above your threats; such empty things
Borrow the form, but I the power of Kings.
No, keep your thin and ^eigned shapes; but know
It was my Treason that transformed you so.
And for this Masque the gods may thank me for it;
'Twas I gave 'em the Subject for their sport.
Here the Alarm renews, and some flashes of fire fly cross the Stage, and the
bloody Cloud interposes again, and stays; the two Tapers on the Altar flash,
and expire; and [Treason] is heard from within, and a noise of Swords. What do
I hear?

Enter Patasithes, amazed. Pat. Treason. We are betrayed.

Smerd. And Heaven it self too has the Traitor played.
Shall my Love thus like to these Tapers uhine?
Their light's gone out, and so I fear will mine.
Curse on their Riddles.

[Treason cried again. Pat. Ha! the noise comes near.
My fears increase.

Smerd. No, it is too late to fear.
But oh, that Smerdis could his Fate recall,
And Reign but one day longer er'e he fall,
To be revenged of Heaven before he dies:
Id'e turn their Temples to one Sacrifice.
Thus by our gods betrayed!
Can there be Treason harbored in that Name!
They Are all Impostors, greater than I am.

Enter Theramnes, Otanes, Darius, and Artaban, with their Swords drawn:
Theramnes making a pass at Smerdis, they each missing their pass, close; whilst
they struggle, Patasithes engages with Otanes; and whilst Darius and Artaban
offer to thrust through Smerdis, in Theramnes's Arms, Theramnes Speaks. There.
Thrust through us both, rather than miss his heart.

[Darius stabs Smerdis, and Otanes kills Patasithes. Dar. Fortune to guide my
Sword took Friendships part.

Smerd. Was this the Embrace in which the gods intend
My Love and Life should with my Empire end?
TO has reached my heart. This Fate Heaven had in store,
That thus my Wounded Heart should bleed no more.

[Dyes. Otan. Now, Daughter, you have for your Countries good,
Done what becomes your Duty, and your blood.

[ To Phed. Phed. What I have done, was in a Crown's defense,
And' it was an Act of my Obedience.

Dar. But I this deed an Act of Love must call,
When you're an Actor in my Rival's fall.
[To Phed. There Is wanting yet to the Triumphs of this day,
[To Otan. That you accept the Crown of Persia.

Otan. My Age, and Youth, with different passions move,
I am above the charms of Power, or Love.
My thoughts fly higher than to inherit Thrones:
Not to wear Diadems, but dispose of Crowns.
But since my Birth makes me an Empires Heir,
Thus I accept the Crown, -- to place it here.

[To Darius, Dar. Should I accept your birth's and merits due,
I should both injure Persia, and You.
No, my Ambition, Sir, shall never climb
Where the acceptance of a Throne's a Crime.

Otan. Since you so nobly do refuse a Crown,
I will this Title of a Monarch own:
I, as your King, this second proffer make,
On your Allegiance, wear it for my sake.

Dar. No, Sir, my Honor pleads in my defense,
I should be guilty in Obedience.

Otan. Since you at this command refuse a Throne,
Thus I command you -- Take it as my Son.

[Gives him Phed. Enter Orinda, and Ladies. Dar. In this, my Lord, you do new
charms infuse,
Love makes me take what Honor did excuse.
In this you give more than a Crown, I dare
Accept an Empire, to divide it here,

[ Bows to Phed. Omnes. Long live Darius, King of Persia.

[Here the two Tapers on the Altar light again by two flashes of fire, which
descend and kindle them. 2. Priest. This omen Heaven does to your Empire show,
That light expired with him revives with you.
Thus gloriously the sacred Tapers shone,
That day when Cyrus did ascend the Throne.

1. Priest. But e're we Crown you King, it is just you knew
Our Laws are sacred next our gods, and you;
Laws, which by Monarchs too must be obeyed,
And in their right I now am bound to plead.
It Is written, Sir, in Persia's strict Decrees,
If any Persian King by Treason dies,
That day his Heir does his high seat supply,
His Predecessors Murderer must dye.
You therefore in Cambyses's cause are bound
To Act his Justice first, and then be Crowned.

Dar. Ye gods, that do to Kings this charge entrust,
You make us cruel when you make us just.
Bring in the Captive Princess.

Phed. -- What new Scene
Is this that must your Justice entertain?

Dar. An object, that had but her soul conformed
To that perfection which her eyes adorned;
Her Virtues glorious as her Beauty shown,
Madam, she, like your self, deserved a Throne.
But since Cambyses's blood by her was spilt,
She by her own must expiate her guilt.
Justice and War in this alike partake,
The bloodiest spoils the greatest Triumphs make.
Enter the Supposed Mandana, in a Mourning Habit, with a black Veil over her
Face, attended by Guards and Executioner. Had we not owed that blood unto your
hand,
Which does my Sentence, and your Death demand,
You should not thus, but a more noble way
Have made a part in the Triumphs of this Day:
I then a milder Justice would have shown,
Not took your Life, but have restored your Crown.
I Am sorry then I Am so ill taught by you,
By your Example to be cruel too.
Yet, pardon me, that Sentence I must give,
Which I want power, not pity, to reprieve:

1. Priest. Her Sentence, Sir, is but too long deferred.

Dar. Then Executioner --

Phed. -- Hold, till I Am heard.

Darius, I my duty should betray,
Not to show pity where so much you pay.
Know then, I am your Rival, and dare own
A share in this as well as in your Throne.
Princess, your Birth and Fortune merits mo^e
[To Mand. Than every common pity can deplore.
Heaven to the great this cruel Fortune gives:
The gods have made you prodigal of your Lives
To rob Mankind.

Enter Mandana, lead in by Guards, and Attendants. Mand. -- At your command I
come*
TO attend your Sentence, and embrace my doom.

1. Guards. I was by that Impostor bribed, but loath
[Points to the other. To violate my trust, I brought'em both.

Dar. Your Fate is in such Mysteries involved,
That Riddle, e're you dye, must be resolved.

[Points to the other. Mand. What Friend, or Ravisher robs me of my doom,
Borrowing my likeness to Usurp my Tomb;
To save my Life, and Sacrifice their own?
Though Love may Rivals have, sure Death has none.
Death has no charms, or only charms to me;
'Cause dying, I shall visit Heaven, and Thee,
My dear Osiris.

Osir. No, he waits you here.

[Undisguising himself, and flinging off the Veil. Osiris, Madam, has not left
your sphere.

Mand. Osiris's soul, and come to wait on mine!
Heaven to our Loves this kindness does design.
Oh, my dear Saint, stay but till I am dead,
And from these Earthly Chains of Nature freed;
And then my soul shall go along with thine,
Whilst we in Aerie soft embraces twine.
We Will like a mounting whirlwind upward move;
We Will fly in Circles in the Arms of Love.
There the kind gods shall to our breasts inspire
Such sparks of Heaven, such new and glorious fire,
That to that height we will our Loves repair,
Till our kind flames shall kindle to a Star.
Now, Executioner.

Osir. -- Hold, you mistake,
Osiris lives; and had Heaven for his sake
And yours been kind, he would lived to have dyed for you.

Mand. Osiris lives! Oh, then, might I live too.

Osir. Know then, that when you saw me last, when I
Was by Cambyses's rage condemned to dye:
It was the Tyrant's Fortune, to prefer
Lord Artaban to be my Murderer.
But he --
Pitying my Youth, and something which he read
Did in my looks for his compassion plead,
In a compliance to the Tyrant's breath,
Disguised me in a borrowed Mask of Death:
And thence till now my Person did secure
To free me from the Tyrant's eye, and power.

Mand. Which does the greater wonder seem, to see
Osiris live, or come to dye for me?

Osir. You need not wonder, since you know the cause,
Love has a power above all Nature's Laws.
Dying for you I should so happy prove,
TO have done a deed worthy my self, and Love.
To show your Friendship, let my Princess live*

[ To Darius. Dar. Oh, now you ask, what I want power to give.

1. Priest. The Persian Laws, like to their god, the Sun,
In one unalterable course must run.
And she must dye, no^ must you favor show,
Because our gods, and Laws will have it so.

Osir. If Heaven delights in humane Sacrifice,
May not my Death those cruel gods suffice?
To save her Life, on me that Grace confer,
To fall a Sacrifice to Heaven, and Her.

Mand. Hold, Sir, your zeal your rashness does declare;
Lovers in all things but in Death may share.
Know then, kind Rival, that'tis only I
Mandana in Mandana's cause must dye.

There. Mandana!
[Runs to her. To see you, Madam, I must bless my eyes:
But I must curse'em when I see she dies.

[Aside* Mand. Prince Intaphernes, what strange Stars have sent
You here to see that Fate you cannot prevent?

There. I do conjure you spare this Princess's blood,
[Kneels to Dar. By all that is Friendship, all that is great, and good.

Dar. Theramnes, rise. -- New wonders you create.

There. It Is Nature's ties make me her Advocate.

2. Priest. You need no Arguments to plead her cause,
For she must dye, to satisfy our Laws.

There. If then your Laws such cruelty exact,
To save her Life, I Will justify the Fact.
[To the Priests: Oh, Sir, you must her Life reprieve; you know
[To Dar. That to her Hand you do your Scepter owe.

Dar. I from Cambyses's Death my Crown derive:
Not from her guilt that did his Death contrive.
Come then, Theramnes, plead her cause no more,
I want not Friendship, but I want the power
To save her Life, though for Theramnes's sake;
Yet it is our Laws, not I, that life will take.
Our Laws which do this cruelty enjoin,
I cannot save her Life for him who gave me mine.
Now, Executioner. -- But hold -- I see
No Kings of Persia from her power are free.
She Murdered him, and now she conquers me.
My pity tells me that she must not dye.

Mand. Sir, your delays are but your cruelty.
And since my Death is by your Laws designed,
A speedy Justice, Sir, is only kind.

Osir. Hold, Sir, I Will interpose' twixt her, and Death:
And in my Breast the Fatal weapon sheath.

Mand. It Is I must dye. You do your Princess wrong:
Live, though I dye, -- But do not live too long.
For, dying, I to Heaven a Stranger go,
Wandering alone, whilst you stay here below.
And wanting your kind presence, I shall be
A Pilgrim in that vast Eternity.
But that my Soul may not mistake her way,
I Will track your steps, and in your shadow play.
When I Am resolved to Air, a subtle guest
I Will hovering fly, and steal into your Breast.
And in my Aerie Pilgrimage I Will make
Mandana's Soul part of that breath you take.
I Will keep my Image in your breast entire,
Inspiring you with chaste and jambent fire.
Sometimes I will with gentle whispers flow,
Sometimes I will a stormy murmur blow.
And in this Language my addresses make,
Breathing that Love which I want words to speak.

Osir. O cruel Princess, now you are unkind,
To think, when you are dead, I Will stay behind.
For when Osiris sees Mandana dye,
Sorrow will Act that which their hands deny.

Mand. My thoughts were fixed on Heaven: But, for your sake,
Something, I know not what, does pluck'em back,
And I could wish to live.

1. Priest. -- Our Laws you wrong,
In the deferring of her Death thus long.

Dar. Since Lives, and Laws depend upon my breath,
He meets his own, that does but name her Death.

1. Priest. Great Sir, you do forget that Crown you wear.

Dar. It Is true, I do: And Scepters sacred are.
Act you my part: whilst I avert my eyes;
My pity shall pay homage when she dies,
And since she suffers for my Empire's sake,
A Monarch's tears
Part of that Royal Sacrifice shall make.

1. Priest. Now, Executioner --

Enter Prexaspes, lead in by Guards. Prex. -- Hold, Sir, till I
Will give you leave to strike, and her to dye.

1. Guard. He from the Prison an escape has wrought,
But we surpised him in his flight, and brought
Him here before you.

Prex. Think you a Prison could my power control,
When Empire was too narrow for my soul?
I from your Chains, Sir, have my self set free,
To tell you, You ascend your Throne by Me.
But be not proud, nor think Prexaspes has
On you alone conferred his Acts of grace.
To show the World that I am complaisant,
Her Life I as my gracious favor grant.
[ Point to Mand. For it shall never be said, a Woman's Name
Usurpt Prexaspes's Treasons, or his Fame.
A Woman shall not my great Rival be;
The Fate of Kings only belongs to Me.
Cambyses, Amasis, and Smerdis, all
Those Pageant Princes by my hand did fall.
And had not Fortune my Ambition crossed,
You had your Lives too with your Empire lost.
It Is true, your Laws require my blood, but know
I Will rob you of the Honor of that blow.
High spirits have this Refuge, Sir, and I,
My greatness and my power expired, can dye.
But he who did the Fate of Kings command,
Does scorn to fall by any common Hand.
Since my Life was unactive, Fame shall tell
Not how Prexaspes lived, but how he fell.
[Draws his Dagger. Thus he your greatness, and your power defies*
And thus Prexaspes by Prexaspes dies.

[Stabs himself, and falls. Dar. Thus may all Traitors fall.

Prex. -- Ye gods, I come;
For since the World could not afford me room:
Since all the barren Fates could not supply
My hand with blood, I Will mount into the Sky,
And hang a blazing Comet in the Air:
That thus the World Me when I Am dead may ^eat.
Whilst over the Earth new horrors I contract,
Still threatening, what I cannot live to act.

[Dyes* Dar. This mighty work of Fate we must admire,
Thus the gods guard those Virtues they inspire.
His blood thus spilt has this kind Justice done,
It saves your Life, and punishes his own.
[To Mand. Thus bruised Scorpions this Virtue have,
They yield a Cure to the same wounds they gave.
But whence, Sir, does your strange Alliance spring?

There. Sir, I was Son to the late Syrian King;
Brother to the brave Amasis. My Name
Is Intaphernes.

Dar. -- I have heard his Fame.
What cause, Sir, was it; and what happy chance,
That made you to the Persian Court advance?

Int. It was, great Sir, Revenge and Honors Charms:
My ill success against Cambyses's Arms
In The Syrian Wars, where my dear Father's blood
Was spilt, and mixed among the common flood.
My Army vanquished, and his Empire lost,
And all the hopes of my succession crossed,
I saw Cambyses with my Laurels Crowned.
No other means for my Rev^nge being found,
I came to Persia in a borrowed Name,
To Right my wrongs, and to repair my Fame*
By Acts of Chivalry, and Martial sport,
I found acquaintance in the Persian Court;
With Patasithes I Alliance gained,
Who had the Persian Government obtained,
During Cambyses's Travels. Him I won
To place Cambyses's Brother in the Throne.
For he descending from the Median blood,
(Which Empire Cyrus had so late subdued,
Took the Infection, the design embraced,
But in the Throne he his own Kinsman placed.
Who in that borrowed Name to The Empire climbs,
Making my Sword a Parron to his Crimes.
And by that cheat abused the World, and me,
Deluding both our Faiths and Loyalty.

Dar. Since Laws of Monarchy so rigid are,
That in my Throne my Friend's forbid to share:
Accept an Empire in my Breast -- and here;
[ Gives him Orinda. And may our Royal Sister in your Love,
As happy as I in your Friendship prove.

Otan. Your worth, brave Intaphernes, makes her yours.

Int. Madam --

Orind. Obedience my consent procures.
Yet though a Father, and a Brother too,
Have both bestowed me as a gift on You;
I in that gift must grant the Nobler part;
They give Orinda, I Orinda's heart.

Int. Yours in a Crown, in Love's my happiness;
Mine may belower, Sir, than yours, not less.

[ To Darius. Dar. The Syrian Laurels now shall fade no more:
Your Merits do your Ravished Crown restore.
[ To Int. And for --
Those wrongs Cambyses has to Egypt done,
I give'em back more than his Arms e're won.
Your self I to your Throne restore. Thus Fate
[ To Mand. Ordains that glory should on Beauty wait.

Osir. Do you remember now your Vows, and Love?

Mand. Love, of all Crimes, cannot forgetful prove.
Since thus my calmer Fates restore my Crown,
Now the gods smile, Mandana cannot frown.
Honor and Love now both perform their part,
I give an Empire where I give a heart.

Otan. Though for your sake I do a Throne disdain,
Yet my Posterity with yours shall Reign.
[ To Darius. And in your Heirs your blood shall mix with mine*
As diverse Fountains in one Current join.
This to my Fame the only glory brings,
Not to wear Crowns, but have a Race of Kings*

Dar. And this my only glory I must own,
Adopted to your blood, and to a Throne.
All that I am, your Beauty raised me to:
I to a Crown aspire to merit you.
[ To Phed. Thus to a Throne no common ways I move,
Others rise by Ambition, I by Love.

EPILOGUE.
THe Persian Laws now cease to seem severe;
You have more cruel Laws that govern here;
Your undisputed power, who Judges sit,
To Sentence all the trespasses of wit.
How can our Author then his doom recall?
He knows he must under your Justice fall;
Being guilty of so capital a Crime,
As shedding so much Humane blood in Rhyme.
Amongst' you Wits such monstrous factions rage,
Such various censures, that'tis thought the Stage
Breeds more Opinions, and produces far
More Heresies than the late Civil war.
Nay, Poets too themselves, of late, they say,
The greatest Hectors are that e're huff'd play.
Like the Issue of the Dragons teeth, one brother
In a poetic fury falls on to other.
It Is thought you will grow to that excess of Rage,
That Been had need come guarded on the Stage.
Nay, you have found a most compendious way
Of Damning, now, before you see the Play.
But ma^gre all your spite, Poets of late
Stand stoutly unconcerned at their Play's Fate;
Provided, it is their destiny to gain,
Like the famed Royal Slave, a third days Reign.
Then sacrifice 'em as you please --
But if you will be so prodigal to give
Our sawey Scribler a three days reprieve;
He impudently swears he will boldly sue,
When your hand's in, to beg your pardon too.
If this, his first, but prosperously hit,
And escape those Rocks where he sees others split:
He vows he will write once more, only to show
what your kind favour's influence can do.
Faith, for once grant it, that the World may say
Your smiles have been the Authors of a Play.
Postscript.
I Would not be so ungrateful to the memor^ of the Dead, as not to acknowledge,
that m^ fellow Student had some hand with me in the beginning of this Tragedy;
but, dying (...) Months before the finishing of the Play, (...) did not live
to see two Acts complete: nor ar^ there sixty lines of his remaining; which
litt^^ concern has in the thoughts of some given hi^ a Title to the whole. And
it is the pleasure of others, to accuse me of stealing out of an (...) obsolete
Tragi-Comedy, called, Cambyses, Ki^^ of Persia; a Play which I had never heard
(...) till this had been Acted: but however, tho^^ that have seen that may find
that I might have borrowed better language from Sternhold and Hopkins.

FINIS

