REFLECTIONS UPON THE OATHS OF SUPREMACY AND ALLEGIANCE.

BY A Catholic Gentleman, an Obedient Son of the Church, and Loyal Subject of
his Majesty.

Printed in the Year. MDCLXI.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 7. fet read set, l. 15. dele and, p. 22. l. 25. excepting r. not
excepting, p. 25. l. 8. Christian r. Christians, p. 26. l. 24. Auihority r.
Authority, p. 33. l. 6. r. in the marg. ib. p. 13, p. 41. l. 18. there r. their,
p. 42. l. 31. mogannant r. moyenant, l. 32. entire r. entier, p. 47. l. 2.
Scots r. Sects, p. 57. l. 19. invention r. intention, p. 58. l. 32. the
useselsesse r. uselessnesse, p. 61. l. 18. Charter r. Character, p. 62. l. 10.
at r. an, p. 65. l. 7. permitted to the people to be taught, r. permitted to be
taught to the people, p. 73. l. 6. fires Estate r. Tiers Estat. l. 7. they are
r. there are, l. 21. to Article r. to be an Article.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE OATHS OF Supremacy and Allegiance.
SECT. I. The Occasion of making these Reflections: And the sum of that which
follows.
THe Divine Providence having been so watchful over His Most Sacred Majesty in
his wonderful preservation from dangers, and so miraculous in restoring him to
his Throne, just and necessary it is that both Himself and his Counsel should
make use of all lawful means to preserve him in safety, and his Subjects in
Obedience and Peace. And because a greater obligation cannot be imagined among
Christians then a Solemn Oath, it became them to make use of that Obligation
indifferently to all, Declaration from Breda, April. 4.14. 1660.
the which in all probability would now at last have a greater effect by virtue
of his Majesty's Declaration of a Liberty to tender consciences, and that no
Man shall be disquieted, or called in question for differences of Opinion in
matter of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom: by which is
taken away the chief cause which began and fomented the late Troubles and
confusion.

2. Notwithstanding seeing that the manner of the application of that
Preservatory and remedy of an Oath, has lately occasioned great Disputes, and
unquietness of minds, in several persons; and seeing the Oath by none more
readily taken and earnestly imposed on others, then by those who began the War,
and promoted the Covenant, and of whose party not one was ever found that drew
a sword for his Majesty; and on the other side by none more scrupled at or
refused, then by those who always assisted the King, and of whose party never
any one drew a Sword against him, and withal of whose Loyalty his Majesty has
often professed that he has sufficient assurance: The consideration of all this
begat in my mind an Opinion, that surely there lay hidden in these Oaths some
Mystery fit to be discovered, and which is attempted in the following
Reflections.

3. In which, 1. After a brief Declaration taken by any Christian. 5. Then is
declared Protestants, 6. And by Presbyterians, Independents, etc. 7. And upon
Roman Catholics do generally refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy, 8. And some
of them make scruple to Allegiance. 9. Lastly there are Declaration for tender
consciences, showing who have the justest pretentions to the benefit of it, etc.

4. All this is offered to the consideration of all good Christians among us,
to the end Advice may be taken whether it be for Gods honor, or the Kingdoms
peace, that such Forms of Oaths so manifestly ambiguous, so inefficacious to
the producing of Loyalty and Peace in the generality of the Kings Subjects, so
piercing and wounding to tender Consciences, etc. should be continued to be
imposed, or new Forms more effectual for his Majesty's security contrived,
after the Example of Scotland, etc.

SECT. II. Touching Oaths in General.
5. AN Oath, by which God is invoked as a witness, Surety and caution of
whatsoever we affirm, renounce and promise, and a Revenger upon us if we
transgress in any of these, is certainly an high Act of Religion: but such an
one, as that like Medicines, it ought not to be used except in cases of just
necessity, and then with great advice and sincerity.

6. The conditions therefore required by God himself in an Oath are expressed
in this saying of the Prophet, Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, and
in Judgment, and in Justice. So that if an Oath be ambiguous, captious or
false, it wants the condition of Truth. If it be either unnecessary, or
indiscreet and unprofitable, it will be destitute of Judgment; and if in the
Object and Form of it, and in the mind of the Taker, there be not a conformity
to the Eternal Law of God, it will want Justice: Lastly if with all these, it
be not attended with fidelity in the execution of what is promised, (supposing
it be a Promissory Oath) and this according to the intention of the Lawgiver,
it will be dishonorable, Irreligious and odious to God; and wanting any of
these conditions it will respectively be destructive to those that so contrive
or take it.

7. All these conditions are doubtless with more then ordinary caution to be
observed in Solemn, public and National Oaths: the breach of which will
involve whole Kingdoms in guilt and punishment, and this, even in the Opinion
of Heathens, inevitably.

8. These things considered, if we will call to mind how many Oaths, Covenants,
Abjurations, etc. Ambiguous, Entangling, Traiterous, Contradicting one another,
and consequently inducing a necessity of Perjury, have been sometimes
voluntarily taken, or by a pretended Authority imposed on the Subjects, it will
surely deeply concern us all to take some fitting course to avert Gods most
just indignation from our Nation, by humbling our selves before his Divine
Majesty, and making a public acknow^edgment of the guilt universally
contracted by us: and however for the future to take ^are that men may clearly
see and understand what it is that they must be compelled to wear.

SECT. III. The Form of the two Oaths, Of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the
proper litteral sense of them.
9. THe Oaths at this time in force, and publicly or generally imposed are
two, 1. that of Supremacy, 2. that of Allegiance, conceived in distinct Forms.

10. The Oath of Supremacy is in the form here expressed, viz. An. 5. Eliz
cap. 1.


I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience that the Kings
Majesty is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities: And do promise that from henceforth I shall
bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Pre-eminencies and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his h^irs and Successors, or united and annexed to the imperial
Crown of this Realm: So help me God, and by the Contents of this book.

11. The tenor of the Oath of Allegiance is this, An 3. Jac cap. 4.
viz.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty; or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, to raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects, within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart that
notwithstanding any Declaration or s^ntence of Excommunication or De^rivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by
any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his See, against
the said King his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects
from their Obedience; I will hear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty his
H^irs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against his or their Persons, their Crown or dignity, by reason or Color of
any such sentence or declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor
to disclose and make known unto his Majesty's Heirs and Successors all
Treasons and Traitorous conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be
against him or any of them. And I do further swear that I from my heart abhor,
detest and abjure as impious and heretical this damnable doctrine and
position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in my conscience am resolved that neither the Pope nor any person
whatsoever has Power to absolve me of this oath, or any part thereof, which I
acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered unto me. And do
renounce all Pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I
do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to these express
words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same words, without any equivocation or mental evasion, or
secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian: So help me God.

12. These are the forms of the two Oaths: Both which if they be understood
according to the proper and natural sense of the words import, that there being
only two kinds of Jurisdictions, viz. Spiritual and Temporal, both which are
named here, the King within his Dominions is equally the Fountain and Root of
them both: So that whosoever exercises any office or Magistracy either in the
State or the Church, does it (and must acknowledge so much) merely by
communication from the King, or a participation of so much of his power as he
is pleased to impart. Upon which grounds it will follow not only that no
foreign Prince, Prelate, etc, No Assembly or Council of Bishops, though never
so Oecumonical has right to any superiority or Jurisdiction within these
Kingdoms, but also that whatsoever any Bishop or Priest in the Kingdom etc.
acts in matters and duties purely Spiritual, as conferring Orders
Ecclesiastical, inflicting censures, administering Sacraments etc. they do all
this with a direct subordination to the King, and as his Delegates or
Substitutes: insomuch as if he pleases, he may himself exercise all those
functions personally, and may according to his pleasure suspend the execution
of them in all others.

13. All this plainly seems to be the true importance of the Oaths; neither
will any Stranger or dis-interessed person, reading them frame to his mind any
other meaning of them: though certain it is that our four last Princes have not
intended that all that took them, should accowledge all this, that is imported
by them. Neither is there at this day any Church or Assembly of Christians, nor
perhaps any person (unless it be the Author of Leviathan) that taking these
Oaths, will or can, without contradicting his belief, mean all that the forms
and clauses of them do directly, properly and Grammatically signify, as shall
be Demonstrated.

SECT. IV. Reflections upon these two Oaths in gross.
14. IT well deserves to be considered, what was the occasion of framing this
Oath of Supremacy by K. Henry the eighth, and what power he received, or at
least executed by virtue of such Acts of Parliament as enjoined the taking of
it, etc.

15. The Title of Supreme head and Governor of the Church of England, was
first given to King Henry the eight, in a Petition addressed unto him by the
Bishops, obnoxious to a Praemunire for having submitted to Cardinal Wolsey's
Legantine power without the Kings assent. Now how far this new Ecclesiastical
power of the King was intended to extend, will appear by following Acts of
Parliaments, and by the Kings own proceedings in virtue thereof.

13. It was enacted by Parliament, 1. that no Canons or Constitutions could be
made by the Bishops, Stat. 25. Hen. 8.
etc. and by them promulgated or executed without the Kings command. 2. Yea the
Clergy were forced to give up also their power of executing any old Canons of
the Church without the Kings consent had before. Records of Convocation. vit.
Heylins Hist. sect. 1. p. 7. Stat. 25. Hen. 8. pref.
3. All former Constitutions Provincial and Synodal, though hitherto enforce by
the authority of the whole Church (at least Western) were committed to the
abitriment of the King and of sixteen Lay persons and sixteen of the Clergy
appointed by the King, to be approved or rejected by them, according as they
conceived them consistent with, or repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, as now a
new head of the Church or to the laws of God. By which means without one single
voice of the Clergy, all former Ecclesiastical Laws might be abrogated. 4. An
authority was allowed to the King to repress and correct all such errors,
Stat. 26. Hen. 8. pref. c. 1.
Heresies, abuses and enormities whatsoever they were, which by any manner of
spiritual Jurisdiction might lawfully be repressed, etc. any foreign Laws,
or any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding. 5. All manner of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical was by Parliament ackowledged to belong to the King, as Head of
the Church* So that no Bishop had any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but by,
under, and from the King 6. Stat. 37. Hen. 8. c. 17.
Supreme Power of dispensing with any Ecclesiastical Constitutions is ascribed
to the King and Parliament, as recognized Supreme Head of the Church, Stat. 25.
Hen. 8. c. 21.
and the Archbishop is made only the Kings Delegate. So that in case he should
refuse, two other Bishops might be named to grant such Dispensations. And after
all, the King and his court of Chancery are made the last Judge, what things in
such Dispensations are repugnant to Scriptures, what not. 7. Though the King
did not personally himself exercise the power of the Keys, Stat. 37. Hen. 8. c.
vid. Reform Leg. Eccles. de offic Jud.
yet this right he claimed, that no Clergy man being a member of the English
Church should exercise it in his Dominions, in any cause or over any person
without the leave and appointment of him the Supreme head. Nor any refuse to
exercise it whenever he should require. 8. It was moreover enacted that no
speaking, doing or holding against any spiritual Laws made by the Sea of Rome,
Stat 32. H. c. 26.
which be repugnant to the Laws of the Realm should be deemed heresies. As
also that whosoever should teach contrary to the determinations which since the
year 1540 were, or afterward should be set forth by the King, should be deemed
and treated as a Heretic. So that the King and Parliament are hereby
constituted Judges of Heresy. Stat 2, 15, and 6. Ed. 6
9. In the days of King Edward the sixth an Act is made in which the King and
Parliament Authorize Bishops, etc. by virtue of their Act to take informations
concerning the not useing the Form of Common Prayer then prescribed, and to
punish the same by Excommunication, etc. 10. There were also appointed six
Prelates and six others nominated by the King, ibid.
by the same authority to frame a new form of Consecration of Bishops, etc.

17. Hereby it is apparent that a Jurisdiction purely Spiritual was
communicated to, or assumed by King Henry the eighth; and this he further
showed by many practices. For besides Jurisdiction, as if he had the Key of
divine knowledge given him by Christ he set forth Books of instructions in
Catholic doctrine by his own authority; declaring them heretics that taught
otherwise. The labor indeed, and we may say, drudgery of composing those books
(as also of executing other spiritual functions) was left either wholly or in
part to the Clergy; but when they had done, he perused them, and and made what
additions and alterations he pleased in them, and without remanding them to the
Bishops, M S in Bibl. Col.
caused them to be printed. The Book with his Interlinings and Changes is still
ex-tant.

18. Indeed it was only spiritual Jurisdiction that he by his new Title of Head
of the Church sought to deprive the Pope of: for he feared not his pretended
temporal Power which in those days the world was little troubled withal. For
he stood in need of a power to justify his Divorce and to dispense with the
horrible Sacrilege designed by him; He was unwilling to be looked on by his
Subjects as a Heathen and a Publican, and therefore to prevent this danger, he
divested the Pope, and assumed to himself the power of Excommunication also,
that is, not the execution of it, but the disposing of of it by Delegation to
the Archbishop, who should execute it according to his will and directions
only.

19. A further irrefragable proof that it was a power purely Spiritual which
that King challenged by his new Title; is taken from the Declaration of Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester (the contriver of the Oath) as we find it
recorded by Calvin himself; For (says he) when Stephen Gardener was upon the
Kings affairs at Ratisbon, he there taking occasion to expound the meaning of
that Title of Supreme head of the English Church given to King Henry the
eighth, Calvin on Amos cap. 7. vid Epist. ded. to the book of Jurisdiction of
Bishop Carlton.
taught that the King had such a power that he might appoint and prescribe new
Ordinances of the Church, even matters concerning Faith and Doctrine, and
abolish old: As tamely that the King might forbid the marriage of Priests, and
might take away the use of the Chalice in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and in such things might appoint what he l^ft. A Title thus interpreted the
same Calvin vehemently inveighs against, calling Gardener (and worthily) an
impestour, and Archbishop Cranmer with his fellows inconsiderate persons, who
make Kings too spiritual, as if beside theirs there were no Ecclesiastical
Government and Jurisdiction.

20. As for his Son King Edward the sixth, the same Title with the plenitude of
power was given him, which he likewise, as very a child as he was, executed:
for he by his Authority made Ecclesiastical Laws to be new reformed, Church
service and Administration of Sacraments to be changed, and new Instructions in
matter of Religion to be published, quite contrary to what the foregoing Head
(though his Father) had decreed to be Christian Doctrine. And the reason was
the same, because new Sacrilege was to be committed by the Protector, for
which he was loath to be excommunicated.

21. His elder sister succeeding, repealed and renounced this Jurisdiction, and
restored it to the Church: But her younger sister repealed her repealings, and
took it again, when it was in as high language, yea higher, conferred on her by
Parliament. And there was a greater necessity for it, than her Brother had: For
her Mothers Marriage was declared Null by the Pope, and consequently her right
to the Crown.

22. And that this was the design and intention, of the Parliament in the first
year of her Reign, when they renewed the Title of her Supremacy in Church
matters, (though they blushed to call a Woman Head of the Church) may
sufficiently be collected from a Speech yet extant, and made in that Parliament
upon that occasion by the then Lord Chancelour Nicholas Heath; L. Chancellor
Heaths speech, M.S.
For arguing very strongly against the said Title, and the Authority imported
by it, he takes it for granted that by giving the Queen such a Title they must
forsake and fly from the Sea of Rome,: the inconveniences of which he desires
may be better considered. In the next place he recommends to their Advice, what
this Supremacy is: For says he, if it consist in Temporal Government, what
further Authority can this House give her, then she has already by right of
Inheritance, and by the appointment of God without their Gift? etc. But if the
Supremacy does consist in Spiritual Government, then it would be considered
what the spiritual Government is, and in what points it does chiefly remain. I
find, says he, in the Gospels, that when Christ gave to St. Peter the Supreme
Government of the Church, he said to him, Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum, etc.
That is, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall bind on Earth, etc. Now if you mean to give to the Queen that
Authority which our Lord gave to St. Peter, if you will say, Nos tibi dabimus
claves Regni coelorum, etc. We will give to your Majesty the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, I pray you show your Commission by which you are authorized
to make such a Gift. Again, for the same purpose Our Lord said to St. Peter,
Pasce, etc. Pasce, etc. Pasce, etc. Feed my sheep, Feed my sheep, Feed my
lambs: As likewise, Tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres, When thou art
converted, confirm thy Brethren. Now if you mean to say so much to the Queen,
let us see your Commission, and withal consider whether her person, being a
Woman, be in a capacity to receive and execute such an Authority, since St.
Paul forbids a Woman to teach in the Church. Thus argued the said Lord
Chancelour, proceeding in the same manner upon other branches of spiritual
Government, and concludes, That without a mature consideration of all these
premises, their honors shall never be able to show their faces before their
Enemies in this matter.

23. But notwithstanding all this, the Lords, etc. proceeded to frame an Act
without any distinct explication, whether it was a Temporal or Spiritual
Authority which they gave the Queen. Or rather they framed it with such
clauses, as that the most obvious sense of it imported that it was an Authority
purely spiritual, that they invested her withal: and most certain it is, that
if she had executed such an Authority, she might have justified her so doing by
that Act.

24. However, after that Parliament was ended, but before the first year of her
Reign was expired, such considerations as the Lord Chancelour had formerly in
vain represented had so great an influence upon the Queen, that she was obliged
by an Admonition prefixed to her Injunctions, to declare that which the
Parliament would not, that it was not her intent by virtue of that Act to
challenge Authority and power of Ministry of Divine Offices in the Church, but
only to have Sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons born within her
Realms, of what State either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be.
Which explication of hers was confirmed four years after by Parliament, yet
without changing the foregoing Act, or any clauses in it.

25. And consequently she left ordering of matters purely Spiritual to Bishops,
etc. Expressly renouncing it; For as for the power of Excommunication, having
again taken it from the Pope, she did not fear it from any of her Bishops.

26. In the times succeeding after her, what qualifications were made and
declared by three Kings touching spiritual Jurisdiction, shall be showed
afterward. They had not any such interests, nor such fears as the three
foregoing Princes had; and therefore looked with a more indifferent eye upon
the matter: Without repealing laws, or changing the Exterior Form of the
oath of Supremacy; they esteemed it sufficient to qualify it by moderate
interpretations, as shall be showed.

27. As for the other Oath of Allegiance, the compiler whereof was King James,
the most sad and horrible occasion of it is but too well known; the intention
of it is obvious, and the sense plain. So that it did not stand in need of such
a Multiplicity of Acts of Parliament, with many clauses to show the extention
of it. Excepting one party, scarce any except against it; and were it not for
some few incommodious expressions and phrases (nothing pertaining to the
substance and design of the Oath) it would freely and generally be admitted and
taken, notwithstanding the foresaid parties condemning it, who take that
advantage to decry the substance of the Oath, from which they have an aversion
in as much as Fidelity is promised thereby.

SECT. V. That the Oath of Supremacy as it lies, and according to the sense of
the first Law giver, cannot lawfully and sincerely be taken by any Christian.
28. IT is a truth from the beginning acknowledged by the Fathers of the
Church, that all Kings are truly Supreme Governors over the persons of all
their Subjects, and in all causes even Ec^lesiastical, wherein their civil
authority is mixed Constitutions of Synods, however they may oblige in
conscience, and be imposed under spiritual censures, yet are not laws in any
Kingdom, that is, they they are not commanded, nor the transgression of them
punishable in external Courts by outward punishments, as Attachments,
Imprisonment, etc. further then supreme Civil Governors do allow.

29. This is a right due to all Kings, though Heathens, Heretics, etc So that
Kings by being converted to Christianity or Catholic Religion, have not any
new Jurisdiction added, or their former enlarged thereby. They do not thereby
become Pastors of Souls, but sheep of lawful pastors: And it is not a new
Authority, but a new duty that by their conversion accrews to them, obliging
them to promote true Religion by the exercise of their Civil Authority and
Sword: And subjects are bound to acknowledge and submit to this Authority of
theirs, that is, not always to do what Princes in Ecclesiastical matters
shall command, but however not to resist, in case their inward Beliefs be
contrary to theirs, but patiently to suffer whatsoever violence shall be
offer^d them.

30. Such a submission therefore to Kingly authority may, when just occasion
is, be lawfully required by Kings from all their Subjects, yea a profession
thereof by oaths. But such an one was not the Oath of Supremacy when it was
first contrived and imposed. For there an authority in many causes purely
spiritual, was by our Princes challenged, as has been showed. Therefore if we
consider that Oath as now imposed on Subjects infinitely differing from their
Princes belief and Judgment, both in Point of doctrine and discipline, it is
not imaginable how it can be taken in such a sense as was first meant, by any
congregations, no not even by that which is of the Kings own Religion.

31. The Oath consists of two parts; one Affirmative, and the other Negative:
The Affirmative clause obliges all the Kings Subjects though never so much
differing in their beliefs, to swear an acknowledgment that the King is the
only supreme Head and Governor of his Realm, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal. And the Negative to deny that any
foreign Prince, Prelate, etc. has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm, and to renounce all such.

32. These two Recognitions, if the words be interpreted in their proper
Grammatical sense (as all Oaths in reason ought to be, unless they be
otherwise interpreted by authority) and according to the intention of the first
lawgiver declared by his practice, imply (excepting even a personal conferring
of Orders, and administering sacraments) that all Jurisdiction purely Spiritual
is acknowledged to be the Kings right. Now what Christian at this day alive
will make these two Recognitions in the sense aforesaid? Yea what English
Protestant will be willing to make even the Negative Recognition? For if there
be no Foreign power at all Superior to the King in things or causes purely
spiritual, then neither is the Pope a Patriarch of the West (which yet King
James will not deny) neither can a lawful and free General Council oblige
English Protestants, which yet they so often protest to submit to. And as for
the Affirmative clause, it is well known they do not admit it, at least in K.
H. the eighth his sense; we may add, nor in Q. Elizabeth's, as their 37 Article
will testify, contrary to the rigorous sense of the words of the oath.

33. How much less then can any English Subjects divided both in belief and
Ecclesiastical Discipline from the Head and Body of the Church of England,
submit to the same Oath? For can the King be acknowledged in all causes
spiritual to be a Head of Churches of which he renounces, and is renounced the
being so much as a member? Shall he contrive, or order the contriving of
Articles of belief respectively suitable to each Congregation, and bind his
Subjects severally to subscribe thereto, when himself believes them to be
false? Will he require some to be obedient to Bishops as instituted by Christ,
and others to renounce them as Antichristian? Some to use no other Form of
Service but the Common Prayer Book; others not that but the Directory; and
others neither of them, but their own crude imaginations and Nonsense? Will
he command some to submit to the Pope as supreme pastor, others Calvin,
others Zuinglius, or Socinus, or a John of Leyden, or a Knipper dolling?

34. It is evident that by virtue of this oath unchanged in any words, this
Kingdom has at least thrice changed its Religion, and the whole frame of the
Church. For in K. Henry the eighths days, excepting only in one point, it was
entirely Catholic. In King Edward the VI. his days it was almost Lutheran:
and in Q. Elizabeth's very much Calvinistical. And which is strange, excepting
Catholics, those that did not change their belief, yet were content to take
the same Oath. Which could not be done without framing to themselves different
senses and mental evasions, so as though all took the same Oath, yet each
severally took a different Oath, with a meaning in all of them contrary to the
intention of the Oath-makers.

35. Matters standing thus, what a burden of guilt most we suppose to lie upon
these Kingdoms by occasion of an Oath so solemnly imposed on the whole Nation,
which if we regard the force of the words, no man can take sincerely? And this
guilt is the more aggravated in this respect that there cannot possibly be any
real necessity for the imposing of it. For since by an Oath of Allegiance and
Obedience, his Majesty may be secured of his Subjects Loyalty, what necessity
or use can there be of such ambiguous acknowledgments of such a Supremacy which
the King himself will not acknowledge, and the affirming or denying of which
contributes nothing to his safety? He has experienced great disloyalty from a
world of those that have most freely taken it, and none at all from those
Catholics that have refused it. It is manifest that it was first contrived
merely on purpose that King Henry the eighth might make a most filthy and
execrable use of it. But now at last his Majesty having been pleased to declare
a liberty to tender consciences, a world of men there are in these Kingdoms
that are or ought to be weary of colluding with men, and dis-honouring God in
swearing according to a a Form which they cannot but judge unlawful, though it
were for no other reason but because it is ambiguous. And these are not Roman
Catholics, for they refuse the Oath: but many of distinct Sects from both
Catholic and Protestant belief. And surely that Christian conscience which is
not tender in a matter in which the honor of God and the salvation or
damnation of souls is so much concerned as in a solemn National Oath, or that
would voluntarily make advantage for temporal ends of gain to themselves, or
malice to others, by such an oath to ensnare the consciences of another, only
pretends to be a Christian, but in his heart says, There is no Christ, and no
God.

SECT. VI. In what sense the Oath of Supremacy is taken by English Protestants.
36 NOtwithstanding what has been said, although the oath of Supremacy as it
is conceived, and in the rigorous sense of the Words, cannot lawfully be taken
by any sect amongst Christians; yet we see it freely taken by persons of quite
different persuasions in matters of Religion: Neither will charity permit us to
judge, that they do all, or indeed any of them directly against their
consciences either take it, or impose it. And some make no doubt at all but
that an Oath, though it contain expressions which absolutely considered are
false, yet are capable of a good interpretation, and that a commodious
interpretation is allowed by supreme authority, such a form of an Oath may not
unlawfully be sworn to, if other circumstances impede not.

37. Now what the senses are in which respectively the Protestants and other
divided Sects do take this oath, cannot assuredly be determined, otherwise then
as they have expressed themselves in their writings. But however certain it is
that they all of them take it in a meaning so far different from that which K.
Henry the eighth intended, that if they had lived in his days, and given such
limitations to the Kingly power in Ecclesiastical matters, as we find openly
and plainly discovered in their Writings, they would have been esteemed as
guilty of treason, as Bishop Fisher and Sr. Thomas More were. Whence appears
that an Oath remaining for the Form unchanged, may be taken, and allowed to be
so taken, in various senses.

38. First for English Protestants, I mean since from toward the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth to these days, that notwithstanding any Spiritual Authority
either by Statutes conferred, or assumed by K. Henry the eighth, and Edward the
sixth, they attribute to the King only a Civil power in matters Ecclesiastical,
and that they do this with the allowance of our Princes, who questionless have
authority to interpret Oaths (such especially as concern their own safety, and
when their interpretations do no ways enlarge their own power, nor diminish
their subjects rights) may appear by evident testimonies in all these three
last Princes times, published by the most learned Doctors then living among
them.

39. In Queen Elizabeth's reign we have the Testimony of Doctor Bilson, Dr
Bilson Of Subject 2. par. p. 218.
afterward Bishop of Winchester, whose expressions are these; The Oath (says
he) expresses not the duty of Princes to God, but ours to them. And as they
must be obeyed when they join with the truth, so must they be endured when
they fall into error. Which side soever they take, either obedience to their
Wills, or submission to their swords, is their due by Gods Law. And that is all
which our oath exacteth. Again, This is the supreme power of Princes, which we
soberly teach, Id ibid p. 256.
and which you [JESUITES] so bitterly detest, That Princes be Gods Ministers in
their own Dominions, bearing the sword, freely to permit, and publicly to
defend that which God commands in Faith and good manners, and in
ecclesiastical discipline to receive and establish such Rules and Orders as the
Scriptures and Canons shall decide to be needful and healthful for the Church
of God in their Kingdoms. And as they may lawfully command that which is good
in all things and causes, be they Temporal, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical: So may
they with just force remove whatsoever is erroneous, vicious or superstitious
within their lands, and with external losses and corporal pains repress the
broachers and abbettours of Heresies and all impieties. From which subjection
unto Princes no man within their Realms, Monk, Priest, Preacher, nor Prelate is
exempted. And without their Realms no mortal man has any power from Christ
judicially to depose them, much less to invade them in open field, least of
all to warrant their Subjects to rebel against them. Moreover intending to
explain in what sense Spiritual Jurisdiction seems by the oath to be given to
Princes, he says first, We make no Prince judge of Faith: Ibid p 173 in marg.
and then more particularly, ibid p: 252
To devise new Rites and Ceremonies; for the Church is not the Princes
vocation; but to receive and allow such as the Scriptures and Canons commend,
and such as the Bishops and pastors of the place shall advise, not infringing
the Scriptures or Canons. And so for all other Ecclesiastical things and
^auses, Princes be neither the devisers nor Directours of them, but the
Confirmers and establishers of that which is good, and displacers and Revengers
of that which is evil. Which power we say they have in all things and causes,
be they Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, or Temporal. Hereto his adversary is brought
in replying And what for Excommunications and absolutions, be they in the
princes power also? To this he answers; The abuse of Excommunication in the
priest, and contempt of it in the people, Princes may punish: excommunicate
they may not, for so much as the Keys are no part of their charge. Lastly to
explain the Negative clause in the Oath, he says, In this sense we defend
Princes to be supreme, ibid p. 218
that is not at liberty to do what they list without regard of truth or right:
but without superior on Earth to repress them with violent means, and to take
their Kingdoms from them. Thus Doctor B^lson: whose testimony may be
interpreted to be the Queens own interpretation of the oath, since as appears
by the Title page of his book, what he wrote was perused and approved by
public Authority. And to such a sense of the Oath as this, there is not a
Catholic Clergy man in France, Germany, Venice, or Flanders but would readily
subscribe.

40. In the next place suitable to him Doctor Carleton in King James his time
thus states the matter; Carleton of Jurisdict. c. 1. p. 8, 9.
Bellarmine (says he) disputing of Jurisdiction says, There is a triple Power
in the Bishop of Rome; first of Order: secondly of internal jurisdiction;
thirdly of external jurisdiction: The first is referd to the sacraments; the
second to inward Government which is in the court of Conscience: the third to
that external Government which is practiced in external Courts: And confesses
that of the first and second there is no question between us, but only of the
third. Then of this (says Carleton) we are agreed that the question between us
and them is only of Jurisdiction coactive in external courts, binding and
compelling by force of Law and other External Mulcts and punishments, beside
excommunication. As for spiritual Jurisdiction of the Church standing in
examination of Controversies of Faith, judging of Heresies, deposing of
Heretics, excommunication of notorious offenders, Ordination of Priests and
Deacons, Institution and Collation of Benefices and spiritual Cures, etc. this
we reserve entire to the Church, which Princes cannot give or take from the
Church. This power has been practiced by the Church without co-active
jurisdiction, other then of Excommunication. But when matters handled in the
Ecclesiastical Consistory are not matters of Faith and Religion, but of a Civil
nature, which yet are called Ecclesiastical, as being given by Princes, and
appointed to be within the cognizance of that Consistory; and when the censures
are not spiritual, but carnal, compulsive, coactive, here appears the power
or the Civil Magistrate. This power we yield to the Magistrate; and here is the
question, whether the Magistrate has right to this power or Jurisdiction, etc.
This then is the thing that we are to prove, That Ecclesiastical coactive power
by force of Law and corporal punishments, by which Christian people are to be
governed in external and contentious Courts, is a power which of right
belongs to Christian Princes. Again afterward he says, Id. ibid. page 42.
Concerning the extention of the Churches Jurisdiction, it cannot be denied but
that there is a power in the Church, not only internal, but also of external
Jurisdiction. Of internal power there is no question made. External
Jurisdiction being understood all that is practiced in external Courts, or
Consistories, is either definitive or Mulctative. Authority Definitive in
matters of Faith and Religion belongs to the Church. Mulctative power may be
understood either as it is with Coaction, or as it is referred to spiritual
censures. As it stands in spiritual censures, it is the right of the Church,
and was practiced by the Church when the Church was without a Christian
Magistrate, and since. But coactive Jurisdiction was never practiced by the
Church when the Church was without Christian Magistrates: but was always
understood to belong to the civil Magistrate, whether he were Christian or
Heathen. After this manner does Doctor Carleton Bishop of Chichester
understand the Supremacy of the King acknowledged in the Oath.

41. In the last place Doctor Bramhall Bishop of Derry in our late Kings
days, and now Archbishop of Armagh, thus declares both the Affirmative and
Negative parts of the Oath touching the Kings supreme authority in matters
Ecclesiastical, and renouncing the Popes Jurisdiction in the same, here in
England, in his book called Schism guarded, Schism guarded.
etc. The sum of which Book is in the Title Page expressed to consist in
showing that the great Controversy about Papal power is not a question of
Faith, but of interest and profit; not with the Church of Rome, but with the
Court of Rome, etc. This learned and judicious writer thus at once states the
point in both these respects. My last ground, (says he) is, That neither King
Henry the eighth, nor any of his Legislators did ever endeavor to deprive the
Bishop of Rome of the power of the keys, or any part thereof; Either the key
of order, or the key of Jurisdiction. I mean Jurisdiction purely spiritual,
which has place only in the inner Court of Conscience, and over such persons
as submit willingly. Nor did ever challenge or endeavor to assume to
themselves either the key of order, or the key of Jurisdiction purely
spiritual. All which they deprived the Pope of, all which they assumed to
themselves, was the external Regiment of the Church by coactive power, to be
exercised by persons capable of the respective Branches of it. This power the
Bishops of Rome never had, or could have justly over their Subjects, but under
them whose Subjects they were. And therefore when we meet with these words or
the like, (That no foreign prelate shall exercise any manner of power,
Jurisdiction, etc. Ecclesiastical within this Realm) it is not to be understood
of internal or purely spiritual power in the Court of Conscience, or the power
of the keys, (We see the contrary practiced every day:) but of external and
Coactive power in Ecclesiastical causes in Foro contentioso. And that it is,
and might to be so understood, I prove clearly by it Proviso in one main Act of
Parliament, and an Article of the English Church. [Which act and article shall
be produced afterward.] The Bishop continues They (that is, the Parliament,)
profess their ordinance is merely Political: What has a Political Ordinance
with power purely spiritual? They seek only to preserve the Kingdom from
rapine, etc. And then having produced the Article, he concludes, You see the
power is political, the sword is political, all is Political. Our Kings leave
the power of the keys and Jurisdiction purely spiritual to those to whom
Christ has left it. Nothing can be more express then this so clear a testimony
of so judicious a Bishop touching the Kings supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical acknowledged by Oath. Only we must be excused if we assent not
to what he affirms, touching King Henry the Eighth his not assuming spiritual
Jurisdiction.

42. Again the same Bishop thus further adds, Id. ib. page 169.
Wheresoever our Laws do deny all spiritual Jurisdiction to the Pope in
England, it is in that sense that we call the exterior Court of the Church,
the spiritual Court. They do not intend at all to deprive him of the power of
the keys, or of any spiritual power that was bequeathed him by Christ or by
his Apostles, when he is able to prove his Legacy. To conclude, Id. ib. p. 119.
omitting a world of other passages to the same effect, he says, We have not
renounced the substance of the Papacy, except the substance of the Papacy do
consist in coactive power.

43. Moreover to warrant these explications of three so eminent men of the
Protestant Church, who write expressly upon the Subject, may be added,
testimonies yet more authentic and irrefragable, of our Princes themselves,
who are to be esteemed unquestionably authoritative interpreters of their own
laws, at least in these cases, as before was observed; and besides those, the
public Articles of the English Clergy, yea the Statutes of Parliaments also.

44. In an Act of Parliament made in the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign
there is an interpretation of the Oath of Supremacy in an express Proviso,
Stat. 5* Elizab.
That the Oath of Supremacy shall be taken and expounded in such form as is
set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens Injunctions published in the
first year of her Reign. The which Admonition was made to take away a scruple
raised by some, as if the Queen had usurped a Jurisdiction purely spiritual,
which she renounces: Admonit. of Q Eliz. to ^er injunctions.
professing first that by virtue of that Oath, no other Authority is to be
acknowledged then what was challenged and lately used by King Henry the eighth,
and King Edward the sixth. This clause is not to be supposed to be any part of
the interpretation of the Oath: but it is only intended to signify, that this
is no new invented usurpation of a Title, but that the same had been allowed to
those two Kings before her and the same Authority (says she) is and was of
ancient time due to the imperial crown of this Realm. Neither does she say,
that she challenges all that those two Kings did, as in effect it is apparent
she did not, but that what she requires had been formerly granted to them. And
it is evident that if her meaning had been that the Oath should be taken
according to that enormous latitude of power allowed and exercised by them,
such a way of indefinite explication would have been far more burdensome and
entangling to conscices then before: For that would signify, that all that
swear should be obliged to inform themselves in all the clauses of acts of
Parliament made by those two Kings, and in all the actions performed by them,
or else they will swear they know not what. Her explication therefore is set
down clearly and distinctly in the following words, by which she declares what
that authority is which she challenges, and which must be acknowledge in taking
the Oath, Viz. That is, Ibid.
the Queen under God to have the Sovereignty and rule over all manner of
persons born within these Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what Estate,
either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be, so as no other foreign
power shall or ought to have any superiority over them.

45. This clause according to the Queens interpretation confirmed by act of
Parliament, contains the true sense of the Oath, so that if this clause can be
sworn to, that is all that is signified in the form of the Oath, say
Protestants. Now that by this Clause only civil power over all persons
Ecclesiastical is challenged, appears by a wrong interpretation of the Oath
which she complains to have been spread abroad, Viz. as if by the words of the
said Oath it may be collected that the Kings and Queens of this Realm, Ibid.
possessours of the crown may challenge authority and power of Ministry of
Divine offices in the Church: She renounces all meddling with any Offices purely
Ecclesiastical in the Church, (as also Doctor Bilson by her authority declares
in the forecited words:) she pretends not to administer Sacraments, conferr
Orders, inflict Ecclesiastical censures, determine controversies of faith, etc.
But she challenges a supreme civil Authority over all those that have right to
exercise those Offices, as being her Subjects as well as the Laity: And this
Jurisdiction she will have acknowledged so to be her peculiar Right, as that no
foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them, that is, no
part of this Regal power, whatsoever spiritual Jurisdiction, which she medles
not withal, they may challenge. That this is the true sense of this clause
appears by that expression [SO AS] which would be void of all sense, if the
meaning of it should be conceived to be, That the Queen has the supreme Regal
authority, so as no other has a Pastoral authority, no way prejudicial to the
Regal; and this sense is evidently confirmed by the Act 50. Eliz. Act. 5, Eliz.
c. 1.
which gives this title to the Act 10. Eliz. That it is an Act by which there
is restored to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, and an abolishing of all foreign power repugnant to the same;
not simply all foreign power, but only that which would diminish her regal
power. For how ridiculous would it be to declare a power challenged, and
another power renounced that has no repugnancy to it, and renounced with the
words So as?

46. Moreover in the said Admonition there are other matters worthy to be well
observed: For first by making and with authority publishing that Admonition and
injunctions, she expressly assumes as her right, a power to interpret Oaths and
Acts of Parliament: Which if she may do, so doubtless may her Successors.
Secondly, besides this she gives power to any one that takes the Oath, in
taking it to signify that he accepts it with the said meaning; Admonit. o^ Q
Eliz.
for says she, If any person that has conceived any other sense of the Form
of the said Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense or
meaning, her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf as
her good and Obedient Subject, and shall acquit them of all manner of penalties
contained in the said Act against such as shall peremptorily or obstinately
refuse to take the same Oath. Thirdly, that this her interpretation and
addition is moreover established by a following Act of Parliament, Stat. 5.
Eliz.
which says, That it is to be taken and expounded in this Form. Lastly, that
the Oath it self is by the Queen in her admonition said to be an oath
prescribed to be required of diverse persons for the recognition of their
Allegiance to her. Which shows it concerned not Belief, but duty only in
maintaining her supreme civil Authority.

Artic. 37.
47. Next in King James his days what was conceived to be the power challenged
by our Kings in virtue of that Oath, will easily appear by a notable passage in
his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs, in which his intention is to
convince (as he says) those (Roman) Libellers of Wilful malice, Praemon of K.
James to all Chr. Monarks page 9.
who impudently affirm, that the Oath of Allegiance was devised for deceiving
and intrapping of Papists in points of Conscience. [Now speaking thus, surely
he would not it should be believed that his meaning was by continuing to urge
the Oath of Supremacy likewise to deceive and entrap his poor Subjects in
points of Conscience. From which unworthy intention how averse he was, that is,
how far from assuming to himself or even denying to the Pope a Jurisdiction
purely spiritual, the following words will testify:] The truth is (says he)
that the lower house of parliament at the first framing of that Oath made it to
contain that the Pope had no power to excommunicate me; ibid.
which I caused them to reform, only making it to conclude, That no
excommunication of the Popes can warrant my Subjects to practice against my
person or State; denying the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful
power: as indeed I take any such Temporal violence to be far without the limits
of such a spiritual Censure as excommunication. [And Suarez and Becanus, etc.
go further, affirming that by Excommunication not any Temporal right or Power
is taken away, or diminished. K. James Premon. ibid.
] So careful was I (says he) that nothing should be contained in this Oath
except the profession of natural Allegiance, and Civil and Temporal obedience,
with a promise to resist to all contrary uncivil violence. And presently after
he adds, That the occasion of the Oath was ordained only for making of a true
distinction between Papists of quiet disposition, ibid.
and in all other things good Subjects, and such other Papists as in their
hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maxims that the powder-traitours
did. Ibid. page 46.
Nay moreover touching the patriarchal Jurisdiction he says, For my self (if
that were the question) I would with all my heart give my consent, that the
Bishops of Rome should have the first seat: I being a Western, King would go
with the Patriarch of the west. And how far he was from challenging spiritual
Jurisdiction, he showed by his constant committing such affairs to his Clergy,
only adding his regal Authority for the execution of their Ordinances: but
more publicly and validly by a new confirming and causing to be published by
his authority the Articles of the English Clergy, among which is the 37th, We
do not give our Kings either the administration of Gods word or Sacraments,
which the injunctions published lately by Queen Elizabeth do most evidently
daclare: But only that prerogative which we see to have been always attributed
to all godly Princes by himself in holy Scriptures, that is, To preserve or
contain all Estates and orders committed to their trust by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or civil, in their duties, and restrain contumacious offenders
with the civil sword.

48, This one Article, not only publicly acknowledged by all English
Protestants, but a subsciption thereto enacted from Ecclesiastics, and those
that take degrees in the Universities, and withal by Act of Parliament
enjoined to be read by all Beneficed Ministers within two months after their
induction, this one Article, I say, so confirmed, may alone suffice to
demonstrate evidently and distinctly that it is only a civil Jurisdiction that
the Kings of England challenge in Ecclesiastical matters, and not at all an
authority purely spiritual or Pastoral: They are as all other Christian Princes
have ever been acknowledged, custodes utriusque Tabuloe: They ought to see and
provide that all their Subjects do their duty both to God and Man. Wherein that
duty consists, which concerns the Divine worship, they are to learn from the
Church: and at their peril it is, if they be misdirected by a false Church; but
however thus far their just power extends, which must be submitted to either by
obeying or suffering. As long therefore as this Article is in force in England,
there will be no need of searching into the senses or interpretations of
following Kings, say Protestants; yet if we should do this, it is well known
that our late Sovereign, and his Majesty now reigning, (besides many
expressions vivae vocis oraculo,) have been rather more careful then King
James, not to interpose themselves in functions purely spiritual.

49. This Section shall be concluded with setting down a notable Provizo extant
in that very Statute in which the Popes Jurisdiction was most prejudiced, and
the greatest Authority in Ecclesiastical matters conferred upon King Henry the
eighth. The which Provizo is so cautelously framed, that though King Henry
esteemed himself to have gained a Jurisdiction purely spiritual, and
accordingly in many particulars practiced it; to the which several clauses also
both in this and following Statutes seem as if they gave warrant; yet the
Parliament by the said Provizo laid a ground how they might in future and
better times show how they meant no such thing. The words are these, PROVIDED
always that this Act, Stat. 25. Hen. 8. cap. 21.
nor any thing or things therein contained shall be hereafter interpreted or
expounded, that your grace, your Nobles and Subjects intend by the same to
decline or vary from the Congregation of Christ's Church in any things
concerning the very Articles of the Catholic Faith of Christendom, or in any
other things declared by holy Scripture and the word of God, necessary for your
and their Salvation: but only to make an ordinance by policies necessary and
convenient to repress vice, and for good conservation of this Realm in peace,
unity and tranquillity, from rapine and spoil, ensuing much the old ancient
customs of this Realm in that behalf. Not minding to seek for any reliefes,
succors or remedies for any worldly things and humane laws in any case of
necessity, but within this Realm, at the hands of your Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, Kings of this Realm, which have and ought to have an imperial power
and authority in the same, and not obliged in any worldly causes to any other
Superior. By this Proviso, never repealed, the Parliaments Ordinance is
declared to be merely Political, that the Kings Independence on foreign power
is in worldly things and humane laws, he being in worldly causes not obliged
to any other Superior.

50. Thus far of the sense in which both the most judicious among the English
Protestants have declared, and have been authorized to declare, what power it
is that by the Oath is deferred to the Kings of England, and renounced to be in
any foreign Prince or Prelate; to wit, a civil Political power, wheresoever it
can be exercised in any causes Ecclesiastical, etc. Against this there is not
extant a contradictory Testimony of any one Protestant Writer: So that the
Protestant Subjects of England do intend, and judging that they have
unquestionable grounds to judge this only to be the sense of the Oath, in this
sense only do they take it, and require it to be taken by others.

SECT. VII. In what sense the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance seem to be
taken by Presbyterians, Independents, etc.
51. IT is a wonderful Mystery how it should come to pass that our English
Prebyterians, etc. should (especially now of late) with so much willingness and
greediness themselves swallow these Oaths, and so clamorously, not without
threatening, urge the imposing them upon others. Is it because the Oath of
Supremacy has so peculiar a conformity to their principles, and that of
Allegiance to their practices? or that they are so ready, and pressing to
disclaim and condemn all that themselves have done these last twenty years?

52. First for there Doctrinal principles, I do not find that any of those Sects
of late in England in peaceable times have publicly declared in what sense
they allowed his Majesty to have a supreme Jurisdicton in causes Ecclesiastical
or Spiritaul, as to themselves: But as to the oppression and destruction of
poor Roman Catholics, they have always showed too great a willingness to
exalt the Kings Authority, and to draw out and sharpen his sword, far more then
himself was willing. I do not find that any of them have busied themselves, as
a world of Protestants and Catholics have, with making discourses upon the
Oaths. Their silence in this point wherein they are doubtless much concerned
one way or other, is surely very argumentative.

53. Who ever knew or heard to flow from the tongue, or drop from the pen of a
Presbyterian, so Christian a positon as is sincerely avouched both by English
Protestants and the general body of Roman Catholics, viz. That even in case a
Christian or Heathen Prince should make use of his civil power to persecute
truth, that power ought not upon any pretenses to be actively resisted by
violence or force of arms: but though they cannot approve, they must at least
patiently suffer the effects of his misused Authority, leaving the judgment to
God only. How unknown, at least how unreceived such a Doctrine has hitherto
been among their Brethren abroad, will but too manifestly appear in a volume
entitled, Dangerous positions, collected by Archbishop Bancroft out of several
books written by Calvinisticall preachers. What judgment their patriarch Calvin
made of King Henry the eighths new Title of the Head of the Church, we have
seen before, Confess. des Eglises de France. 9. ult.
And what an exception, terrible to Princes, the French Calvinistical Church
has made in their confession of Faith, speaking of Obedience due to the
supreme Magistrate, appears at least every Sunday in all their hands in print:
Where they acknowledge such obedience due to them, except the Law of God and
religion be interested, or to use their own expression, mogennant que l'empire
de Dieu, demeure en son entire, that is, upon condition that Gods Sovereignty
remain undiminished. Which clause what it means, their so many, and so long
convinced Rebellions do expound.

54. And as for their practices in England and Scotland, it were to be wished
they could be forgotten, especially all that has happened the last twenty years:
And it may suffiice only in gross to take notice, that the most efficacious
Engine for beginning the late war and engaging their party in the prosecution of
it was a public declaration, that their design was to root out Popish
Doctrines, favored by the King and Bishops, to abolish public Forms of
Church Service, and to destroy Episcopacy and Church Government, root and
branch, which had been established in England by the universal authority of the
whole Kingdom.

55. These things considered, is it not a great Mystery that such persons of
such persuasions should be so zealous to take and impose generally either of
these Oaths? To think that they do knowingly, directly and formally forswear
themselves, and force others to do so, would be uncharitable. Therefore an
Evasion they have to secure themselves in their own opinions from perjury. How
little they deferr to Kings in their own Ecclesiastical matters and Government,
yea how they declare that none must be excepted from their consistories and
Synodical Jurisdictions even externally coercive, is evident both in Sco^land
and elsewhere. And it is observable that in the form of an Oath lately
contrived in Scotland, the word Ecclesiastical is studiously left out. How
comes it then to pass that they can in England swear that the King is supreme
Head and Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical or spiritual? Who can
reconcile these things together in such a sense?

56. Surely it will be extremely difficult, if not impossible to imagine any
colorable Evasion or pretext for cousening themselves, except it be this, That
both the Oaths were made only against Roman Catholics acknowledging the Pope
to be supreme pastor of Gods Church, so that whosoever can swear that he is no
Papist, may freely and without scruple take those Oaths, as being nothing at
all concerned in them: Whatever he does, he cannot be a traitor by virtue of
the Oath, because he was not a powder-traytor.

57. If the secret of the affair do indeed lie on such an interpretation as
this, then it will follow that none of the Kings Subjects are, or can by any
oath as yet in force be obliged not to be traitors, but only such Roman
Catholics as take the Oath of Allegiance. A hard case for his Majesty.

58. This Evasion may perhaps serve for the Negative clause of the Oath of
Supremacy, wherein profession is made, That the Pope has no Jurisdiction in
this Kingdom: But how will they defend themselves from the most principal
Affirmative clause, That the King alone is supreme Governor in all causes
Ecclesiastical? Till they express themselves in this point, no other expedient,
I Suppose, can be found, but by denying that there are two distinct clauses in
the oath, and consequently by saying that the whole Oath is but one simple
assertion, viz. That the King is so far to be esteemed the supreme Governor as
that the Pope is not above him: But yet a consistory of Presbyters though his
Subjects, yea any single Minister in causes touching Religion and Church
Government may be his superior. Now if this guess hit right, upon the like
grounds the Oath of Allegiance will be interpreted too, as if they that take it
should say thus, We promise Fidelity to his Majesty so sincerely, that
notwithstanding any Excommunication or sentence of deprivation issuing from the
Pope against him, we will not seek to depose or murder him. But if our
teachers, or we our selves do interpret the word of God against any of his
actions, or if we find in scripture that he loves not the pure reformed
Religion, and shows his dislike by any public action, then he must look to
himself: For these Oaths do not extend to such cases, no not so much as to
hinder us from defending our purses with our swords against any illegal
exactions. We are sure we are not Papists; that we readily swear, and that is
enough.

59. Notwithstanding if they look well upon the Oath, they will find the word
Only too stubborn to comply with this sense, where they profess the King to be
the only supreme Governor: Unless they will conceive the meaning to be, That
he is only a Supreme Governor in regard of the Pope with whom he will have
nothing to do, and who therefore is neither under him, nor above him, and in
regard of no body of the world besides, not the most pitiful Tub-Man. This
indeed would be an evasion, the invention whereof is beyond the art of
equivocation.

60. It is not here pretended, that by this evasion and no other, Presbyterians
have the art to sweeten Oaths, which in the ordinary sense and understanding of
all the rest of the Kingdom are point blank opposed, at least to their
Brethrens Doctrines and their own practices: So that the Author of these
Reflections must leave a more perfect discovery of their mysterious ways to the
eyes of the State infinitely more clear-sighted and penetrating.

61. As for the Independents, all that to me is known of them since they lately
showed their faces to the destruction both of Church and State, is their new
name: What they think of the Oaths, does not to me appear. But the very name
implying a renouncing of all order and subordination in Church Government even
among themselves: and their known practice having been an Usurpation of supreme
authority to themselves, purchased with the most execrable murder of their
undoubted and too too merciful Sovereign: if they can be so hypocritical as to
take either of these Oaths, they will deceive no body: For it will be evident
to all men, that not changing their tenants and courses, they must needs be
perjured; so that to some it may be a doubt whether it be a lawful or however
an expedient mean for the Kings safety to offer them the Oaths, or to rely
upon their taking them.

62. All that for the present will be collected from the words or practices of
these two Sects, is, That at least they do acknowledge so far a concurrence
with the sense of Protestants touching these Oaths, that they do assure
themselves that by them there is no Jurisdiction purely Ecclesiastical,
attributed or due to his Majesty: How far, or whether at all they will permit
his civil power to act in matters Ecclesiastical, till they discover their
minds, (if they be not too much discovered already) who can tell?

63. Besides these, other Scots there are in abundance, which the common voice
ties together as Samson did his Foxes, tail to tail, their faces all looking
several ways: however they are called usually Fanatics. Of these some
profess Obedience, others profess against it, but not any of them will swear
either the one, or the other. Their sense therefore of these Oaths is neither
to be expected, nor if it were had, is it to be valued.

SECT. VIII. Upon what grounds Roman Catholics do generally refuse to take the
Oath of Supremacy.
64. IT may very well, and indeed does to Protestants seem a mystery almost as
hard to be penetrated into, as was that in the last Section, why
Roman Catholics should so generally refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy, Q
considering that the whole Kingdom besides, does unanimously agree at least in
this point, That the Supremacy ascribed therein to his Majesty does not at all
prejudice the spiritual Jurisdiction of Pastors, with which the King does not
meddle, neither indeed does it concern him; for it is nothing to the King
whether one of his Subjects be for his faults excommunicated, or admitted to
the communion; Whether he be an Ecclesiastical person, or a Layman; as
likewise whether his Excommunication or Ordination proceed from one beyond
Seas, or at home; and the like is to be said of his Orders. Now since Catholic
Faith teaches that secular power which belongs to Caesar, should be given to
Caesar: and mere spiritual Authority over consciences, and upon spiritual
penalties only, should be given to the supreme and subordinate Pastors,
Protestants wonder why Catholics so persuaded should refuse to swear that
which they profess: Especially since by such a refusal they deprive themselves
of a comfortable exercise of their Religion, and withal expose themselves to
many and grievous penalties. They profess Loyalty to the King, and dare not
swear it. And they hopefully persuade themselves, that if they did swear it, he
would believe them, which is a grace that he will not afford to all: but by not
swearing it when they are required by lawful authority, they put themselves in
an incapacity to make their Loyalty useful to his Majesty, and give perhaps
scandal to many out of the Church, as if indeed there were some unknown
principle of disloyalty in their Religion, which forbids them to confirm by
Oath that which they without oath willingly and almost unanimously profess.
This is a mystery that Protestants wonder at.

R.
65. If Catholics answer, that they are ready to swear that which Protestants
so confidently affirm to be the sense of the Oath, but the Oath it self
according to the present form they dare not take, because they find such a
sense very unsuitable to the expressions in the Oath: Ob.
The others will reply, That Catholics take too much upon themselves, to give
a sense to an Oath, contrary to what is declared by public and supreme
Authority: That Protestants themselves would make a scruple perhaps at it, were
it not that the sense in which they declare their taking of it so seems to them
warranted by supreme authority, as no man can imagine, almost a more Authentic
testimony: For that by the Oath our Princes would have no other then civil
Regal authority in Ecclesiastical matters attributed to them; and that as they
themselves pretend not to a Jurisdiction purely spiritual, so neither do they
envy or deny it to any of those whom our Lord has constituted Pastors of souls
in his Church: All this is attested by all particular Writers, nemine
contradicente, by the voluntary assertions of our Princes, the undoubted
authoritative interpreters of their own Laws, who publicly approved such
Writers, and also showed this by their Actions, or rather their Omissions to
exercise spiritual power. Further the same is attested by a public Article or
confession of Faith of the whole body of the English Clergy confirmed and made
an Ecclesiastical Law by Regal and Parliamentary authority: And Lastly by Acts
of Parliament remaining in full force, so that in the opinion of Protestants it
is almost impossible to find stronger assurances of any truth, then are the
proofs that this is acknowledged to be the true sense of the Oath. Thus say
Protestants.

66. Notwithstanding in the judgment of Catholics, the Negative clause in the
oath, Ob.
[viz. No foreign Prince, Prelate, etc. has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, power or authority Ecclesiastical or spiritual within this Realm]
seems incapable of that sense, and directly contrary to a point of their Faith,
viz. that the Pope is supreme pastor of the whole Church in matters purely
Ecclesiastical or spiritual. That clause has so horrible an aspect, it implies
a renouncing even the Popes pastoral Authority, and this with so much Emphasis,
that least the word [ECCLESIASTICAL] might possibly import a Civil authority in
Ecclesiastical Courts, there is added also [SPIRITUAL:] that therefore a
Catholics tongue cannot repeat it, much less swear to an acknowledgment of it.

Sol.
67. But this excuse does not satisfy such Protestants as out of compassion to
the fellow-sufferings of Roman Catholics, are desirous that their Fidelity may
be useful to their Sovereign and Country. Ob.
For they reply, that though the said clause might perhaps deserve to be ill
looked on by strangers, yet not so by Englishmen: Since the word [SPIRITUAL]
has not the same Notion elsewhere, that it has in England. The Oath is to be
administered not only to scholars, but to all Lay-persons in Office, to
Soldiers in ships, etc. Now in England the word [ECCLESIASTICAL] is not
commonly understood by ignorant persons, and therefore for explanation of it
there is added [OR SPIRITUAL,] which term whenever it is applied to
Jurisdiction, signifies in England no more then such Jurisdiction as is
exercised In foro contentioso, and Ecclesiastical Courts, which we call the
Spiritual Courts, Schism guarded.
and Spiritual Judges, and Spiritual Authority, as my Lord of Derry well
observes: for as for that purely spiritual Jurisdiction that a Bishop exercises
in censures, or a Confessarius over his penitent in the internal Court of
conscience, English Men ordinarily know little or nothing of it. And therefore
if that clause were to be translated into Italian, French or Latin, the word
[SPIRITUAL] ought not to be turned Spiritualem, but some other term must be
invented, which should import this sense, and no more.

68. Again, though the clause says that the Pope has not any authority, no not
so much as Ecclesiastical or Spiritual: it has as they think, already been
showed that that phrase implies only that he has not any such Regal or Civil
authority by his own right and Divine Law, as the King challenges in matters
Ecclesiastical, as the approved explication by the words [SO AS] in Queen
Elizabeth's Admonition demonstrates. Neither is it unusual among Writers, when
they speak of a present matter, and would deny any thing concerning it, to deny
it in indefinite terms. So when our Savior says to the Scribes, If ye were
blind, Joan. c. 9.
ye should have no sin; or, ye should not have any sin, his meaning is not,
That if they had not had sufficient light whereby they might perceive him to be
the Messiah, they would not have been proud, malicious, adulterers, etc. but
only this, That the sin of infidelity should not have been imputed to them,
which before he had charged them withal.

69. Therefore although that clause look so hideously in the eyes of Roman
Catholics, that if it stood alone, and were considered absolutely and simply
by it self, they could not without renouncing a point of acknowledged Catholic
Faith subscribe to it: Notwithstanding if it be considered with dependence on
the foregoing words of the Oath, it speaks a quite other language then
otherwise it would in their opinion.

70. To give some examples of the like case. If it were proposed to an Orthodox
Christian whether he would subscribe to these Assertions, The Father is greater
then the Son, and, There is no evil, but God is the Author of it; He would
doubtless refuse to subscribe to the former, as being Heretical, and to the
later, as being moreover blasphemous. Notwithstanding having been informed that
our Savior speaking of himself as a man, said, My Father is greater then I am,
and that the meaning is, That the Father is greater then the Son, if the Son be
considered according to his humane nature: And again that God has by his
prophet speaking of Afflictions, said expressly, Is there any evil in a City,
of which I am not the Author? and that the word [EVILL] in that speech does not
signify sin, which it does, when it is mentioned absolutely and simply; but
only punishment; then a good Catholic will make no difficulty in subscribing
to both those sayings. Now the very same, say they, may be said touching this
clause as it lies in the Oath, especially having been sufficiently declared
that it is only a civil temporal Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Courts, etc.
which is denied to belong to any other by right, except only the King.

71. But in all events, they conceive that among all Roman Catholics those
might soonest be persuaded to admit a favorable interpretation of this oath,
who maintain the doctrine of Equivocation, which is not expressly excluded by
this Oath, as it is by that of Allegiance. Though how can Equivocation be
excluded, when according to them one Equivocation may be renounced by another?
A most horrid example whereof England has lately seen in the R. Padre Antonio
Vais.

72. Neither do Protestants think that a Declaration formerly made by the Pope,
Ob.
and forbidding Catholics to take those Oaths with any Interpretation
whatsoever, needs to be a hindrance to the taking of it in the forementioned
sense so publicly avouched, but only in any secret meanings invented, or
mentally reserved by particular persons. For surely the Pope intends not to
take a power from Lawgivers to interpret their own laws, nor to forbid their
Subjects to admit their interpretations, if they be agreeable to truth, and that
the words be capable of being so interpreted, as these are pretended to be.
Certain it is that the Pope was never informed of this so legal an
interpretation: For if he had, he would never have forbidden that to distressed
English Catholics, which to his knowledge all good Subjects in France, Germany,
Venice, etc. neither will nor dare refuse to acknowledge and profess. Besides,
(say they) is England now become the only Kingdom in Christendom where all
manner of Briefs must be immediately submitted to without a public Legal
acceptance, and without examination of the Motives, or suggestions by which
they were procured? It is far otherwise now in the most Catholic Countries,
and was formerly even in England, when it was most Catholic: the Laws then
made against receiving or executing Bulls from Rome without a public admission
under the penalty of incurring a Praemunire, are still in force.

73. If Catholics rejoyning, say that there is another regard for which they
are unwilling even to receive information touching any qualifications of these
Oaths, Ob.
viz. because the mere admitting a probability that they may lawfully and
without prejudice to Catholic Faith be taken, would argue that so many
virtuous, wise and holy Men as have suffered death, etc. for refusing them,
have suffered without any necessary cause: Such were Bishop Fisher, Sir Thomas
More, etc. in King Henry the eights days, and many good Priests since.

Sol.
74. Notwithstanding, say Protestants, such a consequence is not necessary: For
first, it has been showed that King Henry the eighth intended to exclude the
purely spiritual Jurisdiction of the Pope, his power of determining matters of
Faith according to former Laws of the Church, etc. And therefore no wonder
that good Catholics then would not betray their consciences. But it is well
known that Sir Thomas More advised the King to limit some excesses of the Popes
Jurisdiction. K. James defense of the Oath.
And an eminent writer, tells us that Bishop Fisher offered to take the Oath,
if it might have been permitted him to explicate his sense of it, which could
be no other then this, that he should deny the Popes temporal Jurisdiction.
Secondly as for those that suffered in Q. Elizabeth's time, it is certain that
all good Catholics would never have esteemed it a Martyrdom to dye for
refusing to the King a supreme Kingly Power, and attributing that to the pope.
They had therefore a quite different notion of what the state of England
required by this Oath. But of late good occasion has been given for a more
exact examination of it. For to make a sincere and ingenuous confession, it was
a Committee of the late rebellious parliament, that probably first of all
discovered what use they made of the foresaid proviso in the Act 5. Eliz. to
warrant them to take this Oath without submitting their Religion to the King.
And the same use they judged that all other Sects might make of the same, and
justify their so doing by law, even Roman Catholics themselves.

75. All these things considered, it is no wonder that English protestants not
being fully informed of the state of Catholics, should wonder at Roman
Catholics for their so Universal agreement in refusing an Oath so interpreted,
without the least prejudice to their faith, but with so unexpressible a
prejudice both to their estates and exercise of their Religion.

76. The Author of these Reflections does freely acknowledge that he has been
inquisitive with more then ordinary diligence into the grounds upon which
Protestants do make no scruple at all to take an oath, which if it had no
Expounders to qualify the sense properly imported by the words, he knows they
could not take it with a good conscience Nay moreover he has given all the
advantage that he could to the proofs produced by them to justify that no
other sense ought to be given thereto, by any English Subject: in so much as he
may apprehend that he shall incurr a danger to be esteemed by Catholics to
have a design to encourage them also to take it, since that sense is such as is
very convenient to the principles of Catholic Religion.

77. But he protests the contrary. His end in writing all this is (besides a
satisfaction given to his mind, that he cannot now without breach of Charity
charge Protestants with such an unsincerity in their taking this Oath, as
Presbyterians etc. are apparently guilty of) to afford unto the World an
illustrious proof of the most perfect sincerity, and the greatest tenderness
of conscience expressed on this occasion by the generality of English
Catholics, that I believe ever was given by any Church since Christ's time.

78. They live here in their own native Country with less privilege then
strangers, they are excluded from having any influence on any thing that
concerns the Commonweal of which they are freeborn Subjects; When laws are
made against them as guilty persons, they are not permitted to separate their
cause from a few that only deserved the penalties of those laws; they are by
laws obnoxious to greater sufferings then enemies; they see their families
impoverished, their houses invaded by savage officers, their lives forfeited as
Traitors, for entertaining those without whom they could not live otherwise
then as Pagans, deprived of performing any service and worship to God, etc. All
these miseries they groan under without proof of any demerit on their parts;
the crimes of a few miserable seduced and seducing wretches, and their bloody
Doctrine, by none in the Kingdom more detested then by themselves, are made
their guilt. And these calamities they could avoid by taking an oath, the
present new acknowleded sense whereof (as to his Majesty's right) is just and
lawful. And yet they dare not take it. Why? Because they fear God above all.
But do not Protestants fear him too? They are no Judges of the consciences of
others. This they assure themselves of, that if those that now take the Oath,
had been to have framed it, they would have showed a greater proof of their
fear of God, then to have expressed the Kings Supremacy in terms fit for none
but K. Hen. the VIII.

79. But moreover great difference there is between the case of Protestants and
Roman Catholics in regard of this Oath. For Protestants know that the first
invention of this Oath was to explore the consciences of Catholics, and to
tempt them to Schism, by renouncing the Spiritual Authority of the head of
Gods Church, which under peril of damnation they cannot do. They would not
perhaps find so great difficulty, ( without swearing,) only to say, That the
King alone is the supreme Governor in all matters Ecclesiastical within his
Dominions, etc. when they are obliged to say this to persons that acknowledge
with them such power to be only Civil: But an Oath to Catholics is a thing so
dreadful, that they dare not call God to witness that they sincerely swear an
acknowledgement that the Pope has not, nor ought to have any Superiority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, unless it might be permitted them at the same
time, and in the same breath to signify that this is intended of Civil, Kingly
Authority in Ecclesiastical causes. They tremble to swear in a phrase at the
best ambiguous, or rather not ambiguous, but formally contradictory to
Catholic Doctrine: for all the words that they pronounce, and of their
acknowledgment whereof they make God a witness, are such as they are persuaded
to be manifestly erroneous. Now God is called a witness to what men say in an
oath, not to what they think, unless they think as they say.

80. But moreover there is another consideration that is more than sufficient
to make the taking of this oath inconsistent with Catholic Religion: and that
is, the difference that King James, Bishop Andrews, etc. put between the two
oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, in regard of their End and intention.
Defense of the Oath.
For says King James, The Oath of Allegiance (was not framed against Roman
Catholics in general, but) only to make a separation between Catholics of a
peaceable disposition and in all other things good Subjects, and such Roman
Catholics as maintained the Rebellious Maxims of the Powder-traitours. But as
for the Oath of Supremacy, the intention of the continuation of it, was to the
end to discover who were Roman Catholichs, and who Protestants. So that
whosoever takes that Oath, is presumed by King James etc. to declare that he is
no Catholic: Tort. tort. page 3.
Bishop Andrews has the like expression: but withal he discovers the
usesessness of that oath. For (says he) what needs any oath at all to detect
who are Roman Catholics? For they refuse to be present at the Protestants
Church service, they will not come to our Sermons, they dare not receive the
Eucharist with us, etc. So that without any oath you may easily know who are
Roman Catholics.

81. Lastly the principal proof by which Protestants demonstrate that by the
Oaths no other Authority or Supremacy is given to our Princes, but civil only
(which is the 37 Article of the English Church) though it be sufficient to
clear the Affirmative part of the oath, yet not so for the Negative, concerning
the Popes spiritual Jurisdiction. Yea in the same place it is expressly
excluded: For the words following in the same Article do apparently give and
require a very uncatholick sense of that Negative Clause; for there is
expressly affirmed, The Bishop of Rome has not any Jurisdiction in this
Kingdom. Now since both King James, Bishop Andrews, and the thirty seventh
Article, even in the very same places where they speak of Kingly and papal
power do as the former rightly state the Kingly, and leave the Papal
(Spiritual) power indifinitely excluded, their intention appears to have been
to declare against, and require an abrenunciation of a Catholic point of faith.

82. Upon these grounds Catholics dare not but refuse to take the Oath of
Supremacy. Perhaps by the new unlawful art of Casuistry some of them might
think they could find evasions: but generally such is the tenderness of their
consciences that they dare not think it lawful to make advantage of Casuistry
in a Solemn Oath. Very likely Protestants will call them nicely scrupulous,
foolish or improvident for this their tenderness of conscience. But sure they
will not suspect them disloyal, who attribute as much Authority to the King as
themselves do: and if it were permitted them to confirm this by a clear Oath,
in their own language, they would not yield to them in the fulness of the
expression. If hereafter they are resolved not to grant them any ease from
their pressures, if a harmless scrupulosity in Catholics shall bear those
penalties which direct rebellion in others escapes, If to satisfy the passion
of not very good Subjects, those that are truly loyal shall be treated as
Rebels, and their religion only punished indeed; however that will not be
acknowledged by those that punish it, all that remains for Catholics to say,
is, Dominus judicabit fines terrae.

SECT. IX. Upon what grounds some Catholics make scruple to take the Oath of
Allegiane.
83. NExt follows the Oath of Allegiance, framed by K. James upon the greatest
provocation, and an attentat the most execrable, the most abhorred by the whole
body of Catholics, both at home and abroad, and the most scandalous to
Christian Religion that ever was. This oath affords also matter of wonder to
Protestants, Why Catholics who acknowledge the Kings supreme civil authority,
should make any scruple to take it, since it was never meant against such.

84. But they may impute only to themselves the cause of such a refusal: for by
some incommodious phrases unnecessarily thrust into it they have frighted many
from taking it: and as if they had conspired with that one too well known party
which alone gave occasion for the framing it, they have given them advantage
for those unnecessary phrases sake to fix upon all the Refusers a scandalous
however unjust imputation as if they approved these abominable principles, from
which flowed that more abominable Attentat, which deservedly wrung extreme
severity from a Prince the most element that ever this Nation formerly had
enjoyed.

85. In the following Reflections therefore upon this Oath, justice requires
that we should divide between the innocent and the guilty, between those that
(not in this Kingdom only) have made that Principle of Disloyalty their
distinctive Charter; and those that are ready to renounce that Principle, if
they might be allowed to renounce it by any other, though more Emphatical
expressions.

86. As touching the former unhappy party, it is observable that at the first
publishing of the Oath, there were in every line and almost particle of it
pointed out by them a several Heresy: All which Heresies are now at last
vanished, excepting only one, which is that by which there is enjoined [a
renouncing of that so bruited Article of Faith touching the Popes power of
deposing Princes not for Heresy only but almost any other fault that shall be
esteemed sufficient to deserve it.

87. This pretended Article of Faith is by such new De-fide-men grounded either
upon the Actions of certain Popes since Pope Gregory the seventh, which both
for their own sakes and ours it is to be wished had never been done, or might
be blotted out of all men's memories; or upon the Decrees of some Councels not
received or acknowledged by Catholic Churches; but principally upon a Decree
of the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the third, in which an Ordinance
is said to have been framed to oblige (not supreme Princes but) Temporales
Potestates and Dominos, which bear Offices in States to take at Oath to root
out of their Dominions all Heretics, upon penalty (if they do not perform
what they swear) of being denounced by the pope to be deprived of their
Estates, etc. yet reserving the right of the supreme Lord.

88. All these Allegations have been already unanswerably confuted by several
learned Writers of our Nation: but because this last Decree of a Council not so
questioned, for as much as can be proved to have been decided in it, and
because it is almost alone suggested to the tongues of some Catholics among
us, as the principal pillar of that pretended Article of Faith, for the
maintaining of which they are exhorted to forfeit their Estates and Lives, they
are desired sadly to consider,

89. First, that this pretended decree of faith has been disclaimed by a World
of unquestioned Catholics; and Doctor Bishop the last Catholic Bishop but one
in England, has written a book purposely against it; and no proof can be given,
that it was ever received or executed by any Catholic Kingdom out of Italy:
The reasons whereof are, 1. Because these Decrees were never published by P.
Innocent, nor so much as a copy of them extant either in the Body of Counsels,
or the Vatican Library, or any where else, till a certain German three hundred
years after, said that he found them in a Manuscript, compiled he knows not by
whom, being indeed a mere Collection made by some unknown person out of the
Decretals of his Nephew Gregory the ninth. 2. Because by the testimony of all
Historians of those times, M. Paris, Nauclerus, A.D. 1215. Godf. Monachus.
Platinain Innoc. 3.
P. Innocent the third suffered much in his reputation for having convoked such
a multitude of Prelates to no purpose. Above sixty Capitula were by the Popes
order recited in the Assembly, and many of them pend in a style as if they had
been concluded (for that was the Popes expectation) but nothing at all could be
plainly decreed: they seemed indeed to some [PLACABILIA] passable, to others
Onerosa, but no conciliary Determinations were made except one or two, (which
was about the recovery of the holy Land, and the subjection of the Greek Church
to the Roman) by reason of a war then begun between them of Pisa and Genua,
which called the Pope from the Council. 2.


90. Again, though it were granted that this was a Conciliary Decree, it is far
from looking like an Article of Faith, Bell. l. 2. de. R. Pont. cap. 12. Canus.
l. 5. q. 4.
which (says Bellarmine and Canus) may easily be discerned by the style; Here
is nothing proposed to be believed; no Anathema fulminated against those that
are of a contrary sentiment; no signification that the contrary is against the
words or sense of Scriptures. etc. At the best therefore it is a mere
Ecclesiastical Ordinance touching external discipline And being such, what is
more ordinary, and by custom permitted, then for Princes to refuse the
admittance of them? we see at this day that the State and Church of France do
reject the Decrees of Reformation made in the Council of Trent. This is known
at Rome and all Christendom over; and yet who dare impute Heresy to them? What
confusion would follow, if all the Ordinan^es of the Council of Trent should be
practiced among catholics here in England, as about Clandestine Marriages etc.

91. Thirdly suppose this were granted to be an Ordinan^e established, and
admitted all Christendom over, yet supreme, and Independent Princes not being
expressly named in it, but rather excluded by the expressions of it, what can be
more palpably injust, then without, and against their consent, to captivate
them to such an ordinance? Moreover to demonstrate that they were purposely
excepted, the Emperor Frederike not above five or six years after, published
an edict to the very same intent, and in the very same language and titles, by
which he intended to oblige only the Feudatary princes and officers of the
Empire by oath to root out heresy: And yet after all, no example can be
produced either in the Empire, or other Christian States that such an oath was
in succeeding times imposed. This is the Article of Faith, for the maintaining
of which it is by one party expected that all English Catholics should ruin
both themselves and their Religion. It is not so in Catholic countries abroad:
We know that Charles the fifth by a law of the Empire publicly permitted
Lutherans in several provinces, and all the Kings of France since Henry the
third, the Calvinists through their Kingdom, and yet the pope never so much as
threatened, nor they feared a Deposition.

93. And as for the Doctrinal point of faith most shamelesly pretended to be
involved in that or the like decrees, to wit, the Popes power of deposing
Princes, what one Catholic State, Kingdom, Republic or City can the preachers
of it name where it is received, or permitted to the people to be taught, even
as a probable opinion?

94. It is well known that in France, in the year 1614. a book written by
Suarez the Jesuit, purposely against this Oath, in which that Deposing power
was asserted, was by a Decree of the Parliament of Paris condemned therefore to
be burnt by the public Executioner, as containing propositions scandalous,
seditious, tending to the eversion of States, and inducing Subjects to practice
against the lives and sacred persons of Kings, etc. And moreover it was
ordained, according to a former Edict made A. D. 1610. that a decree then made
by the Theological faculty for renewing a Doctrinal Censure of the same
faculty, A. D. 1408. against the like Doctrine, and confirmed by the Council of
Constance, should every year upon a certain day be read in the Schools of the
Jesuits, and of the four Mendicant orders. Besides all this, the same
Parliament enjoined the four principal Jesuits in Paris, Armandus, Cotton,
Fronto and Sirmond to take order that their General at Rome should renew a
prohibition to any of the society to teach and publish the like Doctrines, and
themselves were commanded in their Sermons to preach a contrary Doctrine: all
this under the penalty of being proceeded against as Traitors.

95. The like fate had several other books written by eminent persons of the
same Order, as Mariana, Bellarmine, Santarellus, etc. which maintained the
Popes temporal Jurisdiction and power to deprive Princes, and to absolve
Subjects from their Obedience. And particularly upon occasion of Santarellus
his book, no less then eight Universities in that Kingdom, Paris, Valentia,
Toulouse, Poictiers, Bourdeaux, Bourges, Rheims and Caen did of their own
accord, not expecting any command from the Court, in the year 1626. brand the
Doctrine of the Popes deposing power with the Titles of impious, seditious,
infamous to Popes, ruinous to States, etc.

96. Yea moreover within these six Months a certain Priest of the Hermitage of
Caen, called Fossart, a known Emissary of that society, having in his public
acts for a degree in that University advanced this proposition, That the Pope
has a Sovereign Authority in Temporals as well as Spirituals, and that he has
power to depose and constitute Kings; though to evade a censure, he Interpreted
his Assertion, saying that he understood that power of the Pope to extend only
to Tyrants: notwithstanding by a Decree of the whole faculty of that
University, both his proposition and exposition of it was censured to be
impious, pernicious, seditious, and in all regards to be detested, and as such
it was by them condemned. And the same Fossart being after this imprisoned, was
sentenced by the presidial Court of Justice in Caen publicly and bare-headed
to acknowledge that the said propositions were false, contrary to the holy
Decrees of Councels, to the fundamental laws of that Kingdom, and to the
liberties and rights of the Gallican Church.

97. Such is the judgment of the Ecclesiastics and State of France of this
Article of Faith, from which was issued rivers of blood during the Ligue there.
As zealous against the Temporal power of Popes, has the State of Venice showed
it self: And if other Catholic Kingdoms have not done the like, it is because
they have not had such dismal occasions and provocations to declare their
minds. In Spain indeed the Schools are connived at, to preserve it from
extinguishing, because by its assistance a great part of Navarre has been
annexed to that crown, and some hopes of England too gave it credit there. But
yet when the Court of Rome would interpose in temporal matters there without
the Kings liking, he is as boldly resisted as in any other Catholic Kingdom
besides.

98. And as for the Church and State of England, I mean even in former times
when Catholic Religion most flourished here, and when Churchmen had the
greatest power, what sign can be showed that the foresaid Decree and the new
article of Faith was admitted either in Parliaments or Synods? Yea so far were
they from acknowledging the Popes deposing power, or Supremacy in Temporals,
that Statutes were then made, and the penalty no less then a Praemunire against
any that without the Kings license should make any Appeals to Rome: Or submit
to a Legates Jurisdiction; Or upon the Popes Summons go out of the Kingdom; or
receive any Mandats or Briefs from Rome; Stat. 25. Edw. 3.
Or sue in a foreign Realm for any thing, for which the Kings Courts took
Cognizance; Or for impeaching a judgment given in the Kings Courts; Stat. 16.
Rich. 2.
Or for purchasing Bulls from Rome for presentiments to Churches an^iently sued
for in the Kings Courts, in the time of all his Progenitors. And it is very
observable that in the Act, where the last Ordinances were made, we find this
expression, Ibid.
To this all the Bishops present, and all the procuratours of the absent
unanimously assented, protesting against the Popes translating some Bishops out
of the Realm, and from one Bishopric to another. And moreover the ground of
their rejecting the Popes usurpations in temporal matters is there thus
expressed, Ibid.
For that the Crown of England is free, and has been free from earthly
subjection at all times, being immediately subject to God in all things
touching the Regalities of the same, and not subject to the Pope.

99. All these laws and many other of the like kind, all the Kings Catholic
Subjects knew, and willingly submitted to, without any prejudice to their
belief that the Pope was the supreme pastor of Gods Church in spiritualibus.
And all these Laws are still in force, and the penalty of them no less then a
premuni^e. Our De-fide-men are not much concerned in all this: but sure persons
of honor and loyalty, and such as have Estates in the Kingdom, are very deeply
interested.

100. And now let any English Catholic judge what reception such a decree or
Article of Faith would have had in England in those most Catholic times, if
they had been proposed Those that were so jealous of the least deminution of
the Kings temporal power in matters of the smallest consequence, and that
imposed the greatest penalty but death upon transgressors, that is, upon all
Factours for the gaining to the Court of Rome any illegal temporal Authority,
with what indignation would they have heard only the mentioning of the
reception of such a Decree? And yet those Laws were made not long after that
Council had been assembled: whereby it is apparent that they were ignorant of
it. Those that would not suffer the least flower of this imperial Crown to be
ravished from it, would they admit a power and foreign Jurisdiction to take
the Crown it self from the Kings head, and afterward the head it self from his
Shoulders?

101. It is true, the teaching of such an Arti^le of faith brings very great
temporal commodities to those few that have the cruelty to their Country to
become the preachers and Apostles of it: great favor and power they gain
thereby abroad, and therefore they will take it kindly at the hands of English
Catholics, if for a mere Secular advantage of theirs, they will be content to
Sacrifice their own Estates, Honors, Families and lives, as traitors, to the
law^s, and withal bring an unavoydable scandal to Catholic Religion, besides.
But truly this is too dear a rate to be paid for such a commodity:

102. A man would think that such Apostles should be content, yea and by their
own Doctrine of probability should be obliged to grant this Doctrine of the
Popes deposing power to be somewhat less then an Article of Faith. The
opposition of the whole State and Ecclesiastics of France against their single
forces surely may be available to make it pass at least for a probable Opinion.
But this they must not allow, because if it be not an Article of Faith, unless
infidelity to Princes be de fide, it signifies ju^t nothing, neither can it
have any effect at all. For certainly no Law nor justice will permit that an
Authority only probable, and therefore questionable, can dispossess Kings of
their right to a Supremacy in temporals, in which they are actually instated:
So that such an Authority can only have force to dispossess Princes already
dispossessed.

103. However they would esteem themselves much bound to any other learned
Catholics among us, if they would condescend to grant that it is only probable
that it is a point of faith and decree of a General Council. But in vain will
they expect such a compliance. For by granting only so much, it will
necessarily follow? 1. That all the so rigorous censures given of it by the
Parliaments and Universities of France have been most temerarious and damnable,
For what can be more horrible then to call a Doctrine impious, seditious,
detestable, etc. which probably is a fundamental Christian verity? 2. That the
preaching of that doctrine will be far more safe, yea only safe in conscience:
because if it be probable that it is an Article of faith, the teaching of the
contrary may perhaps come to be Heretical, which the teaching of it cannot be.

104. In vain therefore do they expect so easy a condescendence from others:
and the more unreasonably, because themselves dare not justify this their
Article of Faith in the Catholic Kingdom of France to be so much as a probable
opinion, no not in these times when they lately had a great Cardinal a Minister
of State their confident, and a Confessarius or manager of the Kings
conscience, their Court-instrument: Who is so much, too much a Courtier, and
(as long as he lives in France) too little a zelot for this their peculiar
principle, as that he dares not so much as motion to his penitentan acceptance
of that Decree of Lateran interpreted in their sense, but freely absolves him,
and admits him to the communion without so much as confessing among his faults
his dis-beliefe of this Article, yea professing the contrary. Nay more, they
themselves whilst they are there, do not believe it: for if they did, they
would not surely omit to attempt the conversion of French Catholics, at least,
in articulo mortis, to this their Fundamental point of Faith; but this they
dare not, and care not to do, nor do they refuse to take money for praying for
their souls, as they did formerly in England to some that defended the Oath of
Allegiance.

105. What charm then have they to make such a topical, uncatholick Aricle of
Faith to serve only for the Meridian of England, which of all the Countries in
Christendom ought least to hear any mention of it? They themselves in France
are, or at least appear Catholics a la mode de France, and dare not so much as
in a whisper say that this is a topical Opinion, much less an Article of Faith:
And yet the King there is of the Popes own Religion, and consequently not
obnoxious to the danger of it. What stupidity then, what blindness do they
presume to find among us English Catholics, that they should fancy that we do
not evidently see that it is their own secular interest only that makes the
same point of Doctrine to be de fide in an Island, and a pestilent error in
terra firma?

106. In vain therefore do they hope that all Catholics which have not made
them the Depositaries of all their reason and common sense, will admit a
position infinitely prejudicial to their Religion, to their King, and to their
own souls, which they would renounce in regard of their own single Estates or
persons. For suppose a Bull of Excommunication should be procured from Rome
against any Catholic Lord, Gentleman, or Farmer in England for some new
Heresy of Jansenisme, or for denying their Exemptions, etc. and that in
consequence thereof, the Pope by his temporal Authority should lay a sine upon
their heads, or deprive them of their Titles and Estates: Would those Lords or
Gentlemen quietly be content to be unlorded and become peasants, or would they
pay their fines and resign their Estates to such Apostles? If not, as most
certainly they would not, with what conscience would they suffer themselves to
be persuaded that the Sacred person of their Sovereign only is obnoxious to
slavery, beggary and danger?

107. Though that party therefore be so tender-conscienced that they dare not,
or so obnoxious to Superiors abroad that they must not, according to the
clause of this Oath of Allegiance, swear, that they do detest as impious that
position of theirs, That Princes excummunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their subjects: Yet since English Catholics, yea even
their own penitents will be both good Catholics, and therefore good subjects,
as all are in France, Germany, Venice, Flanders, etc. Till an Authentic
approved, received decree of the Church be produced, or procured to declare,
not in England only, but all Christendom over, that that position is de fide,
they will not be deprived of their Christian liberty to renounce it, especially
being assured that without renouncing of it the State will never acknowledge
them for loyal Subjects. It is well known that in France there was an Oath
framed by the whole Body of the fires Estate, in which they are to be sound
far more comprehensive expressions then are in our Oath, for therein is
expressly affirmed, That there is no power on Earth, Widdring. last Rejoinder.
p. 425.
either spiritual or temporal that has any right over his Majesty's Kingdom to
deprive the sacred persons of our Kings, nor to to dispense with, or absolve
their Subjects from their loyalty and obedience which they owe to them, for any
cause or pretense whatsoever.

108. This will suffice concerning that position, which those who will not be
permitted to renounce, but rather maintain it to Article of faith, yet however
will perhaps not refuse to profess themselves ready to swear. 1. That the Kings
of England excommunicated by the Pope, may not be murdered by their Subjects,
and to detest the contrary as Heretical. 2. Yea moreover, that notwithstanding
any sentence of deprivation ever hereafter, upon what occasion soever to ensue,
they will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty and his successors.
And what needs Princes desire any greater security (say they) what need they
trouble themselves with their Subjects speculative opinions?

109. But (alas) a miserable security, a poor testimony or gage of fidelity is
all this, God knows. For first, Murder being an unjust killing out of malice,
and with a deliberate purpose, is a sin so horrible in it self, that God
himself cannot make it lawful, much less the Pope: therefore in all reason
instead of those words [ May not be murdred] they ought to say [ may not be
killed by their Subjects] For otherwise notwithstanding that Oath the Pope may
be acknowledged to be a competent Judge of life and death over our Kings to
sentence them to the slaughter, and that sentence may be put in execution
without murder: For who ever said that a Malefactor put to death by Law was
murdered by the Judges sentence?

110. But whether they say [ May not be murthered] or [ May not be killed]
Princes will esteem themselves little advantaged by such an Oath, unless the
swearers say withal [ May not be deposed.] For whosoever has a supreme just
right upon any pretense whatsoever to Depose Princes, has thereby right to
cause them to be killed, in case they by arms oppose the Execution of that
sentence. And can it be imagined that any Prince judged an Heretic or
otherwise guilty by the Pope, and by him sentenced to be deposed will thereupon
quietly descend out of his Throne, and yield up his Scepter to one of a
contrary Religion? Or rather, is it not most certain that they will not, but on
the contrary bring with them many thousands of their armed Subjects to resist
the execution of such a sentence; all which must together with them be killed
or murdered before it can have its full effect?

111. In the next place touching the Offer made by the same persons, who
without renouncing the position of the Popes deposing power will however swear
future Allegiance to the King and his Successors, notwithstanding any past or
coming sentence of Deprivation; in what age do they hope to find in England a
King that will be so simple, and so over good-natured as to believe them, or
rely upon such a Promise, especially considering what passed little above fifty
years since? Is that Oath to be believed which they that take it do know to be
unlawful, and consequently to be ipso facto null and invalid, so that it must
be repented of, and must not be kept? For either they must swear that as soon as
ever they shall have taken their rectifyed Oath, the Kings of England will have
this particular privilege annexed to their Empire, that they shall never
deserve (let their religion or practices be what they will) that the Pope
should exercise his just authority of deposing them; that they alone will be
out of danger to the worlds end of being denounced No-Catholicks or Rebels to
the Sea Apostolic: And this none can swear without the spirit of prophecy,
which they will hardly persuade the State here to believe to be in them: Or
else, they will swear that though the Pope never so justly and necessarily
exercising his lawful authority should command the Deposition of any of our
Kings, and absolve all their Subjects from their Allegiance, yet they against
their duty, conscience and Religion will disobey such his lawful authority, and
continue in Allegiance to him, to whom in such circumstances an Article of
their Faith obliges them to believe that no Allegiance is due, but rather
utmost hostility. Now who will believe such an Oath as this? Or rather will
they not be esteemed for such an oaths sake, resolved to be disloyal both to
God and man? After this manner argues the great Master in the Deposing
Doctrine, Suar. defens. Fid. lib. 6. c. 3.
Suarez, writing upon this very Clause of this Oath.

112. I would to God I could have delivered my conscience on this subject
without danger of incensing or contristating any person. But in the present
conjuncture of affairs, after so many years proof of the constant fidelity of
Catholics to his Majesty, it being necessary that the State should be assured
that such fidelity proceeded from a principle of Catholic Religion
unalterable; to discourse upon such a subject with a complying softness and
tenderness to any party, that is, without a free, hearty, sincere and
confident renouncing of a false principle of disloyalty maintained but by a
very few, but imputed to, and punished in the general body of English
Catholics, would have been to betray the cause of Catholics in general, and
to justify the suspicion that Protestants have formerly had against our
Religion.

113. There is another sort of loyal, well meaning Catholics, who have no
scruple at all to renounce this pretended Article of Faith, nor to make any the
most strict professions of their Allegiance, but in this Oath meet with some
Expressions and adventitious phrases nothing pertinent to the substance, which
they out of tenderness of conscience cannot swear to. For first, they seem to
profess a Declaration of a point of Faith which a particular Christian cannot
presume to do Again, they cannot say that Position of the Popes deposing power
is Heretical: any other ill names they will be content to give it, but they
dare not swear it is Heretical, because the contrary is not evidently in
Scripture, neither has it been condemned by the Church.

114. For the former, Protestants perhaps will account it a needless
scrupulosity, since those which framed the Oath never intended that any one
that takes it should seem to make himself a judge and decider of a point of
faith, but only to signify his acknowledgment touching it. Besides (say they)
this is the ordinary style by which a Profession is made abroad of the
condemning and renouncing of any erroneous propositions, which are by
Parliaments and Courts declared to be impious, seditious, etc. Not that each
Doctor, or whole faculties take upon them an Authority Conciliary to propose
doctrines to the church, but only to testify their judgment concerning them.

115. But the second difficulty will not so easily be cleared, which is the
profession of detesting such a position as Heretical* Because catholics know
that it cannot be called Heretical according to the notion of that term
universally received among them: and what notion Protestants have of that word
does not appear by any public Declaration of theirs; how then can catholics
by Oath protest a detestation of that position as Heretical, since if they
understand it in their own sense they should swear that which they know to be
false: and if in any other unknown sense, they shall swear they know not what?
Besides they should by Oath testify, that all Popes that have exercised, and
all writers that have maintained such a deposing power, are to be esteemed
Heretics, persons fit to be excluded from Catholic communion. And what
Catholic alive will presume to say this?

116. Such is the case of afflicted Catholics touching these two Oaths: their
tenderness about phrases has hitherto been either interpreted, or at least
treated as professed disloyalty. But their hope now at last is that his Majesty
according to his most gloriously element dispositon, and the whole State so
miraculously renewed, will with a compassionate eye look upon, and read their
most secret thoughts touching this matter. Though their abilities and number be
inconsiderable, yet Justice even to a single person ought not to be esteemed
so. They are not unwilling, nay they are desirous to be obliged to make
protestations of their unalterable Fidelity, Obedience and peaceable submission
to the State: and if none other besides themselves shall be esteemed to
deserved to be obliged hereto by Oaths, they are contended to endure such a
mortification, and they beseech God that his Majesty may never have just ground
to suspect any others, for then they are sure that without any Oaths at all he
may be most secure.

117. If any Oath of Supremacy shall be still accounted necessary, they only
beg that they may not seem to renounce the Supreme spiritual jurisdiction of
him whom they acknowledge for the Head of Gods Church: or at least that for
refusing to renounce this, and suffering for such a refusal, they may be
acknowledged to suffer purely for their religion, without the least imputation
of Disloyalty to his Majesty, which they will never be guilty of, whether they
swear against it, or no.

118. That which they deprecate in the Oath of Allegiance is that which God
himself requires, that it may not be ambiguous, dificult to be interpreted, nor
charged with expressions which if they were absent would not prejudice the
substance and intention of the oath: and being present do render the whole
ineffectual. They are assured that the first framer of this Oath, K. James
never intended to entangle the consciences of his subjects, and if he had
foreseen that a few unnecessary words would have rendered them incapable to
serve him, he would never have made choice of such unhappy expressions. But so
long experience having demonstrated what it is that wounds the consciences of
Catholics, they confidently hope that this tenderness will show how
infinitely more tender they will be to keep the Fidelity promised in the oath,
since they have kept it when they were treated as breakers of it, only for, I
cannot say, not daring to profess it, for that have always been ready to do:
but for not dareing to say things unnecessary to be said, or that they
understand not or are not permitted to Explicate their meaning.

119. Never certainly was there a time when it was either more seasonable or
more necessary to obstruct all passages of jealousies amongst English Subjects,
and to prevent all attempts of disturbing the Kingdoms peace. As for other
Sects, the State will (it is hoped and prayed for) be assisted by a divine
wisdom, to provide against the particular tempers of each: and as for Roman
Catholics no other expedient will be necessary but to afford them means to
show abroad that Fidelity which their Religion indispensably obliges them to.
This indeed will be a great affliction to other Sects among us, who would
rather forgive Catholics for being real traitors, then for manifesting
themselves in the eyes and to the satisfaction of all to be good Subjects.

120. Certainly that old policy of Queen Elizabeth's Calvinistical Statesmen is
now very unseasonable, and was always dangerous, of first fomenting divisions
among Catholic Subjects, especially about principles of loyalty and
disloyal^y, and then exposing both the loyal and disloyal subjects
indifferently to the same rigor of laws. Surely it is of greater concernment
now for his Majesty's security to unite all Catholics with one heart to assist
and defend him by casting out all principles of disloyalty inconsistent both
with Catholic and Protestant Religion.

121. Now what more efficacious mean, or rather what other mean is there for
this then that which his Majesty may if he please conferr upon them by allowing
such an Ecclesiastical Government among them by which there will be produced a
true Christian Unity and Uniformity both in opinions and practices, and
consequently by which without giving the least jealousy, but on the contrary
very great security to the State, they may all be united to concur in
promoting his service?

122. Now to what special parties both within and without the continuation of a
defect so projudicial is to be imputed, is but too well known. It is not to be
doubted but that the forementioned party will make use of all their skill and
power to oppose all good correspondence among them, upon more then one Motive.
For 1. A strong affection which they have to independence, and to a promoting
of their particular interests dividedly from all others (by which means they
have got great power abroad, little for the public good of this Kingdom) this
will make a common union very unwellcome to them. 2. And again they will easily
foresee that by this only means those wicked principles of disloyalty which
made them heretofore eminent abroad, must necessarily then be renounced. They
will no longer be looked upon as the only Apostles of a foreign temporal
power, either direct, or (which is as bad) indirect; the enormous writings and
worse practices of their Forefathers, which only procured the continuation of
the Oath of Supremacy, and the framing of that of Allegiance together with the
sharp laws, not against them alone, must be condemned to the same fate that
they have suffered in other Kingdoms: and lastly an advantage of corrupting
good English Natures with Maxims of Morality odious to all Christenstom, and
condemned by supreme Authority will be taken from them.

123. These cannot choose but prove unto such dispositions very great
mortifications, and as great as any of these, would be the framing of Oaths
which all good Catholics could securely take. For it is well known that they
have been publicly told that it is for their advantage only that such Oaths
are imposed here as cannot generally be taken, and that worse news cannot come
to their brethren abroad, then that such Oaths were taken away from Catholics:
Because they have a strong apprehension that themselves having been the sole
clauses of those rigours against the whole body of English Catholics, shall
have but a small portion in any future indulgence without an explicit,
satisfactory renunciation of their principles, and an assurance given to teach
the contrary, as they were obliged by an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, A.
D. 1626.

124. And that this was no suspicion groundlesly taken or invented, there was
produced a well known verified story happening toward the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth's reign: Widdr. against Fitzharb. in the pref. p. 66.
For that Queen being at last satisfied of the loyalty of certain Catholic
Priests, had a purpose to show some indulgence and qualification of the laws
to them. Hereupon certain of their Brethren went to Rome to carry such good
news thither, whither being come they were by that party branded with the
names of Schismatics, Spies and Rebels to the Sea Apostolic: and moreover
there was by one of the party [ T.F.] compiled a Treatise in Italian to advise
his holiness, That it was not good or profitable to the Catholic cause that
any liberty or toleration should be granted by the S^ate of England to
Catholics. And why not good for the Catholic cause? Because not for their own
interest: For having been persons never formerly admitted by public authority
into this Kingdom, and having given sad proofs of their temper, they did not
without reason suspect that if only good loyal Catholic Subjects were
tolerated, their so dangerous, and to themselves only advantageous principles
must be abandoned.

125. It is not therefore to be expected, but that a charitable concurrence of
several Ecclesiastical pastors here would be to them very unwellcome. But the
commodities and Benedictions flowing therefrom are unexpressible. For 1.
Though perhaps by a hindrance thereby given to that parties divided way of
agitation here, the number of Catholics among us might come to be diminished;
yet then there would be none but good, charitable and obedient Catholics in
England, free from all intelligence or designs abroad. 2. Matters of discipline
and Spiritual Government would not be only and immediately ordered by a Court
too far distant from us, and too much suspected by the State here. 3. English
Catholics would be freed from a burden, (and the King from jealousies) to
which no other in the World are obnoxious. For in France, etc. none dare under
utmost penalties execute orders or publish Mandats without express allowance
from the State, though such briefs touched only spiritual matters. Whereas in
England whenever any such briefs are published at Rome, although upon
information of one interessed party, there being no settled correspondence of
pastors to whom they ought in common to be directed, and by them communicated
to their respective flocks, not only the consciences of particular Catholics
are disquieted, whilst some of their directours press the validity of them, and
others reclaim: but the State also, not causelessly, entertains jealousies, and
suspicious of secret practices, not being at all, or not sufficiently informed.
All which inconveniences by such a Government would be easily avoided. 4.
Lastly by this means Catholics would be enabled to receive from his Majesty
any orders that may be for his service, and effectually put them in execution.

126. It is well known what important advantage the Prince of Orange, and the
States of Holland received from the Catholic Bishop there, during the
seditions between the Arminians and Calvinists: The Prince doubting the success
of those contentions, to strengthen his party, sent two or three persons of
condition to the Bishop usually residing at Amsterdam, to propose to him these
two demands: First, to whether of the two Factions the Catholics had an
inclination to adhere: Next, what assistance of forces they were able to bring.
The Bishop being then absent, they were to this effect answered by his Vicarius
in spiritualibus: As to the first, That without studying or consulting with his
brethren he could immediately assure his Excellency, that he being the prime
person trusted by the States with all their forces, the Religion and
consciences of all Catholics obliged them to offer their Estates and lives for
his service and assistance. But that he could not give an answer to the second
demand, till two sundays were passed, in the one of which he was to publish
orders for enquiry into their numbers, and in the other to receive information.
And in effect accordingly after the second Sunday he gave them assurance of the
readiness of above ten thousand well appointed Soldiers out of that one City.
This happened in Holland, where Catholics though proportionably far exceeding us
here in numbers, yet never gave any jealousies to the State, and the less
because of their good correspondence among themselves.

127. Such and many other great commodities fl^wing from such a Government, it
is no wonder that besides the formentioned party, there should be found out of
the Church also many that have, and no doubt will endeavor to oppose it,
especially their embitterd Enemies the Presbyterians, partly out of the hatred
which they bear to the very name of lawful pastors, which they want, and will
not have: but principally least Catholics thereby should be in a better
capacity to serve his sacred Majesty, and his faithful Subjects after a manner
that they do not desire; and this not only by sacrificing their Estates and
persons to the maintaining of his power and safety, but also by gaining to
himself and the State, both civil and Ecclesiastical here a great affection and
readiness of an assistance from Catholic Kingdoms, when it shall appear that
in England the scandal of disloyalty which heretofore was cast upon Catholic
religion in general, shall be taken away.

128. These things considered, and moreover that the Presbyterians, etc.
(implacable adversaries to Prot^stant Religion and Government, as well as
Catholic) have great intelligence and correspondence abroad upon that account,
and for the mere interest of their Religion, which Protestants hitherto are
utterly destitute of; it would be strange if there should still remain any one
among them, after so long experience of the ready concurrence of Catholics
with them in adhering to his Majesty, and suffering with them for him, who
should not now at last have spent all their aversion from them, no^e being more
interested then they to make use of all lawful means to enable his Majesty, now
more then ever to oppose all future practices.

129. It has been an objection formerly against this, Ob.
That the prom^ses made by Catholic Ecclesiastics of Canonical Obedien^e to
their supreme pastor in their ordinations are dangerous to the State. But alas
how groundless is such a fear? Sol.
For (this ground being once laid and assented to, that no foreign power
whatsoever has any right to dispose of temporals in these Kingdoms) what show
of prejudice to any Man's loyalty is the promise of Canonical Obedience in mere
spiritual matters? Do not all Ministers in England owe and promise Canonical
obedience to their Bishops, and Presbyterians to their Consistories, which yet
in mere spiritualibus, they will not allow to be subject to the King, but only
and immediately to our Lord? Besides, all manner of such submissions and
Obligations are every where meant and understood, and if need be, may be
expressed with a Salva Obedientia Regi debita. What apprehension have the Kings
of France, Spain, or the State of Venice from such promises? And yet were ever
any Princes more scrupulous in defending their temporal superiority and
authority against the power by some flatterers ascribed to the Pope, then the
King of France and the State of Venice are? Nay they would not be so secure of
their pastors loyalty, if they should suspect them to be regardless of their
duty to the Church, which indispensably obliges them to loyalty.

SECT. X. Of his Majesty's Declaration for liberty of tender consciences. And
who they are that have the justest pretentions to the benefit of it.
130. BY What has been hitherto said it is apparent, that the words, phrases
and Forms of these Oaths are at least ambiguous: and that by such ambiguity
no manner of convenience, not the least addition of security accrews unto his
sacred Majesty or the State etc. but on the otherside infinite prejudice to his
afflicted Subjects: What then can be more just, more for Gods honor, more
becoming the benignity of his Majesty, and more for the reputation of the
Kingdom then that such ambiguous expressions (suggested no doubt by some
particular malignant spirits) should be cleared or taken away: and that Oaths
should be conceived in such a form that they may be taken uniformly, sincerely
and cordially by all good subjects, and must be refused by all ill Subjects;
and withal that our Princes safety and the peace of the Kingdom may be provided
for, by them?

131. Besides the ambiguity, there seems now to be another Motive, more
pressing, though none can be more weighty to persuade a change in the Forms of
the Oaths, and that is this. When the Oaths were made the intention of the
State was to have one only Religion openly permitted in the Kingdom: and then
the Catholic was that which appeared opposite to it, as having been formerly
the only Religion of the kingdom: and for this reason consequently the Oaths
were framed either upon a jealousy of a doubtful title, or at least against
some special point about the Popes Authority, which one party among Catholics
falsely pretended to be essential to their Religion, and in consequence thereto
gave too just cause to the State to provide against them.

132. But of late the temper of the Kingdom is strangely altered. God only
knows how many new Religions are star^ed up, the natural issues of the more
ancient Presbyterian private spirit: All which perhaps think themselves little
or nothing concerned in Oaths made against Roman Catholics, and therefore
will not much stand upon the taking of them: by which means they,
notwithstanding their known principles and practices, destructive both to
Allegiance and peace, wlll pass for good subjects, without any obligation to
renounce such principles, or change such practices: and only Roman Catholics
will keep the Oaths, though they dare not take them: by which means being yet
more odious to such Sects for keeping the Oaths then they would have been if
they had broke them, the only revenge that the others have against them, is to
force them to take them. So that between them all the security of his sacred
Majesty, which was only intended by the Oaths, is not in the least measure
provided for. Yea I may, I hope, be permitted to say, That his Majesty thinks
himself secure of those that do not take the Oaths, and stands in great need
of securing himself from too many that freely take them, and swear to be loyal
to him. What then can be imagined more necessary for a cure to so great a
confusion, then to change such inefficacious instruments of Loyalty?

133. But moreover since it is not to be doubted but that his Majesty will not
be unmindful of his promise so publicly made of a liberty for tender
consciences, and that none shall be called in question for differences of
opinion in matter of Religion, which do not disturb the peace of the Kingdom:
Those certainly will declare themselves most unworthy of the fruit of so
unexampled a beingnity, that shall either expect from such a promise a liberty
to reserve any ill principles of Disloyalty, or that shall exclude from the
benefit of it any other of his Subjects that shall submit themselves to all
possible proofs of renouncing such principles, and that have hitherto without
any Oaths taken, constantly adhered to him.

134. As his Majesty therefore has been pleased to take notice that among his
Subjects of a different belief there are tender consciences, and has promised
to have a merciful regard to them: So it is most just and necessary that his
Subjects likewise should allow his Majesty to have a tender conscience too, to
which also they must have regard. Now wherein can He (or any in authority under
him) more truly and perfectly show that he has a tender conscience with regard
to his Subjects, then by using his Authority to root out all ill Principles
that disturb peace, or dispose to sedition and Rebellion? For this end
especially Princes were ordained by God: So that if they do otherwise, they
should resist the ordinance of God, and become far worse then Tyrants to their
people. Those Subjects therefore that would expect or desire that the
maintaining any principles of disloyalty should be esteemed a proof that they
have tender consciences, do consequently expect that the King should give them
leave, whenever they have a grudge in conscience thereto, to depose him, and
to put the whole Kingdom into confusion.

135. And now, till his Majesty shall vouchsafe to interpret his promise more
distinctly, let any indifferent person judge, who they are among so many
different beliefs that ought to be esteemed to have tender consciences, and to
hold Opinions which do not disturb the peace of the Kingdom: whether they that
have and ever will be ready to give all possible proofs of loyalty both by
words and deeds, so that the words by which they profess this may not
prejudice their relig^on in a point of mere internal belief which has not any
influence upon their Loyalty: and who if they cannot otherwise then by
betraying their faith be accepted and treated as loyal, will protest themselves
bound in conscience and by their Religion never to disturb the peace of the
Kingdom, but patiently to suffer as if they did disturb it; Or those which make
no conscience to swear according to a Form that requires loyalty, though they
know that such a form in the proper sense of the words cannot consist with
their belief; and when they have done, make less conscience of violating that
duty which they know the law requires, and which ought to have been performed
though they had never sworn it. Surely unless passion alone be judge, unless
that be to be called a tender conscience which is none at all: and unless the
Title of disturbers of the peace of the Kindom, be appropriated to those only
that trouble no body, and wrongfully imputed to those only who are
irreconcilable to all that love and promote peace and loyalty, both
Protestants and Catholics, there will be no error in making a judgment.

136. It is not out of any design to please men, but only because God and
religion require it, that Roman Catholics acknowledge his Majesty to be our
supreme Governor over all persons, and in all causes, as far as Kin^ly power
can be exercised in them: And by Gods grace it is not any fear of man that
shall hinder them from professing that they acknowledge the Pope to be the
supreme spiritual pastor of souls, not only not subject to Kingly Civil
authority therein, but in his line above it, as all spiritual jurisdiction of
the Church is, (by the testimony of Dr. Carleton in his Admonition to the
Reader.) It is purely from the fear of God that they deny unto the King a
Spiritual Jurisdiction, and to the Pope a Temporal. Flattery, disrespect or
malignity have not the least influence on either of these professions: If they
should ascribe to the King a Pastoral authority in spiritual matters, or to any
Spiritual Pastors a Lordly dominion over the persons or lives of other men's
subjects, and much more over Kings themselves, they should give to Caesar the
things which are Gods, and to God spiritually ruling in his Vicar, the things
which belong to Caesar: they should herein wrong both the Pope and the King
too, and by mixing or doubling either of their powers, destroy both. As for
their Duty to Kings, they hear our Lord saying, The Kings of the Nations bear a
Lordly Dominion, but nor so ye (my Apostles:) I have not given to you any such
authority: yea they find our Lord refusing to be a King, or so much as a Judge
in temporal matters, but not refusing to pay tribute, nor to acknowledge Pilate
to have power from heaven over him. They hear the first Vicar of our Lord St.
Peter commanding with an authority greater then ex Cathedra, Be subject to
every humane creature, to the King as precelling all others, etc. Again, as
touching Spiritual Pastors, they hear St. Paul say, The weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but spiritual. They are not carnal, not externally coactive by
attachments, imprisonments, banishments, executions, etc. but far more powerful
as being Spiritual, binding and imprisoning in invisible chains, banishing from
the Communion of Saints, delivering up to Satan, etc. It is a zeal to this
Jurisdiction a Jurisdiction greater then any that the Angels enjoy, that
forbids Catholics to enervate it by adjoining thereto, with an opinion of
making it stronger, a carnal authority; as knowing that Popes were never so
powerful over m^ns souls, as when they despised worldly advantages. By
harkening to flattering Ca^^nists or Schoolmen who invested them with Temporal
power, Popes never gained any so much as temporal commodity to themselves, but
infinitely prejudiced their spiritual; being often looked upon by Princes not
as Fathers, but as, etc. So that the Parliament of Paris in their censure did
very justly say, That such doctrines rendered the dignity of the Pope odious.

137. This is that which Catholics have been taught by Gods word, by
tradition, by Counsels, etc. this they are ready with or without Oaths to
profess, and which, God willing, neither oaths nor laws, nor humane power
shall force them to d^ny. If this renders them obnoxious to the penalties of
laws as ill subjects, yet it cannot make them ill subjects; if this renders
them disloyal subjects, there is not a loyal subject in France, Germany, etc.
if humane tribunals condemn them, God will in his time acquit them.

138. In a word, to demonstrate how little they deserve the imputation of being
not most perfectly good Subjects, Roman Catholics are ready to subscribe to
such a profession and oath of Loyalty, as whosoever takes it will give all the
security of Fidelity that honor, conscience, religion and the hope of eternal
happiness, or fear of eternal damnation can lay upon a soul, that is, By Oath
to protest not only an indispensable obedience and non-resistance in all things
to his Majesty and his successors of what religion soever they be, but also a
firm persuasion or belief that it is absolutely unlawful upon any pretense or
motive whatsoever, either of ascribing to any other an undue power, or even of
defending religion, for subjects actively and with arms or violence to oppose
his Majesty. By the same Oath they will oblige themselves to discover all
secret plots or conspiracies against his Majesty or the State. This Oath they
will promise to keep inviolably; from the obligation of which no commands or
persuasions of any person whatsover, spiritual or temporal, no private
interpretations of Gods word, no supposals of divine inspirations shall or
ought to free them. And lastly, both in this and all other promises they will
sincerely profess a detestation of the abominable doctrine of mental
reservation, and of the lawfulness of breaking faith given to Heretics.

139. If this will not serve to approve the loyalty of Roman Catholics; if
there be no possibility of conjuring down the furious Calvinistical spirit
among us, but that it must be suffered both in Protestant Churches to preach
down Prelacy and Ecclesiastical Government, and in the State to embitter laws
for their own advantage only, and to the prejudice both of Protestants and all
other good subjects: what will become of the reputation of the English Nation
in foreign Countries? It is too well known how strangely we are fallen of late
in esteem abroad; the dismal effects produced in this Kingdom by that ill
spirit, have been, though unjustly, imputed to the whole Kingdom: English men
have been looked upon as enemies both to God and their Kings, as persons ready
to admit any frenzies in religion, and the horriblest cruelties against their
princes.

140. But blessed be God, his divine Providence has wrought miracles to
restore our reputation again, which was almost forfeited. All the world almost
is now satisfied that the generality of Englishmen are the best Subjects in the
world to the best of princes; and therefore it is to be hoped that the
Presbyterian spirit will not, now that it is so well known, be permitted to
have that influence as to imprint again upon us this peculiar character, That
England is the only Nation in which pure religion is most pretended to, and the
way to make that challenge good is (by the malignity of one faction) to make
the most sacred bonds of Religion snares and engines of unlawful passions: where
a just and peaceable Government is designed, and the way to it is by unlawful,
however legal, means to make peace impossible: where oaths are framed against
disloyalty, which are ruinous only to good subjects, and advantageous to the
disloyal: where loyalty and duty are only excluded from rewards, or even
INDEMNITY: where laws are made against crimes, and the penalties of those
laws are insupportable only to those that are free, and are known ever to have
been free from any suspicion of such crimes, and are commodities and rewards
only to the Nocent: where persons of approved fidelity are condemned as
traitors, and both Jurors, Witnesses and Judges for the most part are
Presbyterians, very incompetent and unindifferent parties in such matters, and
especially against such accused persons: Lastly where the only proof of
tenderness of conscience is to sear their consciences; and of no intention to
disturb the public peace, is to take oaths with an intention, yea an
obligation in conscience to break them; and openly to profess both by words and
known practices that peace shall never be settled till the whole frame of the
Kingdom, both for Religion and government, shall be first broken in pieces, and
then new molded for their own only advantage. And after all this, if Rebellion
and desolation follow, we will wonder (forsooth) what demerit God can find in
us to punish, and how it could be possible that a desolation should happen in a
Kingdom, where piety, justice, and his sacred Majesty's safety have been so
well provided for.

141. If among all Religions and Sects now swarming in this Kingdom, there
shall yet be any English Protestants that are still implacable against
Catholics only, it will be more suitable to English dispositions which
heretofore have been above all other Nations esteemed frank and sincere, to
discover their intentions clearly: let them therefore say, We will only destroy
that Religion which all our forefathers professed; which through all
Christendom abounds most with learning, civility and loyalty; which gave to
Protestancy our Baptism, Bishops, Churches, Estates, and whatsoever affords us
an advantageous appearance above all other Sects; the professors of which only
will assist us in the maintaining our privileges against sacrilege and
professed profaneness; which will indispensably concur with us in preserving his
Majesty's person and prerogatives from the attempts and usurpations of all
others; these are the only persons we will destroy: And because a public
promise is made of liberty to tender consciences, we will annul or interpret it
so, as that only those shall have no right to it that dare not swear an
ambiguous Oath, but with all dare less think it lawful to neglect that duty
which is intended by the Oath: Those only shall be excluded from the protection
of laws, or banished, or made the Victimes of public rigor: But as for all
other Sects, the names and number of which we do not know, or if we know many
of their names, we scarce know how blasphemous and dangerous are their secret
tenants, only we know that they are haters of Antiquity, and learning; united
in designs of destroying our Religion, our Estates and Government; and what
care they are likely to have of his Majesty's safety and dignity, has been
showed these last twenty years: these are the only persons esteemed by us to
have tender consciences, because they are bound to disturb peace, to cry down
Bishops, to gather hands against laws, etc. If any Protestants will make this
profession, they will at least deal ingenuously; whether conscionably and
prudently, or no, they must be judges.

142. To conclude, if it be necessary (as doubtless it is) that Oaths should
provide against ill principles, and consequently that the present Oaths should
be interpreted or changed, then is the proper season to separate the guilty
from the innocent: For he that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just,
both of them are an abomination to our Lord. Then is the proper time to have
regard equally both to loyalty and tender consciences jointly together: And an
effectual mean to discover who are such tender consciences as his Majesty
intends liberty to, would be to require from all parties a distinct and sincere
explanation in what sense and how far they acknowledge his Majesty to be
supreme, in all both temporal and Ecclesiastical matters. After which, the
State will easily find out who are the tender consciences that are most tender
both of their duty to God and of his Majesty's safety, and who are they from
whom it will behove him to stand most upon his guards.

FINIS.

