AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE OF THE WARS, Between the Mighty GIANT GALLIENO, And the
Great KNIGHT NASONIUS, And His ASSOCIATES.

-- ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat? --
Doublin: Printed in the Year 1694.

AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE OF THE WARS, etc.
CHAP. I. How the Mighty Giant Gallieno dealt with other Princes, and how they
joined in a Confederacy against him.
SOmetimes in the famous and rich Country of Luyslandia reigned a mighty Giant,
by name Gallieno, by some called also Grandissimo, who for his great Prowess
and Warlike Exploits became Terrible to all his Neighbors: in so much, that
no Man, though never so hardy, was able to compare with him in Feats of Arms, or
by plain Force or Policy to Encounter Him. He had already Subdued the fair
Countries of Lothoringia, Alsatia, Millesia, with part of Trapezond, Calatonia
and Inferiana; and made Inroads into other Places; and was now grown so
formidable as all Men stood in great dread of him. This Gallieno was moreover a
great Necromancer, for he had at his devotion many Familiar Spirits, who gave
him notice of the Strength, and all the Secret Designs of other Princes; So
that nothing could be hid from him that he desired to know. He had also by the
same wonderful Art got all his Cities and Castles enchanted, so that no mortal
Power was able to take them, and a damnable Spell set round about his
Dominions, in so much, that scarce any Enemy could enter them; or, if he did,
he could not stay there long, and wished afterward he had never come there at
all. After which, having, as he thought, made all things Safe and Sure, he
surceased from War, and led his Life in Quiet and Pleasure; right-glad of the
many Conquests he had made: But it fortuned, that as he slept one night in his
Bed, he saw in his Dream many Armed men of several Nations come against him on
all sides, threatening him with their Swords, Pikes and Guns, as if they meant
to kill him: Whereupon awaking, and calling up Mephostophilo, one of his
familiar Spirits, and asking him what it meant, he answered and said unto him,
My dread Lord, This is no Dream, but the very Truth, which I have revealed unto
you in your sleep: There are many Nations who, envying your Greatness, are now
bandying against you in Council, to bereave you of what you have got by force
of your Arms, and of your own Inheritance to boot. Which as soon as Gallieno
heard, he sent for all his Under-Giants, and Great Officers, to Surprise their
Towns before they could be in a readiness to oppose him, which they did
accordingly, especially in Trapezond, otherwise called Regomania.

Now the chief Princes and Potentates, who had joined into an Association
against Gallieno, were these, Austriaco the Great Emperor of Trapezond, Don
Ibero Formalitoso the Proud, the Duke of Bawwaw, Tricongio; with many other
Potentates of Regomania; and lastly, the dreadful many headed Monster, called
Hydra, whose property it was to spit out Flames of Fire in the midst of the
Water; I do not mean that Hydra, which in times of Yore (as Historical Romances
do inform us) was quelled by the Famous Champion Sir Hercules; for this was a
Water. Hydra of another kind, and living under the Sea, was for that reason of
great repute in the Court of the Sea-God Neptune, who was a great Friend to it
on all Occasions, except when it is Demerits, or the blustering Affronts of God
Eolus do put him into an ill humor. Now this Monster Hydra was mightily afraid
of the Great Giant Gallieno, having heard by Tradition, that he was descended
of the Race of the most Valiant Knight Sir Hercules; but especially since he
had by his Necromancy got the trick of spitting Fire on the water, as well or
better than it self; Wherefore, though this Hydra was half Panim, yet those
Christian Princes were glad of its Assistance against the Giant Gallieno, as
dreading his great Prowess, and standing in great fear of his Necromantick
Policy: Besides the Monster Hydra was Powerfully abetted by one of the
Idol-Goddesses they chiefly worshipped, called Mammoneta, to which they were
particularly devoted, and often Sacrificed to her some of their Children and
Relations, by exposing them to the Throw in Storms (as their Heathenish Custom
was) to the bottom of the Sea for her sake. And yet this many-headed Monster
Hydra was all this while (as being born and bred in the Sea) more Fish than
Flesh: It had the Head and Face of a Man, the Beard of a Goat, the Neck of a
Bull, and the Belly of a Hog, but was of the nature of a Herring, of which, for
the most part it fed; It had also a slight Cross on the Forehead (though the mark
of it was for the most part half worn out) but no sign at all of Christianity
any where else. Yet for Neptune's sake. and the assistance they hoped from
Mammoneta, even those Christian Princes were right-glad to have the Monster
Hydra on their Side; and indeed it was no shallow Monster, but as Crafty and
Politic as any of them all, and knew how to watch for its Advantage very
Sedulously, especially when there was any Money to be got or kept.

CHAP. II. How Nasonius, the Famous Knight of the Hydropick Land got into high
Esteem there; and how he disgusted Fortuna in attempting to ravish the
Amazonian Lady Victoria.
NOW so it fortuned that in times of Yore, the Hydra Commonwealth had great
Wars against their own King Don Ibero, against whom they had rebelled; and though
they had very many Heads, yet, being more Fishermen than Soldiers, they had
never a good one fit to lead an Army, or at least none so good as the noble Knight.
Nasonius, who in all Justs and Tournaments had behaved himself right-valiantly,
and won much Renown: For which reason those of his Family and their Descendents
were, out of mere necessity, by the Hydropick Commonwealth chosen to be their
Generals in War, which they call the Hydra-holder: by which means they came to
that Power, that one of them attempted to Sear one of the Heads of the Hydra,
and that was the greatest of them, called Emporiana, but living under water, it
gushed forth such Floods upon his approach, that it quenched all his Irons. Now
in the time of the War with the Giant Gallieno, it happened that Hydra had for
its General a hardy Knight of the Nasonian Family, who was for a particular
Reason very visible to be seen, Height Nasonious; who had behaved himself so
craftily, that tho many of the Heads hated him for his high and proud Humor,
yet there was some others that Loved, and more that feared him, the which bred
much difference between the Heads; yet all of them having but one Body, they
never fell to open Wars with one another. This Famous Knt. Nasonius, being, as
great VVarriors used to be, exceeding Amorous, and much given to court fair
Ladies, had a long time made Suit to Dame Fortuna, not regarding her want of
Sight, (a great Blemish in a Mistress) but hoping by her means to get great
Wealth, Dignity, and high Preferment, after which he gaped exceedingly; which
gave some shrewd Lavish Tongues occasion to talk at random, seeing him (like
the noble Knight Sir Hudibras) more to value the Advantages than the Woman. His
Suit had this Effect, That she requited his good Will with diverse Favors, and
promised to do him some friendly O^fices; but being of a Nature very fickle and
unconstant, she would not consent to marry any Man, or to hold to him very
long; but carelessly scattered her Kindnesses here and there, as if she regarded
not much to whom she gave them; Nay, it was very hard for any but a very wise
Man to enjoy her Friendship any long time, and for that reason it was
suspected, that she did secretly affect, if any, the Politic Giant, K.
Gallieno. Now it happened that Dame Fortuna had a Relation of hers, called the
Lady Victoria, a Stately and Majestic Dame, of the Noble Race of the Amazons:
her Fortuna (being blind her self) thought might be a fit Match for the Knight.
Nasonius, and that by this means she might requite his Love to her self; and
therefore she broke her Mind to him on this manner: Noble Knight, though I find
in my self no inclination to marry any Man living, and experience my Humor to
be such, that I shall never be constant to my Husband, and therefore desire you
to Court me no more upon that score; Yet to make you some amends for your
Kindness, I let you know that I have a Beautiful and Stately Kinswoman of mine,
hight Victoria, descended from the warlike-Race of the Amazons, and sought to
by a great many Great Kings and Princes, whom, if you can by Gentle and wise
Courtship, and fair, and valiant Carriage win to affect you; I, for your Love
to me, give my Consent; and when you have her, you may be sure to have me for
your Friend. To whom the Noble Knight. Nasonius being indeed the very Pink of
Courtesy, though his Nature and Education did not enable him to express it but
with a very ill grace) with an Obeisance so low, that his Nose almost touched
the Ground, did with much Courtesy answer.

Excellent Lady, or rather Goddess! I esteem my Self much bound to you for this
your Grace and Favor; I have heard much of the incomparable Perfections of the
most accomplished Lady Victoria: Indeed I have never had the Luck to see her,
though I sought after her much; which I impute to the Necromancy of the wicked
Giant Gallieno: For when I attempted to wait upon her, and let her know how
passionately I doated on her rare Perfections, as soon as I came near the Place
where she used to be, he did by his Enchantments raise from Hell such a Smoke
and Fire, that I could not come at her sight, and sent down such Showers of
Hailstones, as big as Bullets, as no mortal Man might abide them; So that I was
still forced to retire, and was diverse times in danger of my Life, had I not
ran away: To avoid which, if you please to bring her near my Tent in this time
of Truce and Peace with him, I will be ready to receive her; For you know it is
the Fashion of Knights never to Court any Amazonian Lady but in their Tents.
Dame Fortuna liked well of what he said, and persuaded the fair Lady Victoria
to come with her into the Field, not far from his Tents, and seeing him come to
meet her, civilly withdrew her self. But Nasonius no sooner cast his Eye upon
Victoria, and saw he had her now at an advantage, and in his Power; but he was
so enamored of her, that, neglecting all Courtship, and decent Treaty,
contrary to the Laws of Chivalry, and fair Carriage becoming a Knight, he most
dishonourably set upon her by Surprise, and attempted to ravish her even in the
open Field: Who, though being an Amazonian Lady, she stoutly resisted him, and
had she but foreseen such a Rudeness, and had been armed ready for him, she
could easily have beaten him (for unfair Fighters are generally Cowards) yet
having laid unworthy violent hands upon her, he kept her as his Prisoner,
falsely pretending she was won by the Law of Arms, and could his disobliging
Persuasions have prevailed, he would have kept her still as his Concubine. But
she in great disdain refused it, and writ to her Aunt Dame Fortuna on this wise.

Dear Aunt,
I AM most shamefully and dishonourably abused by the recreant Knight Nasonius;
for he no sooner had me in his Power, but, forgeting all Knightly Honor, he
set upon me to ravish me. You know I never liked the Man, because he was rash,
foolish and inconsiderate, wanting both Conduct and Wisdom, and I was
absolutely resolved never to marry a Mock Soldier: As also, to tell you true,
because my Fancy had a strange aversion against his ill-look'd Phisnomy, his
Slavering Mouth, Lean-Chaps, Spindle-shanks, and Paramont Nose; which, to tell
you my very Thoughts, I never saw, but it caused in me an horrible Loathng.
Besides, I like his Rustic churlish Humor far worse than all the rest: Nor
can that Man have the le^st regard for Honor, or be Master of true Valor, who
thus proudly tramples underfoot all Considerations of Virtue and Worthiness by
which base and ignominious Actions. And though it was your Will I should go
along with you to visit him, yet I assure you I went with an intention to let
him know how much I scorned him, and how unworthy he was of my Affection. I
request you therefore to join with me in revenging such an impardonable
Affront, without which, I can receive no Comfort.

Your Sorrowful Niece, VICTORIA.


WHen Dame Fortuna had perused this lamentable Letter of her Beloved Niece
Victoria, she was so enraged that none came in her way but had some mischief or
other happened to them: Some had their Necks broken, some were burned or
drowned, some were hanged, some died of sudden Diseases, others lost their
Wits, and others their Estates by Casualties, etc. At length rushing into
Nasonius's Tent, who was imperiously Proud, and puffed up with the imprisonment
of Victoria, she thus accosted him.

Base Varlet, and no Knight! How have thou abused my kindness, in using
Victoria so dishonourably, and now triumphest that thy wickedness took Effect!
Hear then what I say unto thee, and what my Sisters the Fates have decreed
concerning thee. Though I cannot altogether recall my words by which I promised
thee good luck in diverse things; Yet this Curse shall go along with it, That
thou shall never have Success but in ill things, and by means of ill Men, which
shall at last turn to thy greater infamy with all truly Noble and disinterested
Persons, and bring thee in the End to the greatest Shame and utter Destruction.
As for the renowned Giant Gallieno, to overcome whom thou bendest all thy small
and borrowed Power, he shall perpetually prevail against thee, and thy
dishonorable Associates: And either force you to truckle to his great Might,
managed by the wisest Policy, and sue for Peace, or else utterly subdue you.
And so fare thee ill.

With that she flung away out of his Tents, and left him in Melancholy Damps,
and an unspeakable disturbance of Mind, which (as some Authors write) made him,
as his Custom was, groan backwards, which left an ill savoured Scent behind it.

CHAP. III. How the invincible Giant, King Gallieno, sent the valiant
Grandorsio to deliver the fair Lady Victoria from her unjust Captivity.
AS soon as Dame Fortuna's Passion was over, and that having vented her angry
Freaks, and recovered her Wits again, the want of which had caused many
disasters to sundry Persons; she set her self to consider by what means she
might be revenged on the Recreant Knight. Nasonius, and set her Niece at Liberty;
and nothing seemed to her more proper and effectual than to stir up the Mighty
Giant Gallieno to undertake the Lady Victoria's Quarrel, and to redeem her from
her thraldom; and therefore she caused a Letter to be writ to him after this
manner.

To the invincible Giant Gallieno.
Right Puissant Prince:
IT is not unknown to your Mightiness how base and unknightly the Recreant Knight.
Nasonius has dealt with the Lady Victoria, when pretending all Peace and Love,
he set upon her, and most foully intended to ravish her, and how he still keeps
her as his Prisoner. Wherefore, my humble request is, for the love you bear to
Honor, and the compassion your Generous Soul has for distressed and abused
Ladies, you would employ your irresistible Strength and Power both to take
Satisfaction for the Affront done to all our Sex in general, and to my self and
her particularly, by revenging it upon that dishonorable Knight.; and withal to
rescue Victoria from her unlawful and undeserved Captivity. By doing which, she
will owe you her self, and you shall also have, as far as her changeable Nature
permits, for

Your constant Friend FORTUNA.


Which Letter, when the Noble Giant had read, he answered it on this wise.

To the Great Lady Fortuna.
Madam,
THis is not the first time the ignoble wretch Nasonius has stained his
Knightly Honor by foul Actions, though this is the foulest he ever did. There
needs no other motive but the indignity of the thing, and the dear Respects I
bear the Noble Lady Victoria to stir me up to revenge it upon him, and also to
rescue her. Besides that, by a just Title that Lady should once have been
Spouse to my self. Doubt not then of my performing your request both for her
sake and my own; Only because you know how Nasonius is supported by the ignoble
Hydra, and other Powerful Associates; therefore, after I have delivered her,
you must give me time to take my full revenge of the Hydra and Him; For I must
not wrong the regular Methods of my Conduct which I have very severely
observed, by entering on any rash Action: As for your assistance, I do not
desire you to strain your Nature for my sake, but as far as in you lies to
stand by an indifferent Spectator. I know the Fates, to whose decrees you are
subject, may sometimes make you look askew upon me, to teach me to acknowledge,
and to submit to their Sovereignty. However, I shall hope for this favor from
them and you too, That I be never crossed in my well laid designs, but in such
circumstances that all the World may see, that it is not through want of Wisdom
or Conduct, but by an overruling Providence, to which all Human Power and
Prudence is subject; That highest point of Honor, I must confess, I do value
my self upon, and would not willingly forfeit it, and while I preserve that
Temper, I fear not any great opposition from your Self or the Fates either, who
are still wont to be favorable to those who are wary and prudent.

Your Servant, GALLIENO.


After King Gallieno had dispatched away this Letter to Dame Fortuna by his
trusty Servant Mephostophilo, he called unto him one of his greatest and most
valiant Under-Giants hight Grandorsio, and thus said unto him; Go Grandorsio,
and according to the Orders I shall give thee, take revenge of the Recreant
Knight Nasonius, who, (as thou remembrest well) attempted to ravish the
excellent Lady Victoria; Beat him wherever thou do find him. But, above all,
be sure that thou do rescue that Lady, and bring her hither to my Court, for
which I do give thee my full Power and Commission; I shall send my other
Commanders against the rest of the Associates, but I make schoice of thee for
this Exploit, knowing right-well how much both the Hydra, Don Ibero, and
Nasonius himself do stand in dread of thy Prowess.

Right-glad was the valiant Knt. Grandorsio of this Commission, and therefore
returning his most humble Thanks to K. Gallieno for honoring him with such a
wished Command, and assuring him of his utmost devoir, he addressed himself to
this Noble Expedition; and finding out Nasonius in the Head of the Hydropick
Army, he set upon him with such Courage and Conduct, that he put him to the
Rout, took his Tents, and by that means, got the Lady Victoria into his Power,
and set her free; who in recompense of that favor took a stately Belt, which
according to the fashion of the Amazonian Ladies she daily wore, and girt it
about him, saying thus unto him; Wear this, Renowned Grandorsio, for my sake,
and be thou ever Victorious against this Monster of Men Nasonius, for know that
there is that hidden Charm in this Belt, that whoever has freed a distressed
Lady, and shall wear it, shall be sure to prevail still against his Enemies in
the Field. Great was the joy of the Noble Grandorsio to receive such an
honorable Reward from so Gallant a Lady: But much more to have performed King
Gallieno's Command. So putting the Lady Victoria into a Coach, lined with
Crimson Velvet, inlay'd with Oriental Pearls, and most costly precious Stones,
and hung round with Ensigns taken from the Enemy; he accompanied her to
Tutelia, where the mighty Giant Gallieno kept his Royal Court; whither she was
very desirous to, both to render her Thanks to her Great Deliverer, as also to
have the sight of the most Magnanimous, and most Magnificent King living.

CHAP. IV. How this Amazonian Lady Victoria arrived at King Gallieno's Court,
and after what a Noble manner she was courted by him.
AS soon as the Heroic King Gallieno heard of the Delivery of the fair Lady
Victoria, and that she was coming to his Court, he was right-glad thereof, and
went in great Pomp himself to meet her, and conduct her to his Stately Palace:
At their first encounter, he alighted out of his Coach of Ebony, and taking her
by the Hand, led her into it: Twenty thousands of his Royal Guard gallantly
attired, and armed at all points, were ranked on both sides the Coach, and
accompanied her to the Royal City Tutelia; into which, when he was about to
enter, Command was given, that all the Bells should ring: The Streets were
covered with rich Tapestry, bestrow'd with the most choice Flowers, the
beauteous Daughters of the Spring, no less delightful to the Eye, than
Odoriferous to the Smell: The Guns were discharged ten several times; the
Conduits ran with Wine: The Altars sent up the sweet Perfumes of Incense to
Heaven; and in a word, all the Solemnities were used, that might express a most
affectionate Welcome.

The Lady Victoria was entertained in a Majestic Palace, curiously adorned
with the most costly Furniture in all Luyslandia, and accompanied by all the
Princesses of the Blood, and Ladies of the Court: whose attire was so quaint
and admirable, and their Demeanor so Charmingly civil, that the Noble Amazon,
surprised with wonder, thought her self happily translated from a kind of Hell
of misery, to the Joys of Heaven: where K. Gallieno coming to visit her, would
have seated her in a Chair of State next himself; but she modestly refused, and
humbly requested she might first perform the Duty to which she was obliged both
by Gratitude and Honor; and so falling on her Knees, she began this Oration.
Invincible Monarch! How much is your Servant Victoria obliged to you for your
Goodness and Valor in freeing her from the slavish thraldom in which she was
detained by the unworthy Knight Nasonius! For not to speak of his former rude
Behavior (which is shameful to remember) a Dungeon had been as welcome to any
Noble Personage, as were their following Civilities to make amends for that
basest of Injuries. I had no Company but that of ill-bred Boars, and which was
worse of all, that of Nasonius himself, whose ill-humour'd Conversation, even,
when he was in highest Mood, bred in me an unspeakable abhorrence. Not one
action did I see; not one discourse did I hear amongst them to divert my Grief,
that had the least resemblance of a Gentlewoman: Their Mirth was unsavory
Taunt, their Wit dullness it self, their Complements rustic, their Language
harsh, and grating to a Ladies Ear; Their Carriage Brutish, and their very
Eloquence Hoggish: Besides the hourly expectation of further rudeness from
their Bear-like Natures. But oh! how quite contrary do I find every thing here!
Wisdom polisht and mixed with Sweetness, Civility, Decency, grateful
Conversation, noble Receiption, and highest Magnificence: Accept then, Glorious
Monarch, the humblest Thanks of your ever indebted Servant Victoria, with her
firm Vows never to forget such invaluable Obligations.

Having thus said, the Noble Gallieno rising up, took her kindly by the hand,
and told her, That such actions were their own reward, and that whilst she
staid there, she might command all, and use the same freedom in every thing, as
if she had received no benefit from him at all: for that he sought not Interest
but Glory, and placed his greatest Glory in performing honorable and valiant
Actions, especially to those noble Personages who were injured by unworthy Men,
and sought to him for Redress.

The next day King Gallieno gave order for Knightly Exercises of Justs and
Tournaments in which the warlike Lady took especial Content. At night Opera's
were shown, sung with most ravishing Music, the subject of which were the
Lawless Imprisonment, and the coarse Entertainment of the Lady Victoria in her
unjust Confinement in the Hydropick Camp, representing the rustickness of her
Jaylours, and her Noble Sufference: And lastly, her deliverance by the valiant
Giant Grandorsio. To close all the Solemnity, Balls too were prepared: But the
Heroic Lady, not much delighting therein, excused her self with much civility,
as not being the Custom of her Country, or suitable to her Genius or Education.

Some days after King Gallieno called together an assembly of all the Princes,
Princesses, and Nobility of his Court, and invited thither also the fair
Amazonian Lady Victoria; every one wondering what this august meeting of so many
great Personages should mean; when the King taking the Lady Victoria by the
right hand did in the hearing of them all deliver his Mind on this manner.
Incomparable Lady, I understand that your self, for your excellent Beauty, and
Heroic Endowments, have been sought to by all the greatest Princes and
Potentates in the World for their Spouse: wherefore my request is, that you
would please, in the presence of this Great, and Honorable Assembly, to
declare your Mind freely, which of them you think most worthy to be your
Husband: in doing which, I desire you to set aside entirely that small Title,
that some may judge I have to your Affection, since I wholly quit all the
obligations it may be conceived you owe me, leaving you fully to your own
Choice, nor would I yet have your self, or any others, deem that this frank
proposal of mine springs from any indifferency toward your Person, or
signifies any sleightness of Affection to so excellent a Lady, fit to be a
Wife to the greatest Monarch in the World; but because I esteem it honorable
not to restrain you in the least while you are in my hands, much less to force
you unlawfully as did the Recreant Knight Nasonius: For I should have courted
you for my self, but that I feared my applications might have been looked upon
by you, or interpreted by others as a kind of over-awing you from following
your own inclinations: In which Point of Honor I am so tenderly sensible, that
it would damp all my felicity in enjoying you, should I apprehend, that my
procuring that Deliverance, or any involuntary Tie upon you, had the least
share in a determination, which ought to be the most free and unforced of any
Action in the World. Please then to speak your Mind freely, as if you had the
sole Command over me and all my Actions and Dominions: Assuring you of my
faithful Promise, that (how highly soever I wish it may be my Lot to be your
choice) whoever renders himself worthy of you, I will with all disinterested
freedom render you back to be his Spouse.

To which the Lady Victoria, after some short Pause, with a lowly Bow, full of
Respect and gracious Demeanor, replied in this wise. Invincible Monarch! This
Modesty of yours where you may command is the highest Complement, and most
Eloquent Courtship, that is possible to be imagined. Whom can I better choose
than my Noble Deliverer, to whom I owe my Safety, my Liberty, and my self; I
resign my self therefore wholly into your hands, and submit my self entirely to
your disposal, as your constant and loyal Spouse. Hoping that your unparalleled
VVorth, most civil Courtship, and highest Merit, will screen the Blushes of my
Modesty, and keep the World from censuring me as too easily won: Nay further, I
must confess I had been yours long since, had I not been surpised by the
treacherous incivilities of the unmanly Knight Nasonius, you having just Title
to me by your high Wisdom and Conduct, with which you manage your Affairs both
at home and in the field: Only I beg this Boon of you, That when ever you go to
the Campaign, I may still be with you, and wait upon you: For I know that my
presence joined with his unworthy Guilt, will so terrify Nason. that he will
not dare to approach where I am; but he shall saunter up and down year after
year, with an Army at his heels without doing any thing worthy a Captain, which
will expose him to ridicule, and lose him that little Credit he has got among
the Boorish, Heads of the Hydra. Indeed, I should have asked the leave of
Fortuna, upon whom I have some kind of dependence, before I had made this final
Determination: but I have partly her Good Will already; and should she be
something out of humor (to which she is now and then obnoxious) and a little
frown upon us for a while, I know your wisdom is such as can reclaim her, and
recover her Friendship. Which said, she immediately gave him her fair Hand, in
Token of her faithful Heart, which he graciously took, and sealed the Contract
with a kind Salute, which done, K. Gallieno added these words.

Excellent Lady! Though I am surpised at your Goodness in bestowing upon me so
frankly the rich Gift of your Self; yet I desire, if you please, as a thing
most becoming your Honor, and Mine, That our Nuptials be deferred till I shall
have challenged all my Rivals the Associates to come themselves with their
Armies to Tutelia (as they have often bragged they would) and fetch you out of
my hands, as I, by Grandorsio forced you out of the hands of Nasonius; and I
engage my Royal word, that I will yet part with my Title to you, if they can
accomplish it. Your worth is so Great, that the winning you is too easy a
Conquest, unless it costs me more trouble than a few Complements, and an
ordinary Entertainment. Nor do I speak this as if I were indifferent to part
with a Jewel (which I esteem too valuable for the Mortgage of the whole World
to purchase) but because I am assured they neither dare attempt it, nor can
compass it; and should they indeed, they would in that case very well deserve
you; and so in Honor and Reason, ought to have you.

All the Assembly stood amazed at such a transcendent strain of Nobleness,
which amidst the affectionate Respects and Courtship of a Lover, still kept up
to the height, the Grandeur of a Hero. As for the Lady Victoria, she, being
all Honor and Courage, most highly applauded this gallant motion, and
declared, That K. Gallieno could not possibly have better pleased her humor,
than in so doing. Whereupon an Herald was dispatched to the several Associates,
to the purpose aforesaid; who carried also, with K. Gallieno's consent. Letters
from the Lady Victoria, inciting them by the most powerful Persuasions she
could use, to force her out of King Gallieno's hands, and promising that
whoever did so, she would therefore be his. What became of the Embassy shall be
declared in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V. How the Luyslandian Herald went to all the Associates challenging
them to fetch the Lady Victoria out of King Gallieno's Hands. And what answer
he brought back: As also of the solemn Marriage of that Lady with King Gallieno
at Tutelia.
THE Herald having received his Commission sets forward on his Journey: And
first he went to the Court of the great Austriaco, Emperor of Regomania; and
when he came to deliver his Message, he found him playing a Lesson upon the
Lute; and he was so attentive to his Music, that though the Herald repeated his
Embassy twice or thrice over, he hardly heard him; and when with much ado he
rightly understood him, he told him he was a troublesome fellow to disturb his
Recreation, and, That as for the Lady Victoria she was such a ticklish
Mistress, and had so often deceived his Expectation and scorned his Courtship
when he fought against the Half Moon of the great Emperor Magog; and on diverse
other occasions had so taken his Master's part, that he did not think it worth
his intermitting his Musical Recreation, nor his wearying himself with so long
a Journey, much less to meddle with fighting for her; in which kind of harsh
and untuneable Music he had no Skill. And so without any kind of respect due
to such public Messages he bid him be gone, and that neither his Master nor he
should trouble him any more with such Impertinencies.

Next he went to the great King, Don Ibero Formalitoso, and requested one of
his Court-Officers to acquaint his Majesty, that there was an Herald come from
the mighty Giant King Gallieno, who demanded Audience, but the strutting
Courtier drawling out every Syllable with a most formal Gravity, answered him,
that his Illustrious Majesty was playing at Shuttle-cock, with some Court
Ladies, and was yet in Querpo, and that it was against the highest Punctilio's
of Honor to disturb so great a King in his Pastimes, especially being de
Scompuesto. After many tedious delays, he obtained Audience, but not till Don
Formalitoso was accoutred in his Royal Habiliments, and seated with great
Solemnity in his Chair of State with all the Lords of his Court attending him.
To whom when the Herald had declared his Message, and delivered his Letters;
Don Ibero Formalitoso with his hands on his sides, and a Mien overlooking all
the Company, proudly answered, That it was very easy for him with a puff of
his Breath to blow King Gallieno out of Tutelia; but that it did not become the
High Majesty of the great King of Iberia to gad out of his Country upon any
account whatever. And as for the Lady Victoria, she had played him so many
slippery trickss in Calatonia, that he wondered how she durst write to the
greatest King in the World, having so often, and so shamefully disobliged him,
and so with the waving of his Hand he signified his Pleasure that he should be
gone.

From thence he went to the noble Duke of Bawwawia, whom he found in Company of
the rest of the Associates, as Tricongio, etc. Who were all assembled together
to consult how they might quell the mighty Giant Gallieno. But they were so
high in their Cups, and so distempered with Drinking, that he did not think it
seasonable to deliver such an honorable Embassy to Men whose reason was
totally drowned in Wine. Wherefore he staid two or three days longer, hoping by
that time he might take them in some Lucid Interval, but he still found them in
the same pickle: So that a Friend of his advised him, That if he would needs
stay till they are all perfectly Sober, it was his best course to hire a House,
to save the charges in an Inn. Yet he obtained of his Friend to acquaint them
in the Case they were in, on what Message he came. When one of them, who scarce
half understood it, taking it to be some high Compliment sent them by the
Persons mentioned; to show he was a generous Foe, and a Man of Honor; after
two or three Yawns, having a well-fill'd Glass in his Hand, began a Health to
King Gallieno,, and his Fair Lady; which they all took down very glibly: But
not a Man of them remembered what they had done or said, the next Morning. At
last he heard that they were all to assemble again the Morrow after at Nine; at
which time he hoped it would be a proper season to deliver his Embassy. But
they no sooner me^, but they leapt on their Horses (with great troops hallooing
and hooting after them) to hunt the wild Boar for nine or ten days. So that the
Herald, fearing that the time allowed him for his return would be elapsed; and
knowing, that to Lovers, Delays are tedious, would not stay to wait their
coming back, but thought sit to haste homewards, taking the Hydra in his way.
Where, when he arrived, he found some of the Heads counting their Money; others
adjusting their Book-Reckonings; some chaffering for Merchandise; others ba^ie
about repairing Old rotten Shi^s, and building New Ones, and some of them too,
Pickling Herrings. As for their Answer, as the Hydra has many Heads, so they
were of diverse Sentiments. Many cried out, Let King Gallieno keep Victoria, if
he will, what is that to us? This Fighting does but spoil our Trade, and our
Markets. But the generality of the greatest Heads said, they were busy, and
his Errand foolish; For he mistook them, They were not Land-Rats but
Water-Rats: But if King Gallieno, who has such a rare Talent at cutting Rivers
through the dry-land, would but be at the Charge and Pains, to make the Sea
Navigable as far as Tutelia, he should then see what they would do; but, that
sure, he could not think them such Fools as to run Knight-Erranting to free
Fair Ladies: not they: Let such light Ware sink or swim, or hang, it is all one
to them: Profit and Money is all they care for; and that if they could be sure
to lose nothing by King Gallieno, or to gain any thing by him, they were his
humble Servants.

He had also a particular Audience of Nasonius; who, when he had heard the
Message, and read the Letters, answered surlily, That Victoria might have kept
her self well with him whilst she was well, and not to have run to the
Luyslandian Court to learn to cut Capers: And for his part, he was not in an
humor to run as far as Tutelia to fetch back such a Baggage. And lastly, That
since he could not keep her while he had her, he had set up his Resolution,
never hereafter to venture himself in any Battle to catch her again; but would
continue his Ambition to stand still, and look on, and let them fight who were
so foolhardy.

The well bred Herald wondered at his Incivility, and much more at this strange
resolution of a Knight who professed himself a Warrior, and a General. So
parting thence, he posted to the Court of Tutelia; and gave an account very
particularly of his sleeveless Embassy, and the respective Answers, or No
Answers of the several Associates: which made the two Royal Lovers smile, and
gave the whole Court plentiful occasion of divertisement, to see what valiant,
gentile, pretty-humour'd Enemies he had to deal with. And now all rubs being
smoothed, Preparation was made for solemnizing the Marriage the Week after;
which was celebrated with all the Gallantry imaginable. The Particulars of
which were so extraordinary, that it would over-task the best Wit in the World
to express them to the Life, in their due order as they were performed. Only I
cannot omit the Epithalamium made by Philopompus, and sung by a Consort of most
harmonious Voices, which was this,

I.
Caelestial Spirits that tune the Harmonious Spheres,
With Charming music strike the Ears,
Of this great Crowd that Celebrate
The Marriage of the happy Pair:
Gallieno the Great, Victoria the Fair:
Rulers both of War and State.
May ill chance never
Their Union sever;
Nor sneaking Treachery their Loves undermine:
But firm accord,
In Deed and Word,
In Honor and Truth, their Noble Hearts Combine.
II.
Mars and Bellona joined and Linked in one
Can never by force be overthrown:
Wise Conduct guiding their Designs,
No Multitude of distructed Foes
Envying their Greatness, spreads, and grows,
Can work them any Countermine.
The Associates,
Weak Kings, base States,
Whose scattered, ill-knit Rags of unjust War,
To the Worlds wonder,
Torn asunder,
Shall turn their Braggs, and Folly to Despair.
III.
May Golden Glories circle their bright Throne;
And join their Foes Crowns to their own;
Fair-Ey'd Peace on their Victory wait;
Peace! Of all just War the sole End,
Though War alone to Peace can the Obstinate bend.
Kindness they abuse,
Who Peace refuse,
So nobly offered when he could by Force subdue.
And may they Live
Crowns to regive
To injured Princes, who for their Protection sue.
CHAP. VI. How Nasonius treated with the Great Lucifero about driving his
Father Eugenius out of his three Kingdoms and get them to himself. And how all
the Furies of Hell, were let loose, and sent into Utopia, to stir up the
Subjects to Rebellion.
MAny days together lasted these Nuptial Solemnities, and never was there seen
such Universal rejoicing and Feasting throughout Luyslandia, as was at that
Season. But it passed far otherwise in the Hydropick Country, and least of all
with the discomfited Knight Nasonius. He had suffered the Lady Victoria to be
taken from him by plain force: He had utterly lost his Honor as well by
getting her unlawfully, as by not being able to keep her. He saw that King
Gallieno was like to encroach daily upon the Hydropick Territories, and that
little help was to be expected from Don Ibero, whose best Politics were mere
folly, his Soldiers half starved for want of Meat and Clothes, and their
Consultations nothing but empty Braggs, and haughty Bluster. He knew well much
assistance might come to him from the War like Dukes, Bawwaw, Tricongio, and
other Potentates of Regomania, had he but Money to hire and pay their
Soldiers. But where was that to be had? Himself had lost his own Patrimony in
Luyslandia; and was but a pitiful poor Knight himself, or, as some Authors
write, but a kind of better sort of Burgher, living mostly upon his Pay as a
Soldier, allowed him by the Hydra; and so could spare nothing out of his own
Purse. He had an Uncle and Father-in-Law, whose Daughter he had Married hight
Eugenius King of Vtopia, Carduana, and Lyramia; a Pious and mild Prince, after
whose Kingdoms he had a long time gaped, and had by the assistance of the Idol
Mammoneta, by his private Emissaries sown much discontent, and ^issatisfaction
toward him amongst his Subjects, and disposed many of them to Rebellion: To
which many of them, especially those of the Panym Party were prone enough of
themselves, seeing how much their immedi^te Predecessors had thriven by driving
that Devilish Trade. The only difficulty that stuck with him was how he might
go about it with Security that he should not miscarry in the attempt, in regard
that King Eugenius was of his own nature mild and Merciful, and never burdened
his Subjects with Taxes, for which reason he had a very great Party Faithful
and Loyal to him. Wherefore Nasonius, to get rid of this Perplexity, called his
best Friend, Sodomicus to him; and asked hm by what means, (good or bad) he
might be certified aforehand, of the success of his undertaking; not doubting
but that if it took effect he could do well enough; for then he could either by
dissimulation gull the credulous People of Vtopia, who were of such an unwary
and silly Humor, that they would easily believe all that was told them that
sounded maliciously, and even loved to be deluded: Or else he could by
Authority crush, or put to death all that durst oppose, or approach to him. He
told him too, that he had already consulted the Star-Wizard Sydrophell, but
that he answered, he could see no Phenomenon, or Indications of Astrology that
could give him any certainty of it; and to tell you true, added Nasonius, I had
as live hear him tell me of Pigs, and Sows, and their Sties, as talk to me of
Bulls, and Bears, and Lions, and their Caelestial Houses. Now to acquaint you,
whom I dare trust with my true Thoughts, I had rather apply my self to the
Black Art, as the surer way, but that I fear it may be against the Rules of
Piety.

At this Sodomicus could hold no longer. Piety! said he, Are you yet such a
Puny, such a Novice in Politics, as to stand upon the weak supports of that
sneaking Virtue, Piety? Could the Hydropick Commo^wealth ever have been raised,
upheld, or grown to this pitch, but by renouncing utterly that puleing
Consideration? Did we mind Piety when we rebelled against our Lawful King Don
Ibero Formalitoso? Or when we robbed foolish Vtopia of so many Plantations,
Massacr'd her Merchants in Ambyona, plundered their Warehouses, etc. Or are we
ever the worse esteemed for it now? Do we not see how the good-natured Puppies
the Vtopians do whine after us, and court our Friendship. Or does any Monarch
in the World for that reason refuse to treat with our Ambassadors? I tell you,
POWER is all in all: Get but Power, and let the demure Gentlewoman Piety go
hang her self. In a word, get b^t Power, and what by interested Men, Di^ines,
or others, what by the Authority of great Men who partake of Power, and
influence the People; what by the Connivance of the Fearful, which make up the
generality, Po^er will be able to justify, nay, to sanctify it self. At these
Words, Nasonius embracing him affectionately, cried out in a kind tone.
Sodomicus! Better half of my self! Thou have spoken my very Thoughts, and
prevented my declaring that which I would have said, but (pardon my diffidence)
durst not openly and abruptly discover. Hereafter therefore assist me with thy
Advice, in the pursuit of that glorious End, and thou shall see that I will in
all things follow thy Counsel. There are, said Sodomicus in the Hellish Country
of Laplandia, certain old Haggs, who have infinite familiarity with the
Infernal Spirits, and have often sold Winds to our Countrymen for old Rags,
and moldy Crusts: Over these Beldams there is one of incomparable Skill, hight
Crampogna, her I would have your Highness send for immediately; follow her
profound Advice, and know of her the Event of your undertaking.

As soon as Nasonius heard this, without further pause, he presently dispatched
a Vessel with a Messenger, and such Presents as he was informed would be most
acceptable unto her, requesting her attendance on him. The Witch answered, I
will be there before thee. And so without any more ado, embarking her self in
an Egg-Shell, or as some Authors say, in a Rotten-Orange-Peel, or as others
say, getting a stride upon a Broom-staff, she arrived in the Hydropick Land in
the space of two Hours, and signified to Nasonius in his Dream, That he should
meet her the next Evening in a Fog, near the side of a stinking Fen, well known
unto him. As soon as he came to the place, he saw the grisly Hag with Hollow
Eyes, Dishelveld Hair, Lank Cheeks, and Shrivelled Chaps, who chatter'd out
this Rhyme.

Thou art too great,
With me to Treat;
Send for my Lord Lucifero,
And all things well with thee will go.
Nasonius, though he was courageous enough in bad things, yet at first was
something stumbl'd at this sudden Proposal; but being over-shooes in Impiety
already, he resolved to wade through: And bade the Witch send for him, or call
him up. Whereupon, turning her self nine times round one way, and as often back
again, and repeating a long ribble-row of Prayers backwards; at length, in a
kind of Extatick Amazement she yell'd out,

Brimstone I smell,
The Breath of Hell;
He comes, he flies,
Through Earth, through Skies.
Draw near, draw near,
Appear, appear,
Not with a Look that may affright,
But with a Shape that may delight.
Upon which words appeared Lucifero with Horns on his Head, and a cloven Foot,
but in all other appearances, a most accomplished Gentleman: The first word he
spoke, he bid Nasonius not to fear, for he was his Friend, and knew well his
Design; which was to drive his pious Father out of his three Kingdoms, and get
them for himself. Know then, continued he, that it was I that inspired thee
with this Thought, and I will carry thee through: only thou must wed
spiritually, or take to Wife I mean Concubine, (for we hate all Marriages) my
eldest Daughter Ambitiosa Superba; That is, thou must give thy whole Heart to
her, hold to her constantly, and follow all her Motions and Inspirations, which
done, she with her Maids of Honor will easily bring that design of thine to
Perfection.

Nasonius thanked him for the high Favor in dignifying him with the Honorable
Title of his Son; professing that he had ever loved and adored that Goddess,
though (hindered by some foolish Christian Principles, instilled by Education,
or taken up upon the Paroll of Preachers; which from hence-forward he utterly
abjurd) he had not till now made his immediate applications to her great
Father, and espoused her: Humbly begging by his good leave a sight of that
high-spirited Princess. With that, Lucifero gave a dreadful stamp with his
Cloven-Foot, which made the Earth tremble, and crack asunder, when out of the
Breach issued forth an horrible Cloud of Bluish Smoke which darkened all the
Sky, and that once dissipated, there appeared the stately Lady Ambitiosa with a
train of Black-Brow'd Furies, or Fiends attending her: Her self was clad in a
gorgeous Robe, with many great Crowns dangling about it, spurning many lesser
ones, and trampling them under her Feet. Her lofty Head seemed to reach the
very Skies, and her grasping Hand seemed to pull down Heaven it self. But,
after a while descending from her height, approaching Nasonius, she took him
kindly by the hand, with these words: Here take me, and with me the Glory thou
affectest, and the three Crowns thou so much desire. Acknowledge the great
Honor I do thee, and see thou observest me in all things, and so shall thou be
sure to be great as far as thy Cursed Fates will permit thee. See here my
Train, my Maids of Honor, who will assist in accomplishing thy Projects, and
going before thee into Vtopia, so prepare the Minds of those sottish People,
who are far the better half at my Father's Devotion already, that thou shall
have little to do but to gather the Fruit, and reap the rich Harvest which they
shall prepare for thee.

Then calling 'em forth one after another first stepped out the proud Fury
Rebelliosa, of so way-ward, and ungovernable a Humor, that she would scarce
obey even great Lucifero himself, but that she knew he would only command her
such things as were most agreeable to her own Inclination. To whom Ambitiosa
said, What will thou do for my devoted Servant Nasonius to obtain him his
Father's three Kingdoms? I will, answered Rebelliosa with a lofty tone, fill
the Hearts, Heads and Tongues of the Vtopians. with Murmurs and Discontents
against their kind and lawful King Eugenius, so that they shall be ready to
rebel, and drive him out, when ever they shall get an Opportunity to do it with
safety. Fear not thy success, great part of that Nation are my sworn Slaves
already. 'Twas I who inspired them to make War against his Father Eusebius.
'Twas to me they Sacrificed a Hundred Thousand of that Damnable Sect called
Loyallists, for which I rewarded them afterward with Riches and Preferments.
Lastly, 'Twas I, that, to crown my triumphant Exploits, inspired them to cut
off his Head; and the same Fate, if it suit with thy Policy, shall betide his
Son.

This said, Rebelliosa retired and there came forward next a monstrous deformed
Hag, whose ill-contriv'd Shape much resembled that of a Chymera, as the Poets
describe it: Her Eyes squinted contrary ways; Her Feet interfer'd with one
another, and all her Parts hung loose, as if they were inartificially tied on
with Points, without any Natural Contexture or Coherence. Of whom, when
Nasonius had demanded her Name; my Name, said she, with a confident look and
tone is Alethia, I am Truth it self, and cannot lie. But Ambitiosa interrupting
her, and turning to Nasonius, said, Believe her not, my Friend, her Name is
Fictitiosa, she is the Spirit of Lying, and her Nature such, that she cannot
say true, but only when she is to answer my dread Father Lucifero, or my self.
Then turning her self to the Fiend Fictitiosa, she demanded of her what she
would do to get her truest Gallant Nasonius his Father's three Kingdoms? I will
said she, spread thousands of horrid Lies against Eugenius, his Queen, and
their Son all over Vtopia, to disaffect his Subjects, and make them hate him; I
will inspire the Pamphletteers, News-Writers, Lampooners, and others of the
State-Scribblers with the Genius of forging 'till almost all the Land be
possessed with the Spirit of Falsehood and Lying Nay, the Pulpits out of which
they preach the Doctrine of their God, and the Preachers themselves shall be
deeply tainted with my venomous Infection.

After her came out a third Fury, which looked like a Fool, or mere Ninny, in a
long mothly Coat, with a Niaisy Countenance, a gaping Mouth, her Head hanging
down, and a great Bibb on her Breast to receive her Slaver, staggering and
stammering still as she walked and spoke. And what, said Nasonius, Can this
silly thing do in my behalf? As much replied Ambitiosa, as any of the rest. She
is the Spirit of Folly, and her name Fatuitosa Credula, let her self speak, and
tell thee what she will perform; I will, said Fatuitosa, so besot and infatuate
the People of Vtopia, that they shall give full Credit to all Fictitiosa's
Lies, though never so monstrous and incredible; by which means I will make them
Abdicate their Hereditary King, though were they not absolutely my Creatures,
they might easily see that it would breed endless Distractions. I will stir
them up to make War against the Powerful and Politic Giant Gallieno, though to
their vast Charge, and the utter destroying their Traffic and Comme^ce. I will
inspire them with the refined Folly, that they shall voluntarily and
contentedly beggar themselves to maintain the War of the Hydra, though they
cannot but know that it laughs at them for it, as great Fools; and in their
Hearts hates them. Nay, I will so totally and perfectly dose their Reason, and
common Sense, that they shall magnify and adore thee Nasonius all the while
thou do impoverish, abuse, and ruin them, and (which I esteem my chief
Master piece) they shall thank thee, and congratulate with thee, not for any
real Benefits they have received from thee, but merely because thou have
beggared and ruined them.

At these last words Nasonius took the Jest to fully, and relished it so
feelingly, that, (though it were a thing unusual with him) he could not refrain
from showing his high Contentment with a pleasant Smile. Till, as he was going
to return an high complement to Ambitiosa for such a notable assistant, by
telling her, That the very Folly of Lucifero's Courtiers outwitted, and
overreached the highest Wisdom of Mortals; there appeared a fourth Fury with a
surly Countenance, that came in stamping and staring, cursing the Earth for
bearing her, the Air for giving her Health, and the Sun for lending her Light.
Nasonius all amazed at such an uncouth kind of Fiend entreated of Ambitiosa the
Knowledge of her Name and Nature. Her Name, replied Ambitiosa is Diabolica, and
she is the Spirit of Ingratitude. She had that particular Name given her as an
high Reward for her great Merit; for she was the forwardest to oppose that
cursed Angel Michael, when he endeavored to debauch our Confederate Angels,
from joining with us in Rebellion, by alleging the Gratitude (forsooth) we owe
to God, as being our Creator, and who gave us our Being, and all the Good we
had; and who is in greater Esteem with my Father Lucifero than she? Nasonius
being a Gentleman well-bred, and full of Courtesy, thought it was his Duty,
and would be grateful to Lucifero, to pass upon such an high Personage, and so
great a Favorite of his a special Complement. Whereupon approaching to her
with a low Bow, and kissing his Hand, he was about a very formal Expressing his
Respects to her; But she, with her Fist gave him such a sound Cuff on the Ear,
that (being but limber Hamm'd) his Proboseis well nigh touched the Ground; so
that he had much ado to recover himself. To take off his trouble and fear,
Ambitiosa told him, it was Diabolica's Nature to render Evil for Good; and that
had he not followed her inspiration formerly in being ungrateful to his Father,
who had done him so many Favors she had certainly done him some great Mischief
for his Kindness: But she bid him rest contented with that Fury's candid
dealing: For had she saluted or kissed him, she would most certainly have
killed him.

After Nasonius had certainly well recovered himself, and come to his Senses
and Wits again, Diabolica thus accosted him; Fond Mortal! who could so think,
that I, who am Ingratitude it self could be won or obliged by any Courtesies.
Thou might have known by thy self, who art one of my greatest Devotes, that
Civilities and Kindnesses are not the way to oblige me, and had not thy great
Merits in being ungrateful to thy obliging Father represt my fury, this had
been thy last day, and all thy ambitious Projects had vanished to Smoke: But
for following my Inspirations I have both spared thee, and will reward thee.
Perhaps thou think that my Sisters have left nothing for me to do for thee;
but thou art much mistaken. Thy Father Eugenius has hugely obliged many
Personages of the highest Rank, and the chief Officers in the Army, nay, indeed
the whole Army it self, by being so good a Master to them; and unless these be
taken off, and rendered ungrateful, they will give thee such disturbance as will
quite ruin all thy Undertakings; but I will take such order, that they shall
all of them either desert or oppose him; for I will infuse such a subtle Poison
into the wretched Souls of those most obliged to him, that most of them, nay,
his own Flesh and Blood, as his own very Children, shall be the first Traitors
to him, and his bitterest Enemies.

Nasonius, upon hearing this comfortable News, taking fresh Heart, blamed
himself for being so foolishly unmindful of her Genius, and humbly asked of
her, (for he was deadly afraid of the to other Cuff) if it would not disoblige
her, to return her his humble Thanks. If thou will oblige me replied Diabolica,
be sure thou never repentest thy Ingratitude to thy Father or others, but
continuest it unto the end. But particularly, be sure thou do not show the
least Gratitude to the Vtopians, though hey foolishly serve thee against their
own Interest: But both disoblige those who have first and most assisted he,
and do all thou can to requite the Kindnesses of that Sottish Nation with
their utter ruin. Huff their Nobility as occasion presents, and imprison them
Lawlessly; Pay not their Soldiers, nor any who are so foolish as to trust thee
with their Goods, Stores, or other Commodities. Regard not the Seamen though
most useful to thee, nor pay 'em their Wages: Only give the Fops good Words,
and some little Pittance to keep up their Folly to trust and serve thee
further. Give the Royal Assent to no National Bills, that may in any wise serve
to support or secure their pretended Rights, Liberties, and Properties; nor to
any others that do not strengthen thy Power, enable thee to crush their
Persons, and drain their Pockets. Thou must also use thy utmost endeavor to
procure an Act to Endenise all the Rascally Refuse of thy Noble Allies,
especially our beloved Hydropicks and vagrant Luyslandian Panyms, by which
means they will eat the Bread out of the foolish, and tame Vtopians Mouths; Rob
their Clothes from their Backs, and reduce them and their Posterity to utmost
Beggary and Slavery. They have made themselves thy Slaves, use them accordingly.

Nasonius was about to assure her of his doing his utmost to follow this
Advice, when there steps forward another Fury in a Rich Gown of Cloth of
Silver, richly Embroidered with massy Gold, studded all over with Faces and
Stamps of diverse sorts and figures; who said, I am the great Goddess Mammoneta,
chief Idol of the accursed Sons of Adam. What I will do for thee thou shall
know when thou come to confer with the Heads of the Hydra, whom I will
require to serve thee heartily for their own Interest. At this, Lucifero put
in; see, said he, that thou Sacrificest the Wealth of Vtopia to my best beloved
Hydra, and in all things seek her Advantage. For know that none are so dear
to our Deity ever since they in the Indies formally renounced and Crucified
God, and chose to adore my Slave Mammoneta in his stead for their Goddess:
which binds me to requite their highly Meritorious Apostasy with temporal
Wealth.

When he had thus said, there came forward two He Fiends, of which one was a
bold, brisk Blade, clad in a long Gown, with a short purple Cloak over it, and
a Square Cap like a Judge, and seemed to be a Devil of great Authority. The
other in a black short Vest, between a Cassock and a Jump, a little formal
narrow Band, and a Black Velvet Cap, with another of white underneath turned up
over the Edges of the other, with a Lace, who walked gravely and demurely with
his Eyes lift up to Heaven, as if he were in some divine Contemplation, and in
the height of Prayer; with a little Bible in his Hand, making show by his
gestures and actions as if his Prayer ended, he were about to hold forth. These
are, said Lucifero, two of my chief, and most useful Servants, by name
Injurioso, and Hypocritico; the former my Chancellor, the latter my Chaplain:
who, at the inspiration of Mammoneta (which Idol, being of the same Religion
with the Hydra the adore) will, to give thee Title, wrest both Law and Gospel,
and make both the Bar and the Pulpit be at thy Devotion. Speak both of you in
your Turns, continued he, and declare what you will do for my best beloved Son
Nasonius.

What will I do? says Injurioso; Why I will inspire the Judges and the Lawyers
with such Quirks and Quillets, that they shall Torture and writh the Laws of
the Land with their Face backwards, till they come to acknowledge thee their
rightful Monarch: I will teach them how to make out Eugenius's Abdication in
despite of all those Antiquated Rules of Common Sense and Reason, which
foolish Mortals followed hitherto: By which means they shall satisfy those who
are unskilful; or else they shall punish imprison, and adjudge to Death those
overwise Fools who dare declare themselves for Eugenius, or Speak, Write,
Print, or Publish any thing in his Favor.

And I, said Hypocritico, with a grave and goodly look and tone, do Prosess
verily and truly, that I will inspire all those Bishops and Preachers who do
bear a servent Devotion to the Goddess Mammone^a (as the generallity do) to
teach dis-allegiance to thy Father, and Allegiance to thee out of their
Pulpits; nay, they shall assure their Hearers in the Name of the Lord; and
quote the wrested Word of their God to abet it, That thou art their true and
Lawful Sovereign, God's Anointed and Vicegerent on Earth. Nay more, verily,
they shall pray for thee too, and by obliging their sheepish Flock to say Amen,
they shall innure their Conscience to fancy that their Treason is a special act
of Religion. Lastly they shall maintain it Lawful to unswear their former Oaths
made to Eugenius, and swear 'em to thee as their only Lawful King and supreme
Governor, and even Sanctify Perjury by their devout Pretense of Religiousness.

These Goblins disappearing, Lucifero turning himself to Nasonius, said these
words, Thou see my dear Son, how by the Care of Ambitiosa, and her Maids of
Honor and my willy Servants, Jujurioso, and H^prcritico, all the way is paved
and smoothed to the glorius end thou aimest at. See thou be a Constant and
Loyal Lover to my Daughter Ambitiosa, adore her, and her only next to me;
observe all her ways, and follow steadily all her Inspirations, fear not that
thy pretending Religion will displease me; it is the best Cloak for all my
Darling Villainies, and makes them more sucessfull; but take heed of setting up
that Religion which is the true one, and values its self upon the score of its
Principles, especially in Carduana, where I have many Panym Servants, (whom I
would wish should have some particular Favor.) But the better to keep up a
conterfeit Pretense of being kind and equal, give freedom to all; and if thou
can jumble 'em all into one motly Church: If not, let all Sects whatsoever,
even Atheists, and Socinians, which are next to them, hold and teach what they
will, as does my Servant the Hydra: For that is the only plausible way to make
Mortals be of no Religion at all. For the rest, advise with the Hydropick
Heads; I my self will be present invisibly at all you^ Consultations, and
direct your Councils in the way of true Policy, which teaches you not to regard
the unlawfulness of the means you make use of, but resolutely to pursue the end
you drive at. In a word, behave thy self so as best becomes the Son and sworn
Slave of Lucifero. Hereupon Nasonius kneeling, and laying his Right Hand on his
Cloven-Foot, swear all Duty and Vassallage to him, and Loyalty to the Goddess
of his Soul, ^mbitiosa; who at parting warned him not to engage too rashly with
the Enchanted Giant Gallieno, but to make use of the Letters of his partial
Friends, and his own Gazzetts (the Gospel of the vulgar) to keep up the repute
of his Courage and Conduct. Which said, the Hellish Scene quite disappeared and
Nasonius full of Joy returned home, and the next day went merrily to hunt at
Holoo, having perfect Faith and hope ^n the Assistance of Lucifero, and of his
haughty, new betrothed Mistress, Ambitiosa.

CHAP. VII. How the good King Eugenuis was driven out of his Kingdoms, and how
Nasonius Usurped his Throne.
NAsonius had spent but few days in his divertisement e're News was brought him
from Vtopia how all the Country was in an Uproar, and ready to rise in open
Rebellion as soon as they might find a fit Man to head them, and an Army to fly
to for their Protection. Shameless Sl^nders against Eugenius had possessed
every Corner of the Nation. The Great Men Caball'd to desert him, the Pulpits
dinn'd into Peoples Ears nothing but Fears and Jeolousies (the sly language of
Treason a Brewing) that he was about to destroy their Religion, when only
themselves were actually a^tempting it by preparing to relinquish their
Principles, in which it consisted essentially. The Common People grew Factious
and Mutinous; and Traitors almost beset him round, spoke him fair, and advised
him false-heartedly. The Officers of the Army were tampered With, the City of
Thamopolis, and even the Army it self was in great part poisoned with Treachery
and disloyalty; and but a few in comparison remained firm to his Party and
Interest. Which Nasonius no sooner heard, but convinced that the Hellish furies
had done their Business effectually; called to him his best Friend, Sodomicus,
and thus bespoke him. My entiire Friend! Thou see that he Promise Lucifero
made, is come to effect, and Vtopia is ready to receive me with open Arms; and
as the Furies have handled the Matter, does sue to me to have me come over;
courting me as their noble Deliverer: while in reallity I go only to enslave
them. What remains but that we now convene the Heads of the Hydra, and with
them take fit measures to prepare for my Expedition, which thou know I can i
no wise do, unless they assist me with Ships Seaman, and Soldiers.

To whom Sodomicus answered, I have already disposed 'em to thy Mind and they
shall be ready to assist thee. Only because thou know how Superstitiously
they are devoted to their Idol Goddess Mammoneta, without whose Directions they
undertake nothing, they are now consulting her Oracle; but to Morrow I will
assemble them all, when proposals shall be drawn up, which I know will be
grateful to Mammoneta, and therefore I doubt not they will readily agree to
them.

Two days after the Heads of the Hydra met in a full Junto. To whom Nasonius
delivered himself after this plain Dunstable manner, better suiting with their
Rusticity than if his Speech had been garnished with all the Flowers of
Rhetoric, perfuming the Breath of the most Eloquent Orators. High and Mighty
Lords! It Is not unknown unto you how the mighty Giant Gallieno encroaches daily
upon us and our Associates in Arms, and how necessary it is to strengthen our
selves against him; and I am sure no way is so effectual to do this, as to get
the whole Power and Riches of Vtopia, Carduana, and Lyrania to join in our
Assistance. This, if we can compass, the Giant will be reduced to the stature
of a Dwarf; and (as our Ingenious Emblem long ago foretold) Our Holland Cheese
will darken and Eclipse the luster of his rising Sun. You know how averse my
Father Eugenius is to join with the Associates, being resolved by preserving a
Neutrality, and keeping his Country in Peace to advance the Trade and Riches of
his Kingdoms, which with his giving Freedom from Persecution to tender
Consciences, will bring the Traffic to them, and half ruin us. I have already
by the assistance of Mammoneta, corrupted many of his Subjects,, nay some of
his Chief Commanders, to give him such advice as should dis-affect his Subjects
in Vtopia, and dispose 'em to Rebellion. But for all that, finding things go on
but slowly, I have, to tell you true, (which is not to go further than this
Assembly) craved aid of our Common Lord and Master Lucifero who has sent his
Furies and wicked Spirits into Vtopia to invite them to Rebellion, and so
infatuate them that we may do what we list wish them; and instead of their
spoiling our Markets, we may make our Markets of them. And now the Deed is
brought to perfection, so that there needs no more but my Presence to
accomplish that glorious and profitable Work. Now because I cannot go thither
with an Army (as is requisite) without your Money, Ships and Soldiers, my
request is, that you would furnish me with such a Competency of all these as
may suffice to gain that incomparable advantage to our common Cause, assuring,
that as things are, and will be ordered, we shall find no opposition. And
besides, I do promise to pay super abundantly, when I am settled, whatever you
shall disburse. In doing this, you shall highly oblige great Lucifero, who
commanded me to treat with you about it; as also our Powerful Goddess
Mammoneta, who has in Person appeared to me, and promised me your Assistance.

When the Heads of the Hydra had received certain Intelligence of these good
tidings, they were right-glad in their Hearts; yet it being a Crafty and wary
Monster, It only said the matter should be considered the next day, and an
Answer returned. When they were assembled, and began to discuss the Point, they
all liked the Project exceedingly: only some doubted lest Nasonius, when he had
got so much Power, might come to swallow them up too, and there wanted not some
who said, That he would not stick at devouring them, if he saw it his Interest;
who made no reckoning of ruining his Father, who had been so good to him, and
had ever espoused and upheld his Interest. Others hoped he was not so ill
natured, and self-seeking (for he had craftily concealed his having married the
all coveting, and insatiable Friend Ambitiosa) and that what he did was to
carry on the Common Cause against the Giant Gallieno; or if he were desiours of
Honor and Dignity, he was not so immoderate, as not to be satisfied with three
Kingdoms. Others hoped by that means to get rid of him, of whose proud and
ambitious Humor they were al^eady weary. At length they all agreed to assist
him with what he desired; but yet on such Conditions that they should find a
good account in doing so, e're they yielded to set him up so high: And as for
the danger of his encroaching on their Authority afterward, it was concluded,
That if it were perceived he aimed that way, they could quickly check his
towering 'Thought by chopping up a Peace with the mighty Giant Gallieno, and
leave the Associates in the Lurch; as by the Advice of Mammoneta, they had done
formerly.

Sending therefore for Nasonius, They told him, that he could not fail by their
assistance of getting vast Riches in Vtopia; and therefore, it was but Reason
they should share with him in his opulent Aquisitions; and that otherwise their
Goddess Mammoneta, whose Dictates their Religion obliged them to obey in all
things, had advised them not to intermeddle in the Matter. He answered, that
the Hydropick Land was his Native Country where he was born and bred; and where
he sucked in with his Milk and the Air, all the wise Religion, and Gen^eel
Education he had: And that therefore he could not but retain his chief
Affection for the Hydra; and that he was willing to sacrifice the Men, Money,
and Interest of Vtopia to that of his own dear Countrymen. So after some
debate, the Articles of Agreement were signed between them, which are these
that follow.

Imprimis, It is agreed between the Great Knight Nasonius, and the Heads of the
Hydra, That the Associates should be acquianted with the Project, and their
Contributions and Assistance required, that they may all bring in their Quota
toward the charges of the Expedition. But that the Treaty with Lucifero, and
the intent of Dethroning Eugenius be only communicated to some choice Friends
amongst them: And that it be only pretended to the rest, that they aim at no
more but to bring him to join with them against the Giant Gallieno, lest their
foolish Piety should warp them from true Policy, and make them against it.

Item, That in what their Contributions shall fall short, it should be supplied
by the Hydra; and that though what they added were but Twenty hundred Pounds, yet
they should be paid Six hundred thousand Pounds for it out of the Money of the
foolish Vtopians.

Item, That Nasonius when he was settled, should furnish Money out of the Estates
of the said Vtopians, to set up and uphold the green-headed Knight Sabaudiero to
make war upon K. Gallieno, and to pay large Sums to assist the poorer
Associates; and to make the sottish Vtopians maintain the Wars of the Hydra.

Item, He should prevail with the Vtopians to declare War against the Giant
Gallieno, and fit out a great Fleet, and raise Armies of his own Men, at his
own proper Costs and Charges to oppose him; and yet notwithstanding, that he
should pay the Vtopian Soldiers and Seamen but slenderly, though with their own
Money; but the Hydropick Soldiers fully and nobly.

Item, That in regard Vtopia is the only Competitor in Trade with the Noble
Hydra, he should do his utmost to advance the Hydropick Interest, and depress
the Vtopian, by denying them Convoys, though of their own Ships, as also to
take strict Care that no Vtopian should trade privately with Luyslandia: But
yet that he should connive at the Hydrpicks doing the same, which would
impoverish Vtopia, and enrich the Hydra: Than which nothing can be more
grateful to their powerful Patroness, the Goddess Mammoneta.

Item, That to the same end the best Money should be transported out of Vtopia,
and none but the riff-raff left behind, and that the transported Money should
pass through the hands of the Hydra to make their advantage of it receiving it
cheap, and vending it dear: Clipping it first if capable, washing it if
weighty, or melting it down if they saw occasion.

Item, That Nasonius should promise to enslave and improverish the Vtopians as
much as it is possible in policy, and permit the Hydropicks and other
Foreigners to abuse their Soldiers that should be sent over to defend them;
it being but reason, that they who would needs be Slaves, should be treated as
they are.

Lastly, That some of the greatest Personages of the Hydropick Commonwealth
should go over with Nasonius, whom he is to advance to high Dignity, making
some of them his Prime Ministers of State, and his most secret Council; and
communicate to them all his Actions, and consult with them about all his
Affairs: That so they may certainly see he keeps his Promise with the Hydra, as
to all the Particulars abovesaid, and give sure Intelligence to the Hydra of
all his Proceedings.

These Articles agreed and sworn to; and the Associates having sent in their
Quota, the Hydra supplied Nasonius with Shipping, Soldiers, and what Money was
wanting. Which done, he full of aspiring Thoughts, Embarked for Vtopia: But
Neptune, who knew the lewd intention of this Voyage, and had formerly by a
Charter, confirmed by a long Possession, Constituted King Eugenius his
Ancestors Sovereigns of their Seas, did signify the great displeasure he
conceived at this unnatural attempt, and therefore, he gave leave to Eolus (no
less angry at the Hydropicks for buying Winds of the Lapland Witches to the
prejudice of his Prerogative) to ruffle his Waters to an horrible Storm, so
that diverse of Nasonius's Ships, Men, and Horses were lost and drowned.
Insomuch that he began now to stagger in his Faith, and to doubt of Lucifero's
Promise, fearing it was but a trappan, had not the Inferral Lady Ambitiosa, who
now possessed his whole Soul, and was still present with him invisibly,
encouraged him to pursue his undertaking, and not to be daunted with the first
mishap. Yet, had not his Heart been hardened, he might have seen that this was
but an ill abodement, and a fair warning that this inauspicious beginning
showed that this action of his was displeasing to Heaven: Yet, it is believed
that those two Gods abovementioned had drowned his whole Fleet, had not
Mercury, Jove's Messenger, been sent to them, to order them to permit him to go
forward; telling them, that the Sins of Vtopia were now full ripe, and cried
for Vegeance; and that he was sent thither by a decree of Heaven to be a
perpetual Scourge to them, 'till taught by dear Experience they come to see
their Old and New Sins of Rebellion, and grew so wise to repent, and make
Satisfaction to their Injured Prince, and restore him to his Throne; which
Message heard, the Storm ceased, and Nasonius landed at his wished for Port.

As Soon as the News of his arrival was spread, all Vtopia began to show openly
the Spirits, and confess the Furies that possessed 'em, some spread Lies, some
deserted; some Chief Officers caball'd to put their Disloyalty in Execution.
The Rabble played a thousand Tricks; and in a word, all (but some Loyal Persons
who had no Power to withstand the Innundation of Rebellion) with Shouts and
Acclamations welcomed the Invader. Yet Nasonius having professed he only came to
redress Abuses (as all Reformers do, though they afterward turn every thing
topsy-turvy) durst not yet pull off his Mask, lest he would discover his
Ambition too early: Nor yet durst he treat with Eugenius, for then (things
being adjusted between him and his Subjects) he had been reduced, but yet King
still, which suited not with the end he aimed at. Wherefore Nasonius refused
all Treaties with his Father, answered not his Messages; nor accepted his kind
Invitation; but (contrary to all Honor, and the Law of Nations) imprisoned his
Ambassador; hunted him out of his own Palace, even at Midnight, and put him
under a Guard of Hydropick Soldiers: Hoping, that by seeing his Life in danger
(no further outrage being lest but the taking away that) he would for his
safety run out of the Kingdom: Which succeeding as he wished and projected,
Nasonius got himself by those of his Faction, without much ado, proclaimed Kind
in his stead (though against the Fundamental Constitution of the Government,
(even though Eugenius had been dead without any Children) to the great Joy of
Lucifero, and all his true Servants the Hydropicks, and the no less rejoicing
of the mad-headed People of Vtopia.

Now the Reader is to understand, that there was at that time a kind of Hyd^a
in Vtopia, who upon King Eugenius's Retreat did set up for themselves, and gave
themselves Authority there; and this done, they, though no better Authorized,
gave the Supreme Authority to Nasonius, and he again kindly imparted to them
some of the Authority they had given him, and so made their No-Authority Legal,
and stronger than it was before: Which though strangely mysterious, passed for
admirable good Sense in infatuated Vtopia at that Season, but will be laughed
at for the most refined and exquisite Nonsense by all Mankind in succeeding
Ages.

CHAP. VIII. How Eugenius retired into Luyslandia to request Protection of the
Noble Giant Gallieno. And how the infatuated Utopians for that reason
proclaimed open War against him. And also of Nasonius his Coronation. And the
Heroic Adventure of the Contaminated Breeches.
THE good King Eugenius being thus unworthily driven out of his Kingdom by his
graceless Son Nasonius, and the Treacherous Falsehoods of his own Subjects;
after he had received unpardonable affronts from them, arrived at length at the
glorious Court of the great Giant Gillieno, and thus addressed himself to him.

Behold, Invincible Monach! an injured and destitute Prince, dishonourably, and
unnaturally bereaved of his Crowns by an ungrateful Son, and treacherous
Subjects, through the instigation of the Hydra, and the rest of their shameless
Associates, and flying to your Court for Refuge, and Redress. The safety,
honor, and dignity of all Crowned Heads are concerned in my Quarrel: For, no
Injury have I, to my knowlegde, done to any of those, who thus against all
Honor, Justice, and Allegiance, have conspired to my Ruin; and those which
were pretended, were done by advice of Counselors of their own Party, whom
they had corrupted to betray me. Be then a Mighty King as well in Goodness as
you are in Greatness, another Tamberlane, and revenge the Cause of an injured
Prince, bereaved of all, what both by God's and Man's Laws he possessed, by an
ambitious Usuper; who not content to have robbed me of all I had, does to
render his Crime more Enormous, and to palliate his Usurpation, add to his
wicked Injustice most reproachful, and base Calumnies, to debauch my Credulou^s
Subjects from their Allegiance. I have no hopes left but your puissant
Patronage, to whom nothing can be more Glorious than to relieve the oppressed,
and restore Crowns to those Princes who have lost them not through their own
faults, but by the malice of unprovoked Enemies,

When the good King Eugenius had thus ended his Address, the Noble and Generous
Gallieno embraced him tenderly in his Arms, and thus be spoke him. Dear
Brother, were not your Misfortunes the occasion of this Visit, no Man living
could have been a more welcome Guest (...) my Court than such a Suitor; Nor do
I esteem any Conquest in m^ Cause half so Glorious, as is the undertaking a
Business which is every way so honorable, and full of Renown: For by how much
your Innocence is greater; and the wickedness of your Enemies mo^^ manifest; so
much higher will it set my Reputation to redress yo^^ Injuries, and revenge
your disgraces upon your inhumane and base Enemies. Be here as free as my self,
and be assured of my effectu^^ Assistance; only let me take my own season, in
regard I have many Foes deal with, which may cost me some time to make them sue
for Pea^^ or to subdue them by War. Having ended his Speech, he gave orders to
Coin a Medal with his own Effigies on one side, and Eugeni^^ on the other, with
this Inscription: Je vous met^ray sur vostre Throne,
Ou jo perdray ma Courenne.
In English: I Will either set you on your Throne,
Or I resolve to lose my Own.


So King Eugenius remained in the Court of King Gallieno, where lived in great
Splendor, caressed by King Gallieno himself; the P^^ces of the Blood, and all
the Nob^lity; with less fear now that he shou^^ not regain his Kingdoms in due
time, than he had formerly assur^^ he should keep them while he had them among
such a multitude of T^^tors as he had daily about him: Though his Piety toward
his (...) Subjects was such, that dreading the Calamity of War, which wo^^ have
harrass'd the Nation, and undone many of his well-beloved P^^ple, He had much
rather have recovered them by the returning of Kingdoms (made sensible by their
Taxes and Losses) to their (...) than by the Force of any Foreign Armies,
which, though never so well disciplined or restrained from offering any
Outrage, except to those who opposed them, yet could not fail, for all that, of
b^inging great distractions and Miseries to these Kingdoms, which, with the Eye
of a Compassionate Father he looked upon as his own.

In the mean time Nasonius triumphed now gloriously in Vtopia, having obtained
by the Favor of Lucifero (of whom only as his Liege he held it) the Crown and
Imperial Throne of that Kingdom; which he had acquired neither by Honesty or
Valor, but by the high^st Injustice, and basest Treachery; according as Dame
Fortuna had told him, That he should never have Success, but in ill things, and
by means of ill Men. As Soon as he was seated in his Throne, he received the
Congratulations of his Hydropick Friends, and some other of the Associates, who
now made no doubt but by his assistance to pull down the mighty Giant Gallieno,
and to shrink him into a Pigmy. And the overjoyed Vtopians were so fond of
their new King, that no Money was enough to give him to prosecute his Designs.
Nay, such a sound Drench had Fatu^tosa given them, that at his Instigation they
would needs undertake the Quarrel of other Men, and declare War against the
invincible Giant Gallieno, (whom so strangely did Malice transport their
foolish and rude Natures) they mortally hated, because he had harbored and
protected their Lawful Sovereign: As if not contented to have spoiled and
robbed hi^ of all he had, they were resolved still to prosecute him where he
was and threatened Ruin to any Man that should shelter him from their Malice, or
give him Meat, Drink, or Lodging, and so (as far as they were able) to make any
place in the World afraid to entertain him; b^ which it is easy for any Men in
their Wits to discern, and might be so even to the Vtopians themselves, had not
Fatuitosa absolutely besotte^ them with Folly and Madness, that nothing but
Lucifero himself, an^ all the Furies of Hell could have inspired them with such
a Diabolic Malice.

After this, Nasonius's Coronation was to be Celebrated, which w^^ performed
with all the Splendor imaginable: But while he walked (...) Convalcade in his
Knightly Robes under his Royal Canopy, a sad and (...) accident happened, which
in the worst and ugliest manner dusk'd and (...) dirted the whole Solemnity:
His Heart was so full, and so over-swol^^^ with the windy Glory of his
Coronation, and the Joy he conceived the^^ of was so overflowing, that it burst
forth backwards, and the Perfu^^ of that Yellow Aromatic Matter was so strong,
that it imparted, and c^^municated it self to as many as were near him; And
which was wors^ all, his thus anointed Majesty was not in circumstances to
alter his Condition, but was forced to remain in the same abominable Pickle,
and to retain the same Scent a long time after; the Effluviums of which were so
very puissant, that whoever smelt it might safely swear it was specific to a
King; nor could proceed from any other but from the most powerful, and most
magnanimous Monarch in the World. Many and diverse were the Conjectures what
this unusual and ominous Accident should portend. The Wizzard Sydrophel erected
Schemes of the Nativity of this new Birth; he consulted all the Caelestial
Bodies, and knocked at the very doors of all their Houses to enquire the Reason
of it, and brought certain News thence, that the noble Constellation Ariadne's
Crown had veil'dits height, and become a falling Star to do honor to his
Coronation: That such sort of Stars when they fall, leaving a kind of Slough
behind them, this was only the Caelestial Slough, or Gelly of that Star, and
was very sweet-scented of its own Nature, and only seemed otherwise to us,
because it was so uncouth to our Sublunary Noses. Others, who were Poetically
given, wrote Panegyricks, and swore by Parnassus that it was as sweet as its
Cousin-German Musk; but, as sweet Perfurmes seem to many to have a stinking
Smell: So it was nothing in the World that made People conceit that it was not
Odoriferous, but the vast disproportion between that part in a Sovereign, and
the Noses of his Subjects. And others said, it was a freakish Revenge of Dame
Fortuna for the Injury he had offered to the Lady Victoria. But the Eugenians
were of another opinion, and made far different Constructions of it: For some
of them noted, that this was his first Adventure, and that it was an evident
sign that he should bewray all the Glory of his Reign by base and Cowardly
Actions: Or that the Giant Gallieno would make him often do the same in the
Process of his Reign, which he did at the beginning of it. Others would needs
have it signify that all which the Nation should ^gain by him, would be no more
than a Sir Reverence. Others, That the inward Gripes of his Conscience did (as
Gripes use ^o do) occasion such a sudden Laxativeness; But those of his good
^ubjects, who granted it to be as it was, and were heartily sorry, and shamed
to see it, gave out, That the Great Giant Gallieno by his Necro^ancy, or some
of his Familiar Spirits had invisibly conveyed some pur^ing Powder into his
Mornings Draught, to work him that foul disgrace, ^o disparage and beshit his
Coronation.

However it happened, it was a very foul Business, both in it self, and
especially in the timeing of it, and lighting at such a Nick^^g Season; and the
further Prognostics will, I conceive, be better found out hereafter by his
History (as appears in part already) than by all the most Learned Maxims of
Judiciary Astrology.

CHAP. IX. How the Panym Knight Refugio was sent into Lyrania against King
Eugenius. And how Nasonius himself went thither afterward, and what succeeded.
NOW the Country of Lyrania did, for the most part remain steadfast to their
Allegiance to King Eugenius, and the Noble Giant Tarcon had raised him fifty
thousand Soldiers, but undisciplined, and ill armed: Wherefore by the Friendly
assistance of the Giant Gallieno, King Eugenius though fit to send over
thither, and try his Fortune there, though that Country was far too weak to
resist the Forces of Vtopia, not having Conveniences and Necessaries to
maintain a War comparable to what was found in Vtopia. He kept his Royal Court
at Lyrapolis, and was now about to assault Walkerburga, whither the greatest
part of the Rebels, who were almost all Panyms, had betaken themselves. Now,
this place he could easily have taken, but the Besieged being obstinate, he was
loath to assault it, well knowing that the Lyranians, who used to spare none in
their just Anger, were so enraged against them, that they would certainly have
put them all to the Sword; which he (whose Piety toward his misled People
often much hindered his Policy) had too much Compassion to permit; hoping that
overtures of Mercy, and their own Famine, and other hardships would in time
reclaim them, and bring 'em to their Duty; and they were many of them starved,
and the rest about to yield, when they were relieved by Sea with all
Necessaries, which Eugenius being destitute of Ships, could by no means hinder.

After this, the Panym Knight Refugio, than whom few were more in savor with
Nasonius, was sent over to Lyrania with an Army of Seven and Twenty Thousand
Soldiers to make Head against King Eugenius; to whom the Vtopian Hydra (for
Money was yet plentiful there) gave a noble, but very foolish Gratuity of an
Hundred Thousand Pounds: Thus encouraged, he went forward on his Expedition;
And when he Landed, he encamped at Lutosia, where he staid so long in Dirt and
Mire, not daring to Fight with King Eugenius, that far the better half of his
Soldiers breathed out their Souls backwards: But they all embraced their Death
as the greatest Honor that could befall them, because it was Regis ad
Exemplum. Our Seamen at the same time had as great Calamity befell them as the
other, tho not so slovenly: For, a strange Giddiness seized their Heads on a
sudden, which made them desirious, and fall down as if they had been
Epileptick; and three days after they died of this Malady, and a third part of
them perished. This Disease being so sudden, so Mortal, and so strangely
unusual, and indeed scarce ever heard of before, Lucifero feared it would be
looked on as a Judgment from Heaven, and therefore took Care that Fictitiosa
should give it out, and Fatuitosa make it believed, that their Meat was
poisoned by Treachery: But though all the Industry imaginable was used to
discover the Poysoner, and find out the Poison, yet not one grain of it could
be found, and though such a vast quantity as could taint so much Meat was
inconceivable, for all the three Nations could not furnish half so much, much
less could any Art apply it so undiscernably, yet still, (so had Lucifero, and
his Furies handled the matter) that it passed for current Sense in Vtopia.

After this Disaster had happened to the Knight Refugio, Nasonius himself
passed over into Lyrania, with a right puissant Army, and marched toward
Eugenius. But whilst he lay near a River called Vndana, which he was to pass
the next day, going to Bed, not without some Sollicitous and frightful Fancies
in his Head; he dreamed a Dream which (though no Authors write of, yet may be
probably conjectured to have wrought a Coronation Effect with him. He dreamed
that while (contrary to the charge Ambitiosa had given him) he unadvisedly came
too near the Enemy, a Bullet of Six Pound weight granted upon his Shoulder.
Upon which awakening in a Fright, and great Anxiety, cried out, Treason,
Treason. Sodomicus, who lay in the next Room to him, rushed in suddenly and
asked what the matter was. Oh! said he, I have had such a fearful Dream, that
I Am afraid it portends some ill luck to Morrow: For methought, a Six pound
weight Bullet hit me on my Shoulder, took away part of my Clothes and Shirt,
razed the Skin, and that had it gone but a little deeper, it had put an end to
all my Glory, with my Life. Take Courage, said Sodomicus, for I dreamed that
Ambitiosa had appeared to you in your Sleep, to assure you, that she had taken
Care to dispose some of Eugenius's Army to Treachery, and some to Cowardice,
and promised you that to Morrow you should win the Day. Neither think I that
your Dream is to no purpose; doubtless it was inspired to hint to us what
Politic use we may make of it. I will take orde^ to make it pass for a
reallity, and cause the Relation of it to be writ and sent into Vtopia, and to
make it believed there in good earnest: Then what sport shall we have to hear
how the whining Puppies will bemoan their good King, who undergoes such
Hazards, and suffers so much for his beloved People. This will have a twofold
good effect; one is, that you will be looked upon as a Person, over whom
Providence, (as it shows by this miraculous escape) has a peculiar Care, which
will gain you universal Credit with the bigoted Generallity, The other is,
that kind Pity will so soften the Hearts of those silly Whelps (whose Heads are
soft enough already,) that they shall give you what Money you shall ask, and
contentedly beggar themselves to enrich us. And as for carrying it well with
the People here, it is but conjuring your Chyrurgeon to say as we say, for some
Gratuity: And tearing, and beblooding your Shirt in that part to delude the
Landress, and all will pass current; or put case that any do distrust it, yet
who dares contradict it, or rob you of the Honor you assume of suffering for
the Public Good.

Nasonius smiled at the Project, and approved of it exceedingly: So into Vtopia
the News was sent, and had all the effect they expected. For, the sottish
Vtopians with one Voice, Magnify God's Merciful Providence in averting so
miraculously the Chymerical danger. And now, who was so ill-natured as not to
be willing to give even half they had to assist this good King, who had so
profusely exposed his Sacred Person, and had incurred such imminent danger of
losing his Life for their Sakes? Whereas, has they not been Infatuated beyond
measure, they could not but see plainly, that all that little that he did, or
suffered (had his hurt been real) was the least he could do to uphold his
Grandeur and Ambition.

Nasonius was mightily pleased with the Project of Sodomicus, but much more
encouraged by the Promises, which both Lucifero, and Ambitiosa had given him of
their particular assistance in the present Action; but yet, (as if he would
have a trick beyond the Devil) to make sure work, he sent several, who, under
the notion of Deserters, and flying to the assistance of their Old Master,
Eugenius, discovered to him how all matters stood in his Father's Camp, and
withal, knowing that there was a dearth of Money in Lyrania, he sent great Sums
by the same pretended Deserters, with which they should not fail to corrupt,
what Counselors and Officers they could, still making promise of greater Sums:
Thus having all the assurance that could be, he commanded the old Panym Knight
Refugio to pass the River Vndana at such a place, where he knew the beat of of
the Battle would fall upon him; Refugio, as presaging his end, was utterly
against this Undertaking, but obeyed; and no sooner could he and his Forces
pass The River, but they were so briskly received by certain Luislanders, and
Loyal Vtopians, that it gave no small hopes of Victory to the Party of
Eugenius; and it was remarkable, that about thirty brave Vtopians, who had
followed their Lawful, injured Prince through all Fortune, made a Vow among
themselves, to put an end to this unnatural War, if possible, by cutting of the
False Nasonius; and accordingly they furiously broke through all the Troops to
find him, but instead of him, discovered Refugio, well and stoutly guarded, but
they forced their way, and one shot the old Panym in the Head, who fell from
his Horse into a filthy Ditch, where lying unregarded, he breathed his last; a
fit end for him, who spent his very last days in the most dirty Actions, and in
playing the most shameless, treacherous, and faithless Pranks. But while these
things were in acting, Nasonius sent over a strong Body of Rebellious Vtopians,
who came upon the corrupted Officers, and the main strength of the Lyranians;
but the Lyranians having for many Ages been subject to the Vtopians, and
beaten, as it were, into a habit of running away from them, could not so
quickly conquer those deep-rooted Fears, but presently betook them to their
Heels, and fled as so many Hares before Hounds. Eugenius grieved, and enraged
at such Cowardice, did all he could to turn and rally them, and to that end,
often put his own Life in imminent danger, but nothing would prevail with them,
but they still ran, and had left him to the Mercy of the Enemy, had not some
gallant Luislanders, and Loyal Vtopians come to his Succor, who seeing all
lost by such matchless Treachery and Cowardice, not without much ado was
persuaded, and prevailed with Eugenius to go off, and reserve himself for a
further Trial, and better Fortune. And now Nasonius, who had carefully observed
all from a Hill on the other side the River, seeing the danger over, and the
Day his own, took the Courage to pass the Water after his Army, to reap the
Fruit and Glory of the Victory.

Having then thus obtained the Victory, Nasonius marched to Lyrapolis, where he
was highly welcomed by all the Panym Party, and King Eugenius and turned to
King Gallieno to Tutelia. Now might Nasonius, had he not sauntered at
Lypapolis, but pursued the Enemies with his Horsemen while they were in that
distraction, have cut them off in Parcels, and hindered their rejoyning: But
Fatuitosa envying that she could have no influence over Nasonius, to govern
whom even uninspired by others, she made account she had the best Title, gave
him a Draught of her Poppy with a dash of Lethe in it, knowing it would easily
work with his Temper so fitly disposed for it; which so doz'd and infatuated
his Reason, not used to be over-burthened with any Politic Considerations,
that neglecting his manifest and best advantage, he thought of nothing but of
the high and mighty Encomiums which the Panyms at Lyrapolis gave him: Which
gave the Noble Giant Duke Tarcon a fair oppotunity to rally his Army again to
breed him further trouble. However, after he was weary with hugging himself for
the Victory which Chance, Folly and Treachery had given him, he marched forward
with his Army toward the strong City Shannonopolis, whither great part of
Eugenius's Army had retired, and laid Siege to it.

There governed at that time in it a noble Luislandian Under-Giant, called
Pandaro, who boldly set open the Gates, and suffered six Thousand of the
unpolitick Nasonians no enter, but as soon as they were got in, he had prepared
such volleys of Cannon and Muskets to welcome them, that they cut of great
Multitudes of them; and the resolute, and valiant Lyranians set upon the rest
(dismayed by such an expected and rude Greeting), with that Fury that few of
them escaped. Nor could they be relieved or seconded; for Nasonius, by a
fineness of Policy peculiar to himself, (For the Dose given him by Fatuitosa
had not yet done working) had left his main Body on the other side of the
River; so that it could afford them no help, but they were exposed to be
massacred in the manner aforesaid. After which defeat, the Garrison rushed out
to their Astonishment, and fell upon Nasonius's Army, and killed many more of
them, and put the rest to a disorderly Flight, which the Poet elegantly
describes thus in an apt simile.

When all the Elements at once conspire,
And round those Walls there is nothing seen but Fire:
When crossing Billows caused the Shannon swell,
And from above the watery Buckets fell:
When Air condensed unwholsom Vapors sent,
And Earth dissolved to putrid Water went. --
What them?

As Beds of Eels by Clap of Thunder broke,
Frighted they run, each fears the dreadful str^ke:
So Conger-like the Hero first broke way,
And through the Mudd his scamp'ring Legions stray.
Sure none but such at B -- t dare
Call this Success, Heaven's peculiar Care.
But Nasonius, whose chiefest Policy was shown upon such occasions, made as
much haste away as if his Life had been concerned, and blamed the slowness of
his Horse, though he had been a Pegasus; never looking behind him till he came
to the Seaside, and there finding a little Vessel, he got over to the happy
and safe Shore of Vtopia. Those who write thus of him, do seem to doubt whether
a Coronation Accident might have befallen him upon this occasion: Because, (say
they) his precipitate haste gave him no respite for a decent and leisurely
Evacuation. But to speak impartially, this is too great an Injury to the known
Courage of Nasonius. For, to say the truth, he had no occasion to fear any
thing, but the dishonor of staying, when he saw no good could be done: And
therefore he posted back, that he might prevent the news of the Defeat, and
make it thought that (his occasions inviting him home) the ill Success light,
as soon as he had left them, and only by reason of his forced Absence, which
none can blame for bad Policy in such a Warrior.

And this was the upshot of those two famous Expeditions performed by the Panym
Knight Refugio, and Nasonius; in which this latter did forfeit more of his
Honor, by this defeat and sudden retreat (when his Presence was most needful
to retrieve the disgrace that had happened, by his Conduct, and Valor, had
they availed any thing) nay, and lost him more Men too in that Siege, than had
the Eugenians in the famous Battle at Vndana.

But things went yet worse with Nasonius and his Party, in Inferiana; for the
valiant and Politic Giant Grandorsio, charmged and assisted by the Enchanted
Belt, which the Amazonian Lady Victoria had given him, set upon the Hydropick,
General Valdectius, in the Field of Florus; killed Twelve Thousand of his Men,
and made him run away thirty Miles to save the rest. Which made the Giant
Grandosio still more famous, and redoubted, and caused the routed Panym
Valdectius to cast out most bitter Complaints and Lamentations in his Letters
to Nasonius, and the Hydra, cursing grievously the frowardness of Dame Fortuna,
who by her unkindness and Partiality had brought him to such Disgrace, and
Dishonor.

CHAP. X. How Nasonius himself went into Inferiana; and how Gallieno took
Petrana, even before Nasonius's Face, and of his other Successes there. How
Lyrania was totally subdued by the Knight Ginglero; and how the Green-headed
Knight, Sabaudiero broke Truce with his Uncle, the great Giant Gallieno.
WHEn the next Spring approached Nasonius having (as was his Custom) sleec'd
the sheepish Vtopians of vast Sums of Money, went over into Inferiana to fight
the Battles of the Associates, being appointed their Generalissimo. At his
arrival they had a very solemn Consultation, how they might utterly subdue the
great Giant Gallieno, and assault him both by Sea and Land: So that now their
foolhardly Party ceased not to make boasts that they would carry on their
Conquests as far as Tutelia, and that in despite of Gallieno's Enchantments,
and Power, Nasonius would fetch away the Lady Victoria by plain force of Arms:
Which great huff, instead of causing the least Fear in Luyslandia, gave great
matter of Divertisement and Laughter to the Tutelian Court.

But before Nasonius took his leave of Vtopia, he called his Admiral, the Panym
Knight, Tornano unto him, and thus bespoke him. Thou know, dear Tornano, how
I have always treated thee with the highest Respects; nor has any Man more
obliged me than thou have by thy faithful Service: But now the time is come,
that thou must go beyond thy former self in Fidelity, both in executing my
Commands, as also in keeping the Orders I shall give thee, severely secret,
which shall be both for thy safety at the present, and (when time serves) for
thy higher Advancement: None knows better than thy self, that the accursed
Giant Gallieno would quickly land my Father Eugenius, and dispossess me of my
Throne, did not my Power at Sea bridle and restain him: So that should I lose
my Fleet in a Sea Fight, I should be in great danger of losing all. My Request
therefore is, that when the Fight begins, thou would hover a loof with thy
Squadron, which will keep the rest from being too rash; by which means, the
Brunt of the Enemies Fury will light most upon the Ships belonging unto the
Hydra: For (besides the Politic Consideration now mentioned) I am (to tell you
true,) much incensed against that Commonwealth, and not without just reason,
for attempting to take away from me the Office of Hydra-holder; or, at least,
to abridge the Authority of it, and make it insignificant, Which is an affront
so little suiting my Honor, and so unbecoming so great a Monarch, that I can
in no wise brook it; as I have wrote to my dearest Friend Sodomicus, and
ordered him in soft terms to tell them so much. Wherefore, I would at once
revenge my self, and by preserving my Fleet, and weakening their Power at Sea,
make them rather Court me for my assistance, than that I should sue or truckle
to them. Tornano was heartily glad to hear the Proposal; for he had no Maw to
encounter the Luyslandians at Sea, having been so rudely beaten by them the
Year before, on the Coast of Lyrania. Besides, it is said he had a Fair Lady
with him on Board, in whom he took especial Delight, and he feared the roaring
of the Cannons might maker her Head-Ake: Wherefore he readily consented to the
motion; only he as'd how they might be secured against being Impeached for
Treason by the Hydra, and Vtopian Sea-Officers, if he should refuse to Fight in
such a Juncture. To which, Nasonius answered, Feign what plausible excuse thou
see fit, and I will give private Orders to those that shall Examine the
Matter, that they shall acquit thee from Blame. Which, when Nasonius had
promised by the most Sacred Oaths, and (which was more binding, and more sacred
with him than all the rest) by the Word of a King; the thing was agreed upon.

This done, Nasonius addressed himself for his Expedition, and met the
Associates in Inferiana, where they had very long Consulations how they should
bring the Giant Gallieno on his Knees, and the Idea each of them had with much
hammering framed of this Project had such a gay appearance to their wise
Fancies, considering it Speculatively, that they made account it was as good as
done already. But while they were talking so long about what they should do
(their many Heads being of so many Minds and opinions, and never a good one)
the Powerful and Politic Giant Gallieno (who had but one Head worth them all)
did his Business, without talking; and with a right puissant Army Besieged
Petrana, the strongest City and Fort in all Inferiana. The sudden and
unexpected News of this Siege broke off their Consultations, e're they were
full ripe; and made them all distractedly do, they knew now what, nor how: And
such Power had the sound Dose, given 'em by Fatuitosa, over their stupefied
Senses, that they had neither once thought of possessing themselves of the
Passages to Petrana, nor of preventing the Giant Grandorsio from intrenching
himself, so as to cover the Siege. So that all Nasonius could do, was to March
that way with his Army, and stay a great way off: As if it had been Honor
enough for him to come so near Gallieno's Army, as but to hear the frightful
noise of Bombs, and Cannons, which fired and battered Petrana; which was not
done neither without mature Advisement, and a deep reach of Policy; which made
'em conclude, that it was more advisable to avoid the Hellish Fire and Smoke
that the Giant Gallieno (woe fought still in a Spell, or, Circle of Flames) used
to spit, and sputter round about him. So Petrana, which they foolishly boasted,
and thought Impregnable, was taken by the Luislandians: However, Gallieno was
sure to pay for that his bold Rashnness, in presuming to take the Town without
Nasonius's leave; and was never securely Victorious, if words would do it: For
Nasonius gave out that he was resolutely determined to revenge himself by
Battle. But the Giant Grandosio had by his Necromancy so ordered things, that
Nasonius could not for his Heart tell how to come at him, or how with any
Safety, to attack him. And thus continued both Armies, till the Nasonians
forced thereto by Grandorsio's Stratagems must needs decamp and be gone: Which,
Nasonius with all the Inconveniences likely to ensue, thought it his best
Policy to retire to Holoo, pretending he had no more to do since Grandorsio
would not Fight, though indeed it was to save his own Credit, which was like to
suffer some disparagement, had he staid and been Present. The Nasonian Army
therefore was left under the Command of the Panym Knight Valdectius to bring it
off as well as he could. But they no sooner began their Retreat, but the Giant
Gran^orsio fell on their Rear, and gave 'em such a Kick oath Breech for a
Farewell, as killed of them near three Thousand Men.

Thus ended the Campaign, and this was the Issue of all the vast designs, and
glorious Braggs of entering Luyslandia, taking Tutelia, and fetching thence the
Lady Victoria, which was sufficiently redicul'd by the Luyslandians, who were
now asham^d to have to do with such weak, improvident, and cow-hearted Enemies.
But the Mirth was heightened, even to loud Laughter, that the Nasonian
Star-Gazers had undertaken to demonstrate by the unerring Arts of Astrology,
that this Campaign ws to be the very last Period of all the Glory of Gallieno,
and the fatal time that Luyslandia was to be subdued and destroyed. But since
no more was to be done, who could help it? So, the Associates, after they had
had another grave Consultation what plausible Excuses it were best to give out
to palliate their unwise Conduct, and ill Success, separated themselves, and
Nasonius returned into Vtopia. Where, no sooner arrived, but he found the
Complaints made by the Hydra, and the Vtopian Sea-Officers against Tornano were
very high, and heavy. They alleged that this backwardness had cost the English
many rude Blows, but had cost the Hydra Eighteen or Nineteen Ships, for which
they demanded Vengeance and Justice against him. Tornano put in his Plea, which
was bandied to and fro, till the severe heat by degrees somewhat cooling, his
Trial came on, and as Nasonius had promised (though with much regret of the
Hydra) he was acquitted. To comfort Nasonius, and to keep up his Heart for his
ill success in Inferiana, Dame Fortuna granted him the happy reduction of
Lyrania by the Panym Knight Ginglero. Not for his own sake, whom she mortally
hated, but for Ginglero's, as being of all the Panym Officers the most
Courteous, Civil, and of best Conduct. This Knight led his Armies through the
Land of Lyrania, and took diverse of their Towns and Forts: At length they came
into a pitched Battle. The Lyranian Army was at that time Commanded by the
Politic and Valiant Luyslandian Giant hight Rutheno, who with the Noble
Gigantick Knight, Lucanio, so encouraged the Lyranian Soldiers that they thrice
beat back the Panym Army, and now were the Horse coming up to secure an entire
Victory under the Leading of the Giant Rutheno, when, a Cannon Bullet did
unfortunately light on that noble Giant, and bereaved him of his Life; which so
daunted his Army (his Valor giving Heart and Courage to them all) that the
Panyms got the Victory, killed many of the Army, and the rest retired into the
strong City of Shannonopolis; but the Places being Fifty Miles from the Sea, so
that no Relief or Provision could come to them by Sea or Land, they, with the
allowance of King Eugenius, Capitulated, but upon such good terms that he by
yielding to it as he did (according to his usual Piety (both preserved all his
Subjects in Lyrania from utter Destruction, and withal, it was stipulated that
they should have all their Liberties, Immunities, and Privileges restored to
them. And moreover, that as many Soldiers as would, should be transported into
Luslandia, of which there went twenty Thousand. All which was advised by the
Wisdom of the Politic Giant Gallieno, who considered that the Loyal Lyranians
that Capitulated, would still retain the same Principles, and be ready to serve
King Eugenius upon any fit Occasion; and withal, that this new Army of valiant
Soldiers, when well clothed and paid, (all which in great part they wanted in
Lyrania) would do Eugenius and himself more Service in Luyslandia, than they
could ever have done had they remained in Lyrania: which they performed
accordingly, as shall be seen hereafter.

About this time, or rather before, it the Green-headed Knight Sabaudiero was
prevailed upon by the Associates to rise up in Arms with them, against the
Noble Giant Gallieno. Nasonius promised him whole Indies of Money, and that he
would maintain too at his own cost, many Troops to assist him. The Associates
also unanimously promised him, that in the winding up of the War, when they
came to divide the Spoil, they would add some part of Luyslandia to his
Dominions; having very politickly divided it among 'em, e're they had got a
foot in it. This Project was carried so secretly, that never was any mystery of
State so carefully concealed. However, the Necromantick Giant Gallieno had not
only by his Familiar Spirit got light of it, but had moreover by a strange
Charm got an exact Copy of their Agreement. Upon knowledge of which he sent the
Valiant Giant Sabaudocrato into his Country, e're he was ready, who took all
Montania, otherwise called Sabaudia, and was about to fall into Alpiana, when
Sabaudiero confident of the impossility it should take Air, sent Ambassadors to
King Gallieno falsely protesting he was his most humble Servant, and meant
nothing but Peace and Amity toward him.

Now did many sober Men admire at this strange action of Gallieno, as breeding
himself causeless, and needless Enemies, when he had so many already: For one
could imagine that Sabaudiero should be so unworthy and ungrateful to his
Uncle, the great King Gallieno, who ever favored him, and had formerly
assisted him against his own Rebellious Subjects, as without any cause given
him to join with his Enemies, who sought nothing but his desctruction; which
made Men think it very harsh in King Gallieno to invade his Nephew's Dominions,
and to refuse to withdraw his Armies till Sabaudiero had put two of his chief
Cities, as Cautionary Towns, into his Hands: 'Till at length, King Gallieno,
when he saw his time, showed the Copy of Sabaudiero's Agreement with the
Associates; to let the World see how false and hollow-hearted he was, to
pretend Peace by his Ambassadors, and yet at the same time to have conspired
against his Uncle, his Friend, and his Ally, to bring him, if he could, to
utter Ruin. But, it was the Luck of this ill-contriv'd Association to be
supported by the violation of all the nearest Ties of Nature and Honor, and
all Laws, both Divine and Humane. Yet did the Noble Gallieno so moderate his
Resentment, as not to let Sabaudocrato destroy all his Country, as he could
easily have done. pitttying the folly of his Youth, too easily led aside by his
Secratary, who had a great Ascendant over him, and had received, as it is said,
for such treacherous Services, an hundred Thousand Pound from the Associates,
but chieftly from Nasonius, who was still very profuse in laying out the easy
got Money of Vtopia upon Projects of his own, for which, they that gave it,
never intended it. Wherefore the Luyslandian Army continued still in Montania
and Alpiana; took, and Garrisoned diverse of the principal Cities and Forts: But
of this; more heareafter.

CHAP. XI. Of the Annus mirabilis; Or the Campaign of the Year, when the
Associates with their utmost efforts intended to invade the mighty Giant
Gallieno on all sides, and to destroy both Him, and his, Root and Branch, and
also of the infallible Prognostics of his Ruin.
ALL Men, though never so dull, are taught Wisdom by their frequent
Misfortunes; and by their often experiencing what occasioned them; they learn
how to prevent them for the future. Wherefore these subtle Politicians, the
Associates, though they were but bad Reflecters came at length, with much ado,
to discover, after Gallieno had with many repeated Victories beat it into their
Heads, that two things especially had given him great Advantages over them,
(viz.) his being early in the Field, e're they were ready; and his Carrying the
War still into his Enemies Countries: Hereupon, after many Consultations, they
fully and und unanimously resolved to bereave him of both these Advantages, and
get them to themselves. But, as nothing is more rediculous than an Ape, because
it is like a Man, and yet is not a Man, so nothing is so mirthful and pleasant
as Mimical and Ape-Politicians, who would seem such by imitating the true ones,
and yet are Politicians at all. However, they mustered up, and increased their
Forces, and bent their utmost Endeavors, both to be beforehand with Gallieno
in the earliness of their Preparations, and also to enter Luyslandia on all
sides, as well by Sea as by Land; and teach him to let the invading of others
alone hereafter, and to study his best Arts to defend his own Country.

It was agreed amongst them, than an hundred Thousand Men, led by Nasonius,
should invade his Territories bordeering upon Inferiana; that the Regomanians
should fall into Alsatia; that Don Ibero Formalitosa should enter Luyslandia on
the side of Calatonia; that Sabaudie^o should make Incursions into Delphicoris,
where his Frontiers were least Fortified; and lastly, that Nasonius and the
Hydra should make a Descent upon his Coasts, take his Seaport Towns, burn his
Ships in their Harbor, and pillage and spoil all the Country before them. So
that now Nasonius did not doubt but that Victoria, seeing her Gallant so beset
on every side, would of her own accord come over to him, and renounce her Faith
and Troth to King Gallieno for ever. To facilitate these great Undertakings,
they had prevailed with Don Ibero, to create the valiant Duke of Bawwawia
Governor of Inferiana, who had formerly won much Credit by fighting so
successfully against the Half Moon of the great Emperor Magog, who accepted his
Proffer; though some Men too severe, said, that in doing so, he sold all his
Wit and former Reputation to the Iberians, in taking upon him so troublesome
and hazardous an Employ, insomuch that he had left little or none to himself,
as the Event showed: For he has made no Figure at all of a Soldier, nor done
any thing worthy the least note ever since he became Formalitoso's Underling.
However, this served to keep up the drooping Hearts of the Inferianians, ready
to sink under the ill Success, and bad Conduct of Nasonius.

As Astrologers consort it with Thieves to know what they have stolen, that
they may get Credit by telling how it was lost, and how to retrieve it: So it
is a common thing with all Politicians to give half light of any Success they
think themselves assured of, to some Star-gazing Conjurer, or Apocaliptical
Fortune Tellers of some Reputation with the Common People, that when they read
it foretold, and afterward see it come to pass, they may conceit it was laid
by Divine Providence, and that that Person who is to bring it about, is highly
in Heaven's Books; in that God would deign to signify it thus to the admiring
World beforehand. Now, Nasonius, who was the very Idea of deep Policy, knew
right-well of what Consequence such a Prediction would be, and therefore
resolved to send for his Astrologer Sydrophell, who had heretofore done him
great Service in the same kind when he first intended to invade his Father
Fugenius's Kingdoms.

Sydrophell, when the Messenger came near hand, was sitting in a dark
brown-Study what he should say in his next Almanac, by way of Star-Prophecy,
and yet not lose his Credit by being quite mistaken. He saw no symptoms of Hope
to prognosticate good luck to Nasonius, and was to hearty to the Cause to tell
bad: Wherefore he left off that Quest, and betook himself to invent some neat
and profitable sleights of gulling the Credulous People, and to make 'em
believe he knew almost any Event by consulting the twelve Signs of the Zodiac:
As by Aries, how may Cuckolds should be made next Year, and who in particular.
By Taurus, who was the first Bull that leaped their Heifer. By Gemini, who
should have two Children at a Birth, or meet with double-hearted People. By
Cancer, who should deceive them with false Pretenses, and delude them by
Crawling backwards, while they seemed to go forwards. By Leo, who should be a
valiant Soldier, and come to high Preferment for his feats in Arms. By Virgo,
who should be Married that Year, and whether the Person courted for a Spouse,
be a Virgin, etc. He was got thus far in his Caelestial Speculation, when the
Messenger from Nasonius knocked at the Door, and summoned him at attend him;
where, when he was arrived, -- Sydrophell, said Nasonius, Thou know, that
formerly I caused an hint to be given thee when I had assurance of it my self,
of driving my Father Eugenius out of his Kingdom; and thou did acquit thy
self well in prognosticating it very exactly, both to my great credit, and
advantage, and thine own. Now I have such another Job for thee: Ask me no
questions, nor hint thou heardst any thing from me for thy Life. I do tell
thee, and assure thee, that the Luyslandian Tyrant Gallieno, will be quite
pulled down this Summer; and therefore Prognosticate it boldly. Let me alone,
replied Sydrophell, I will make it so credible, and so plain to all those silly
Fools that understand nothing, by the Position of the Planets, and the
unintelligible Schemes I shall erect, that none of them all shall in the least
suspect that I needed any Sublunary Advertisement of it; nor is it for my
credit they should. So, with a lowly bow he departed, blessing his kind Stars,
which had shined so propitiously upon him, as to offer him such pregnant
occasions to make himself more famous than Booker, Lilly, or any of the rest of
that Canting Tribe; for now he made account that not only his Almanacks, that
related such grateful News, but that when his Predictions succeeded, all his
future Writings would be snatched up faster than they could be Printed. To work
then he went, and foretold the doleful downfall of King Gallieno with so much
Asseveration, that if their were any Truth in Heaven, that poor King was by the
Nasonian Party given for lost already: And to make this the more credible, the
Panym Star-gazer, Monsieur Helmontius, who had fled from Luyslandia to the
Hydra, did (as we may suppose) by the same Inspiration, in which case it is no
wonder if good Wits Jump) with all imaginable assurance Prognosticate the same.
How exactly their Star-Prophecies were fullfilled, will be seen in the Sequel.

The Spring was now come, and Nasonius, (as was his custom) having again
drained a Mass of Money out of the Pockets of his poor Slaves the Vtopians,
took the Field very early with an hundred Thousand of Associate Soldiers at
his Heel, and was now tickled with the Conceit how he should firk King
Gallieno: But when it came to the Trial, instead of his invading Luyslandia,
King Gallieno came himself into Inferiana, and laid Siege to the strongest City
and Fort that remained there, called Sambrina, e're Nasonius once thought or
dreamt of it. It was very obvious to imagine that King Gallieno would set down
before that Place, and it had been easy for Nasonius, he being first in the
Field, to have possessed himself of the Posts and Avenues which gave the
Luyslandians passage thither: But, as if the senceless Spirit Fatuitosa had
intended to make a property of him, and his Associates too, it never once
entered into their heads in all their Consultations, to provide against so great
a Mischief. However, when the Siege was already laid, then, (as if he awaked
out of a Dream, with some sudden noise) he began to bustle up, and bestir
himself, and marched directly thither with his whole Army in a most formidable
manner, threatening to fight the Giant Gallieno, and raise the Siege
immediately: But the politic Giant Grandorsio had by his Skill in Magic, so
postured his Army to cover King Gallieno, who, with another Army pushed on the
Siege: That Nasonius and his great Officers could not for their Lives tell how
to come at them with any Safety, or how to set upon him without hazarding their
whole Army. So they very soberly stood still, and looked on, whilst King
Gallieno, and his Soldiers did, with incredible Valor and Dexterity make
themselves Masters of Sambrina. Some were of opinion, that this was an high
point of Policy thus to stand still, and view, that by making their
Observations, how wisely King Gallieno went to work, they might learn to take
his Towns afterward. Others said, they came to bear Witness that the Town was
surely taken, because they were very nigh, and saw it with their own Eyes. But
the Nasonians imputed it to the Luyslandian Witches, or to King Gallieno's
Skill in Conjuration, by which he caused a Storm upon the River Mahaignia which
sunk some of their Bridges and Boats, by which they should pass, and by some
Charm had so stupefied their bethinking Faculties, that they had forgot to
provide or look afterward to make more. But the wisest saw, and said plainly,
that all those were but Pretenses, and that had they passed the River, and
attacked the Giant Grandorsio, in all liklyhood it had cost Nasonius the
greatest part of his Army. So King Gallieno being now possessed of that
strongest City and Castle, feasted his Nobility, and the Lady Victoria, and the
next day he sent an Herald to Nasonius, offering him Battle within two days,
if he pleased to accept it. Nasonius returned him this Politic Answer, That he
would fight when himself saw fit. Well then, said Gallieno smiling, I see
Nasonius has nothing to say to me, so I will leave him to the Mercy of
Grandorsio; and immediately returned to Tutelia, with his Lady Victoria, now
more than ever endeared to him by seeing his Warlike Courage and Conduct. The
Congratulations of his Subjects, and triumphs they had prepared for him were
very Noble and Magnificent: But the noble King Gallieno would needs divest
himself of that Merit, and give the Honor of that Action to the Amazonian Lady
Victoria, who was in his Company all the while he took it: And to that end he
caused a large Medal to be Coined, representing Nasonius with his Army looking
on, whilst Gallieno with his, took Fambrina, with this Motto about it.

-- Amat Victoria Testes.
Thus Paraphrased in English.

Victory of her brave, and valiant Deeds,
No more Authentic Witness could have chose,
Than this; which Hist'ry's Credit far exceeds,
An hundred Thousand tamely viewing Foes.
CHAP. XII. How Nasonius and the Hydra fought against half the Fleet of King
Gallieno; together witht the Reasons given by Jupiter, why King Gallieno's
Fortune should for the time receive some small Check.
ABout this time Nasonius and the Hydra with a vast Fleet of near an hundred
Men of War, prepared to infest King Gallieno by Sea, fearing he should Land the
good King Eugenius in Vtopia, where those of his Subjects who had remained
Loyal, and others who became so, by seeing their past Errors, and present
miseries, were ready to join and receive him: But Fatuitosa had so besotted
Nasonius, and his Council, that when Eugenius's Forces came to the Seacoast,
they weakly imagined they were drawn thither, merely to hinder their making a
Descent upon Luyslandia.

But when the Project was about to be put in Execution, Dame Fortuna, who was
never constant in any thing, an had owed King Gallieno a Spite, for a long
time, for engrossing the Lady Victoria (for her fickle nature hated that either
Love or Success in War should be permanent) and withal, enraged that his
Providence and Forecast made him so perpetually Victorious, went to the Throne
of Jupiter, and to the Fates, and complained heavily that her Deity would
become neglected, and Providence it self grow into Contempt, if humane Courage
and Policy should render the Designs of Mortals thus continually successful;
wherefore she earnestly besought them for Hers, and their own Honors sake, to
give some Check to the too contant Successes of King Gallieno. The matter was
debated in the Senate of the Gods, and it was unanimously voted, that it was
unworthy the Caelestial Deities, and would seem as if they were Envious of
Gallieno's high Merits should they hinder Wisdom and Valor from having their
due Rewards and Successes. Especially since Gallieno did humbly attribute all
his Victories to the Overseers of the World, and never failed to give Thanks
accordingly: But Jupiter standing up, (which made all the rest with a reverent
Silence expect his final Determination) delivered himself on this manner.

It is decreed by the Fates, and I have signed the Decree, and bid it stand
irrevocable that Gallieno's well meant, and wisely laid Designs shall in this
juncture receive some small Check. Not for his own sake, (for none but Fortuna
who is blind her self, could think his Merit ought not to be cherished with
deserved success) much less for King Eugenius's, whose magnanimous Patience,
and Heroic Virtue, under so many afflictions, as well as his noble hearted
Charity, and Love to his People, though Rebellious, gives him a most deserved
Title (besides that of Justice) to regain his Hereditary Right: But for the
sake of Traitorous Vtopia, and to punish their Crying Sins of dis-allegiance
and Ingratitude by the same Man, whom of their own Head, but not by me, they
have fondly set up to be their King, which makes 'em incapable of so great a
Mercy, as the restoring to them so Fatherly and good a Prince. Now, that you
may see how just this Decree of mine is of denying 'em. yet as a deliverance
from their Oppression, I will make known to you how obstinately and wilfully
blind, both Nasonius, and they are, in their wicked and malicious Errors; and
what I have done to signify my displeasure at their disloyal, and ungrateful
Proceedings; enough to make any repent of their Sins, but such as are hardened
in them: I will not speak of the prodigious Mortallity of their Soldiers and
Land, nor of their Seamen at Sea, nor diverse other such; but I will recount
some of those disasters which pointed at their particular Persons. I sent an
horrible Tempest at Nasonius's first setting forth; by that first inauspicious
Omen to deter him, and them, from proceeding on their Cursed Design, and could
in Justice have d^owned them all, at that time, but that I meant he should be a
Scourge to 'em, till they saw their Fault, and became Penitent; but it wrought
no effect with either. Well! by my Permission they possessed themselves of
their Father's Throne and being settled, fell a building a Hamptonia; but down
it came. They did the same at Nothinghamia, but that fell down too; this could
not be imputed to Treachery, Negligence, or a common Casuallty; for, none can
but know that Kings (their Lives being endangered by the Instability of their
Dwelling-Houses,) would make choice of the best Materials, and Workmen; and
that those Workmen would use their utmost Care that their Work should be most
firm, when they are employed, by such great Personages: Yet in despite of
their best choice of Artificers, and these Artificers best Circumspection, both
those works suffered a shameful Miscarriage. Now these Instances pointed
personally at Nasonius, and his unnatural Tullia: For they cannot name, nor did
any one ever hear of any other in the whole Nation, who was going to build in
two places, have had such a disaster light to them in both. Was it possible
then to impute these ill-boding Accidents to any thing but an overruling
Providence, plainly telling them (in such Language as the Sovereign Governors
of the World do generally use) that is, (speaking to them by Deeds) that let
'em use their best care, and exert their utmost art, nothing they build shall
stand.

This working nothing with 'em; I took more severe ways, and sent the dreadful
Fire at Alb^ Regalis, they removed thence to Nottinghamia; but the Judgment of
Fire pursued them thither also; and yet no willful Malice, or Treachery could
be alleged; nor could there be want of particular Care to avoid such disasters
in the Courts of Princes. Did they ever hear of any other Person in the whole
Kingdom, to whom the like Mischiefs happened, as first to be burnt out of one
house, than to be like to be burnt, a short time after in another? Or any in
the World, of what Rank soever, (much less of Princes) to whom the falling and
burning of two of their Houses did ever happen? It Is the common Sentiment of
all Mankind, who have any (even unnatural) Religion at all, that when humane
Care and Prudence have done their utmost, and yet their Intentions meet with
disasters, that it is then to be imputed merely, and particularly to the Will of
the Supreme Deity. Yet they continue to shut their Eyes against such manifest
Judgments, and carelessly huddle up the Consideration of them under the common
notions of Casualties; not regarding the Particularities now mentioned. which
were far from being common, being indeed till then unheard of. But, did these
Men regard any Principles, they might know that what they call Casualty, is
with me Providence, and Design; and if it be incredibly particular, it argues
some particular Design of mine: And what could that be but to make them, and
the World to take notice, by those Events so stangely remarkable, how highly I
am displeased that they dare presume with another Man's Money, and on another
Man's Ground, to build, or to live in Houses which are none of their own; and
that I declare my self by such signal and peculiar mischances, relating to
their very Persons, That my dread anger is kindled against them for their
unjust Usurpation.

I proceeded further, and hinted plainly my just Indignation at their audacious
and vainglorious Coronation, and their ill-plac'd Crown, and not to speak of
the ridiculous slur put upon Nasonius, by Dame Natura, offended at their
unnatural Intrusion into their Father's Throne; I took order, that the Ship
called the Crown-Frigat should be sunk, and that other called the Coronation,
should by a strange disaster in Calm Weather be suddenly plunged to the bottom
of the Sea: Thus to intimate to them, and threaten them, that when they think
themse^ves safest, and furthest out of danger, all their Usurped Glory should
in a moment sink into the deepest disgrace, never to rise again. And now, what
could I, in Wisdom, have done more to inform that infatuated Nation of my
Resentment against their illegal Rulers, and Rebellious Selves, unless I had
come down in humane shape (as I did before Deucalion's Flood) and told 'em to
their Faces of their deep ingrafted Sins? And had I done so, there would not
have been wanting Wolvish Lycaons enough to worry and murder Me, as they did my
anointed Vicegerent Eusebius, Eugenius's Father; and would have done the same
to Eugenius himself, had he not providently withdrawn himself for his Security.
Wherefore, seeing if Gallieno's wisely projected designs be not crossed, he
will certainly do that unmerited kindness to the Vtopians, as to restore their
good King Eugenius; and I will take order that it suffer some defeat at the
pesent, to such a degree as to hinder it. Now, let Nasonius, their Scourge,
still harrass, impoverish, and bring 'em to the very brink of Ruin. Let the War
they maintain to keep him out, take their Ships, spoil their Traffic, make
dear their Foreign Commodities, and all their Provisions too: Let it empty
their Purses, and lose the lives of some hundred Thousands of the Vtopians;
for, till they repent, and heartily desire to restore their King, the Justice
of the Goddess Nemesis cannot be satisfied, nor my dread Anger appeased, nor
they deserve the mighty Blessing of good Eugenius's Restoration.

But to let you further see, how just this Decree of mine is; it is not
Ignorance in the Vtopians, which makes 'em thus Rebellious, but willful Malice
against their own Consciences, and against their own Knowledge. To show which,
I will not allege how they Sin against my Divine Law, and their own humane
Laws (for all such Considerations they have trampled under Foot) but I will
challenge them with their own Thoughts, and bring themselves to witness against
themselves. Not one Judge or Lawyer in the Naton, but would six Years ago,
without any Hesitation, have condemned any Man as guilty of High Treason, by
the Laws of the Land, who should have asserted it was Lawful upon any occasion
whatsoever, to have invited a Foreign Prince to invade King Eugenius's
Kingdoms, and no less Treason to have deserted him, run over to, or sided with
the Invader, much more to have Abdicated their Lawful King, who still
challenged his right, and only retired to a place of safety, till he might try
their Temper, and receive their Proposals. Again, not one Divine, or Preacher,
(no not Scoto Apostato himself, but would, at that time have maintained, and
undertaken to prove it out of my written Word, to be divine Law, to pay
indispensable Allegiance to him. Nor do the Lawyers either, pretend to have any
New Light, to understand the Law of the Land better now and formerly. Nor do
those Mercenary Pastors pretend to any New Revelation of my Divine Will, or
better means of Interpreting Holy Writ than they had before, when they taught
out of it the contrary to what they now profess, Preach, and Practice: And,
that both Lawyers, and Preachers held thus formerly, and hold, and teach the
quite contrary now, without any pretense of new, or better light, is known to
their whole Abdicating Senate, and to the generality of sensible Men throughout
the whole Nation: So it is every way most manifest, that nothing but a
Rebellious Spirit, Slavish Fear, or Sordid Interest, are the only Rules of
their new Interpretations, both of Law, and Gospel. Most justly then do they
deserve to be punished by that which was their Sin, their setting up an Usurped
Power. Decreed therefore it it is, and that irrevocably, that Eugenius shall
not come yet to deliver them, but they shall still reap the harsh Fruits of
that which they have so wickedly sown, in despite of my Divine Commands, their
own Laws; nay, against their own Consciences and Knowledge.

The King of the Gods having thus finished his Speech, which was received with
an universal approbation, and applause of the Inferior Deities, he immediately
dispatched Mercury, his Messenger, to Eolus, commanding him to hinder the
better half of the Giant Gallieno's Fleet from coming up to join the rest. Now,
had King Gallieno commanded his Sea-Giant Thalassarchus, to set upon Nasonius,
and the Hydra's Fleet as soon as possibly, presuming his whole Navy was got
together by that time: That while he kept them in play, King Eugenius with his
Army might be safely transported into Vtopia. The noble Giant, though not half
the number of his Enemies (no more of his Ships but four and forty being yet
got together) yet mindful of King Gallieno's precise Order, he thought it
became not his duty to gloss upon his Commands, but to obey them literally,
struggled against the Wind, and made toward them. Indeed, King Gallieno, who
was now far off in Inferiana, having Intelligence that the Wind had been
contrary, sent him three several Expresses not to Fight, till the whole Fleet
was come up; but by the peevishness of Dame Fortuna, who (for the reasons
abovesaid) waited all opportunities to do him some displeasure, they never came
to the hand of Thalassarchus. Wherefore, not regarding the exceeding inequality
of their number, he like a brave and courageous Giant, boldly set upon them;
and notwithstanding their Odds, had rather the advantage during the Fight,
having shattered some of the Nasonian and Hydropick Ships, far more than they
had done any of his. But, while he retreated the next day, hoping to meet, and
join some of his other Ships, and prudently designing by that advantage of
number to draw them nearer the Luyslandian Coast, and Ports, where he might
with more safety renew the Fight; Neptune, by an order from Jupiter, put back
the Tide an hour, so that he could not pass the Cape; by which means sixteen of
them were in part burnt by the Fireships of the Enemies, lying on the shore,
and so not able to make resistance. But Fatuitosa taking delight to make Fools
of those who would needs be so, inspired them with such Carelessness, and
Folly, that they never minded the making use of that Advantage but were fully
satisfied with the imaginary Conceit of having beaten the Luyslandians, now
resounding all over Vtopia; that they never dreamed of making any further
Conquests, till too late: For the Politic Giant Gallieno had by this delay so
Fortified all the Coasts, that having lo^t their opportunity, they durst
attempt nothing.

Many Impartial Considerers denied that Nasonius had the Victory, because (say
they) to conquer, is to have the better in Fight, which he had not, and the
disadvantage was merely accidental; which put those Luyslandian Ships out of
capacity of Fighting, and so it required no Mastery, or Valor to do them a
Mischief, and therefore was a disadvantage, and loss to them indeed, but no
true named Victory, nor any gain to the Enemy.

CHAP. XIII. How Nasonius intended a Descent upon Luyslandia, and what became
of it. As also of the Exploits of the Green-headed Knight Sabaudiero, in
skipping into, and out of Delphicoris.
Afterward the Vtopians set themselves resolutely to make a Descent into
Luyslandia, and it was given out, Nasonius would exert the Q^intessence of his
infallible Policy and War-Wisdom, in bringing this vast attempt to Perfection,
to the utter overthrow of King Gallieno, and his own Immortal Glory. Long, very
long had this mighty Project amused all Europe; huge preparations of Cannons,
Mortars, Bombs, and other formidable Military Engines had marched with great
Solemnity from Thamopolis, and were Embarked. Many hundreds of Transport
Ships, and Well-boats were taken up, and made ready. Nay, all that the Wit of
Man could invent, or such a noble Exploit could need, without sparing any Cost
(for Vtopia had Money enough) was put in a readiness. The Soldiers were not
only furnished with Arms, and all things necessary nay, (which was to them a
special favor and encouragement) with Money too; but as report went, with ten
thousand Arms to equip the Panyms in Luyslandia, who were to rise up and join
with them. The Panym Knight, Misanglus, Eldest Son to the Knight Refugio, who
was to command this powerful Army, looked as big as Alexander, hugely proud of
this blessed occasion to signallize his matchless Valor, and to equal (for
none could outdo them) his Father's unparallelled Performances at Lutosia. What
Gazet? What Couranto? What News-Letter, nay, what Nation was there on this side
the World which did not ring with the loud and astonishing sound of this
renowned Enterprise. The Nasonian Courtiers were all turned Astrologers, and
prognosticated the miserable Downfall of King Gallieno, from the success they
promised themselves of this undertaking; which was so sure, and the Grounds of
it so firmly and wisely laid by the unerring Politics of Nasonius, and the
Certainty of it Sealed by the universal approbation of all the Associates met
in a general Consultation for that purpose, that it was beyond the casual
condition of bearing any Wager (though at never so great odds) to which few or
none of their other designs, but were liable. Besides, the profound Secrecy of
it, gave it the revered Esteem, of a wonderful Mystery.

The most searching Wits of Vtopia were too shallow to found the dark bottom of
it, and were at a deadly plunge how to frame the least Conjecture where this
iresistable Thunderb^lt would light; but being of a Temper easily appay'd with
any thing (or nothing) they contented themselves to believe by implicit Faith
whatever their Oraculous, and infallible Nasonius did propose to their
credulous Assent, and as long as they were thus assured this object of their
new Faith was true, they would not be so profane as to dive into the
inscrutable Majesty of his Apocalyptical Policy.

But Fatuito^a, who had only order from the Luciferian Court to besot the
Vtopians, in order to the Interest of the Hydra, being a very foolish Fiend her
self, went often beyond her Commission, and so infatuated Nasonius, the whole
Junto of Associates, and the Vtopian Council, and Generals too, that the so
much bragged of Design vanished in a Mist; and the brisk Invaders came back
greater Fools than they went forth. However, some Nasonian Counselors were
sent down to them, to remove, by their wise Advice the Impediment, that
rendered their attempt abortive. But all the effect that appeared of their
Consultation was this, that after some dodging (as the manner was) to cozen the
People, it should be given out, that they would out again when the Wind served,
and pursue their Project: 'Till at last, Men's Expectations being wearied, and
in tract of time, pretty well cooled, instead of setting Foot on the Enemies
Country, they went to visit their Friends in Inferiana; and very fairly,
easily, and prudently too (there being no danger, nor any to oppose 'em there)
they landed at Ostelia; which put their Friends to great Confusion, brought a
cruel disgrace upon Nasonius, gave occasion of much mirth to the Luyslandians,
and as much regret to the wiser sort of Vtopians to see their expectations
still fooled, and such vast Sums still thrown away to do just nothing. In a
word, this grand design, as it was conceived and born in a Mystery, so it died
as Mysteriously too. The reason of its miscarriage being so carefully hushed
up, that to this day few know certainly the occasion of it. Some undertake to
clear Nasonius's Credit, and Conduct, by alleging that he never meant or
designed any thing in his Life but to March to and fro with a great Army at his
Heels, to show his Greatness, and get Money of the Vtopians, in neither of
which Projects did his Policy ever fail him, and that all the rest was but
pretense, which some unwise Critics misunderstanding to be design, do frame
thence a rash and censorious Judgment, that his designs suffer defeat; which
(things being rightly understood) is impossible.

About the same time the young Knight Sabaudiero, assisted by Nasonius's Money,
picked dexterously out of the Vtopians Pockets, and by twenty Thousand
Soldiers of Austriaco, and Don Ibero, did on a sudden invade that part of
Luyslandia which bordered on his Country; where, when he had entered, he
plundered and burnt Country Towns, and Villages most valiantly, though they were
strongly Fortified with Hedges, Ditches, and Mud-Walls, while there was as yet,
none there to resist him: Especially the Panym Knight Caprea out of his innate
hatred to all that is Sacred, sparing not either Churches or Religious Houses;
not caring what Credit he lost his Master Austriaco by such Insolences, so he
might gratify the Licentious Humor of his barbarous Regomanians; though (as is
said) against the will of Sabaudiero, who though he wore the fine Cap and
Feather, yet his Officers valued not his Authority, but did in that, and all
things else what themselves listed.

As a left handed Fellow, though unskillful, puts a very good Gamester out of
his Play; so this Left Handed Policy of Sabaudiero gave some small trouble to
King Gallieno; who, governing all his actions by Wisdom, and expecting that
others too, would (to some degree at least) do the same, could never have
thought that Sabaudiero, who had now a good Army in the Field, would not have
rather attempted first to have cleared his own Country of Enemies, e're he had
Invaded that of another. This being no wiser than for a Man, when he knew his
own House was on Fire, to neglect the quenching of it, and run to set fire to
that of his Neighbor, and all this to satisfy the Braggadocio humor of the
Iberian Officers: But, as soon as the news of this impotent Invasion allarmed
the Giant Gallieno, and that he sent the Giant Sabaudocrato with Forces to
drive 'em out; they showed their chief Policy and Valor in running away as
fast as they could (as Thieves out of a House, when they perceive the Lord of
it is awake) e're they could come up to them; carrying some inconsiderable
Booty along with them, though not of worth to countervail the tenth part of the
wise Expedition. Nor had they ability, leisure, or wisdom to stop the Passages,
or hindering his Potent Enemy from following him to the Heart of his Country,
with such Force (as appears by his flight, and the sequel) as he was not able
to resist: There (if not restrained, by King Gallieno's Noble Mercy) to take
quadruple Satisfaction. As for these Subjects of King Gallieno, who had been
thus harrass'd, he, by easing 'em from Taxes for Many Y^ars; by repairing their
Buildings, and other prudent Methods he took, reduced em again to as good a
Condition as ever. And moreover to comfort 'em, and secure 'em for the future,
he fortified their great Towns, and the Passages into his Country on that side.
Only Sabaudiero got, and carried away with the due reward of such inglorious
Foolhardy Sacrilegious Actions, inflicted on him by the just hand of the
Goddess Nemesis, incensed at him for his unnatural opposition to his obliging
Uncle, a soul disease, and an ugly disfigured Face: the former of which and the
Arrears of it could not by any help of Art, he cured for a Year after, and
often brought him to the brink of Death, a proper Trophy for such soul Actions.
But we will leave him at present, and return to the Heroic Nasonius.

CHAP XIV. How Nasonius thought to surprise the Giant Grandorsio's Camp at
Steenkirkia, and how he succeeded. And of his attempt on Ipresburga; as also of
his noble Enterprise to Besiege Dunkirkia Together with what happened in
Regomania.
NOW did the hopes of doing any good upon the mighty Giant Gallieno, rest upon
the puissance, and policy of Nasonius, and the Duke of Bawwawia, who had a
great Army in Inferiana yet entire; for they were very moderate Men in their
way, and had no such vast designs as to Besiege any of King Gallieno's Towns,
which might lessen their Armies, or impair the number of their Men, and
Grandorsio had sent many of his to other Places: Yet it was necessary for
Nasonius, especially having this seeming advantage, to do something at least to
uphold his Credit, much sunk last Year by doing nothing at all. Long time he
had watched his opportunity, and at length thought verily he had caught it: For
being informed by some of his infatuated Scouts, that the Giant Grandorsio lay
negligently, and weakly encamped near Steenkirkia, he betimes next Morning drew
forth his Army, and marched without beat of Drum, or sound of Trumpet, not
doubting but that now he should take him napping, rout him Horse and Foot, and
revenge the disgrace he had formerly done him, by forcing from him the
Amazonian Lady Victoria: But arriving at the place, the Giant (to his great
surprise and dis-satisfaction) having had timely notice of this design by
Mephostophilo) had so postured himself, and so conveniently disposed his Army,
that they might regularly come up to relieve those that went before, and
received him so warmly, that the Foolhardy Vtopians, who bore the brunt of the
Charge, were after a sharp Conflict, totally defeated.

Indeed, Nasonius himself did that day signalize exceedingly his Valor, by
standing half a Mile off on the top of an high Hill, and thence, as the Gods
used to view the Grecian and Trojan Hosts when they fought, did very
attentively behold all that passed: and As if he had taken a peculiar Felicity
in seeing the Towns of the Associates taken* and their Armies routed, while he,
as if he had been unconcerned, and only came as a curious Spectator, stood
still, and looked on. Those that fell, were all Vtopians, or those whom they
had hired; For, though being the Generallisimo, it lay in his Power to send the
Hydropick Soldiers to relieve them; yet, mindful of his Promise to Lucifero,
which was to sacrifice the foolish Vtopians to preserve his darlings the
Hydropicks, he very fairly let above ten Thousand of them be knocked of the
Head, without coming himself, or sending any Soldiers of the Hydra to assist
'em. Some imputed this strange Carriage of Nasonius to want of Courage,
orthers, to his defect in Conduct; but, others, without disparagement to these
two Qualifications, (which they are far from denying to him) attributed it, as
the main motive to his following the faithful advice of his Spouse Ambitiosa,
charging him not to come too near the Armies of the Necromancer Gallieno, and
to the Inspiration of the Arch-Fiend Diabolica, to be most ungrateful to those
to whom he was most obliged.

Not long after, Nasonius having staid long in one place, began to want
Forage, the reason of their continuing so long in the same spot was very
Politic, for they were ashamed to go back, and durst not go forwards; and
therefore, out of a deep reach of Wisdom, they judged it best to sit still.
There was a part of the Country which was very plentiful, having never yet been
harrassed by the Armies, which they had a Months Mind to be nibbling at: But
they knew not how to move, lest the Giant Grandorsio getting light, by his
Familiar Spirits, of their Intentions, should (as his wicked manner was) set
upon their Rear, and pluck some Feathers out of their Tail. However, Grandorsio
himself, had an Eye upon that commodious place; and by his Sorceries cast them
into such a dead Sleep, that he decamped with his Army, and took Possession of
it, e're they so much as dreamed of any such matter: But, when he was gone,
they marched on valiantly to the place he had left, and resolved to cry quits
with him, by taking the strong Town of Ipresburga, and it was their peculiar
manner of Conduct, to have oftentimes done great matters, but that something or
other still hindered them: So, understanding that Grandorsio was now a great way
off, they with good resolution marched toward it, not doubting but 'twas their
own; insomuch that Letters were by way of anticipation sent into Vtopia, that
it was actually taken. But, so it unluckily happened, that another of King
Gallieno's Giants, Nicobelgus by name, having by Sorcery, (for they were all
great Conjurers in their way) got notice of their Intentions, came just in the
nick, and frustrated their Expectations.

At this time the Panym Knight, Misanglus who (as was said) had put to Sea
formerly to make a Descent upon Luyslandia, and had shamefully miscarried in
his project, that they might make a show of doing something, landed his Army in
Inferiana: Upon which, Nasonius set up a firm Resolution, being joined with the
Forces under Misanglus, to besiege, and take the famous and strong Town of
Baldwinopolis: For this purpose he caused great Cannon, Bombs, and all sorts of
Warlike Provision to be brought from Mosana, overthwart Brabantia, and in
Inferiana. This set up afresh the Courages, and Hearts of the Nasonians; not
doubting but the Wisdom and Policy of their Generalissimo was such, that all
this formidable preparation could not be made for nothing, and made 'em
Cock-sure that Baldwinopolis was as good as their own. But so short-sighted
were their Politics, that they did not yet well know, or soberly consider the
strength of the place they were to attack, nor what the Enemy could do to
hinder their approaches to it; much less had they compared these (as wise
Leaders ought) with their own Force. Wherefore, after they had vapoured a long
time and (as it was their main Policy to trump one sham-pretence after another
to keep up the drooping Hearts of the Party) had filled the easy deluded
Vtopians with assured hopes of such huge Importance; and that the Thamopolitans
had, upon that Prospect, lent great Sums of Money. They upon second Thoughts
(for otherwise they generally acted upon the first) very fairly let the Project
fall easily by degrees, and only gave out, they would at least Bomb it, and
Fire it; But, when they came to execute even that, they found all too late;
that King Gallieno had by his Necromancy raised such enchanted Forts in their
way, that it was impossible for them to come within five Miles of it; Besides
they were afraid the Wizard Grandorsio, who lay behind 'em, would play them
some Legerdemain Trick, if they offered to move far either one way or the
other. Whereupon, all the Cannons, Bombs, etc. as i^ they had been brought only
to Muster, showing their Postures, and then as they were, remarch'd back again
a long Journey to strong Mosana, and so the Project vanished, to the Eternal
Discredit of Na^^nius, and the loud Laughter of all sensible Men, and served
only ^o show the weak Poli^icks, and great Fo^ly of the Pro^^c^ors. A ^ertain
Hydropick, (for these (...) have a pretty kna^k at (...) Picture) would needs
(...) N^^^nius in a motl^ Coat, and a ^abel out of his Mouth, with this Motto
NON POTAR^M, and a Phryg^^n inspiring him how to c^^ch ^ Butter^ly, which when
(...) ^ame near, and reached out hi^ hand (...), it immediately (...) away, so
that all he could do was to (...) after it.

No better success had the Associates in attempting to invade the Country of
Grandosio, from which the Giant of that Name had his Title, for they were
utterly routed by the valiant Giant Harcourtio; lost two Thousand Horse, and a
great part of their Foot; and were forced to retire with much Shame. In this
Conflict, the Lyranian Soldiers (who, as was formerly said, were transported
into Luyslandia upon the Capitulation of Shannonopolis) won much credit for
their courageous Behavior, breaking down all before 'em. By which they
convinced the World how slanderously the Reports were, that were spread of 'em
in Vtopia; for then they were not inferior to the best of the Nasonians, when
well clothed, armed, and fed; all which in great part they wanted in Lyrania.

It past after the same unfortunate manner, or rather much worse with the
Regomanian Associates, Needs they would (as it had been concerted amongst 'em)
invade the Territories of King Gallieno on that side, and destroy Alsatia: But
having appointed three or four solemn Drinking Matches (which out of Devotion
to God Bacchus, they would not omit) they had not leisure to come into the
Field till the Campaign was almost at an end; and when they did (as if the
fumes of the Wine had not been yet well evapourated, they took such broken
Measures, that when they made account to pass into Luyslandia, where the great
Giant Allemano-Mastix had strongly posted himself, they lost many Men in
attempting it, and were forced with shame and loss to retire. After which, that
Politic Giant led 'em such dances, ad made 'em reel from one end of the
Rhenusia to the other, till their Heads were giddy, and quite ravell'd all the
Designs their muddy Policy had laid. In the mean time Allemano-Mastix waiting
his opportunity, took their Towns, burned, and plundered their Villages, and
put all the large Country of Wirtemania under Contribution. But the Campaign
now drawing to an end, and the Associates thinking it a great Dishonor to them
all, that the avowed Project of invading Luyslandia should come to just nothing
at all. They (poor dull Gentlemen!) held a Consultation, as their Courants tell
us, for a whole day together, what they should do, and the Result of it was,
the Besieging the Castle of Ebrenburga, defended by no more than three hundred
of King Gallieno's Soldiers. Mean while the Politic Giant Allemano-Mastix,
having defeated their Army beyond the Rhenusia, and taken the Duke of
Wirtemania Prisoner, hasted to raise the Siege. But as soon as this came to the
Ears of the improvident Knight Hessio, who would, contrary to the Sentiments of
the rest, undertake that worthy Business; away he ran as fast as he could, and
yet for all his haste, there wanted but little of his being intercepted in his
Flight, by the vigilant Allemano-Mastix, which had cost him the loss of his
Army, and brought him Prisoner to Tutelia, to bear his Fellow-General, the Duke
of Wirtemania Company, in their Land of Captivity.

CHAP. XV. How Nasonius surprised Meudixia, and Furnium, which were soon after
retaken by the Giant Nicobelgus.
THE Season of the Year began to grow so severe, that Soldiers could not much
longer abide the Field; and scarce any thing but one Disgrace upon the Neck of
another, had befallen Nasonius, so that he thought he must now be forced to
break up that Years Campaign, with an irreparable Blast upon his Reputation,
upon which he was so cursedly fallen out with himself, and grown so enragedly
out of Humor, that he was become a Plague to himself, and a Torment to all
that were about him. Yet in this Temper he at length bethought himself, and he,
which never had any kindness for Women, but for the promoting some wicked
Designs* retired to the Apartment of the haughty Daughter of Lucisero, his
Coneubine Ambitiosa, with whom he very passionately expostulated his Case,
telling her, that he thought his Designs to be wicked enough to have obliged
her by her own Inclination to assist him, though there had not been that near
Relation between them, and that he wondered that She and her Mai^s of Honor
could not, or would not do him as good Service against his only Enemy Gallieno,
as they had done against his Father Eugenius; she replied, That his Sorrows and
Disgraces were also hers, and that she was as deeply affected as himself with
all his Misfortunes and Disappointments: That she and her Maids had not been
wanting on their part, but the strict Government, and strong Spells set upon
Luystandia had hitherto rendered all their endeavors ineffectual; but that she
would immediately haste away to her Father Lucifero, the grand Master of all
mis-rule, and mischief, all the World over, and having co^^ulted with him,
would contrive something yet, which might make for his better Satisfaction
before the Campaign ended. Upon this she immediately posted away, and he a
little better comforted with her Promise, lay down to try if his troubled Mind
could admit of, or find any ease or refreshment in a little Sleep.

Ambitiosa somewhat nettled with her Gallant's Misfortunes, made all haste to
the Plutonick Court, where she found her Father Lucifero all alone, drawing up
a Scheme of Hellish Politics, how to employ all his Under-Devils, and fill the
World with Wickedness and Confusion, whom, without further Ceremony, she thus
rudely accosted. Dread Sire! whilst you take care even of the minutest matters,
relating to your Infernal Dominions, I wonder you should be so regardless of my
Gallant, and your Son-in-Law, Nasonius, as to suffer that damned Necromancer
Archimedes, to command your Spirits to his assistance against him, and to blast
all his designs, and undertakings? As she would have gone on, Lucifero with a
kind, but somewhat scornful Smile, thus took her up. My dear Daughter! if you
be such a fool as to be fallen in Love, yet I pray do not take my work out of
my Hands, and teach Lucifero to play the Devil; I thoroughly understand
Nasonius, he is as fit an Instrument for my use, as the World affords; but if I
should flush him a little too much with Successes, the Devil himself would not
be able to rule him; and when he descends hither, and (if for want of my
Spectacles I lately read right in the Book of the Destinies,) his fate is not
far off, he would be as ready to dethrone me his Hellish Father-in-law, as he
has already shamelesly in the face of the whole World done the same to his too
kind Earthly Father-in-Law. Besides I am highly offended at the wrong done to
you, and I wonder that you should not highly resent it, to see Sodomicus more
dear to him than your self; for though Sodomy be a Sin of my own Invention,
devised on purpose to make the Righteous Jove with his Thunderbolts to strike
down all Mankind to Hell, as it did provoke him to destroy whole Cities by Fire
from Heaven, yet I am not pleased to see my darling Sins turned against my
self, and my own dearest Daughter thereby wronged: And further, you know that
it is an infallible Maxim in Hell, That I must bring all my Servants to Shame;
and the more signal Service they do me, so much the greater Shame must they be
brought to, and I assure you he shall have it, according to his deserts. But,
because at present I have great occasion for him, I will give him some small
Encouragement; go therefore and advise him to set upon Meudixia, and Furnium,
and I will take care that both shall fall into his hands.

Ambitiosa^ Zeal for her Gallant, upon her Father's Lecture, began to cool, and
being somewhat weary of the open Air, and desiring to refresh, and recreat her
Devilish Nature for some time in Hell, and ^lso being suspiciou^ that her
Father had some trick, and further design in it, which she durst not then
enquire after, she would not go herself, but with a low Courtesy retiring, she
went and called for the old Mother of the Witches C^am^ogna, and having given
he, her Errand, presently dispatched her away and immediately the old Hag
bestriding her Broom-staff, and muttering to her self her usual Charms, rode
post through the Air, and in the dead time of Night alighted where Nasonius
with his Army lay, and entering hi Lodging Room, she somewhat rudely drew his
Curtains; at which, Nasonius, who for grie^ and vexation could not Sleep, was
not a little startled, fearing the Devil was come to fetch him away alive; but
seeing the Flaggs writhled Face, and sunk Eyes, he presently knew his old
Friend Crampogna, who had done him many a Kindness, and thereupon took so much
Courage as to ask her, what might be her Business? Quoth she, I am come from
the Infernal Court to tell you, that your design to take in some Towns was not
amiss, but that your mistake lay here, that you made your attempt upon places
of such strength, as the shallow Brains, and cowed Hearts of your Soldiers
were not able to cope with, you should have set upon such as you were sure
could not have withstood you; for a Town is a Town, and if you had surprised
but a Pidgeon-House, we could have made as great a Noise about it, as was for
the taking the sometime thought Impregnable, strong holds of Petrana, and
Sambrina, and thus have balanced your Reputation: And now I have in charge
from the great Lucifero, to bid you go immediately, without making any noise
beforehand, and set upon Meudixia and Furnium, and you shall not want the
assistance of all the Powers of Hell. Nasonius, whose Mind was uneasy, and who
was never very Courtly, received her Message with a kind of sullen
Reservedness. The Hag took it somewhat hainously, that he seemed so little to
regard her great Pains, and so kind a Message, and in an angry Tone said, Well!
For this once thou shall succeed in thy Enterprise, but because thou serest so
light by my kindness, I will give thee one small Shot before I go, and
therewith she sucked in her Breath, and squeezed her Body, whereupon her Guts
fell a rumbling, and out slew a Fart, that roared in his Ears like Thunder, and
left such a suffocating stench behind it, that poor Nasorisus, whose Lungs were
not very good, could not forbear Coughing for above half an hour after: But
Sadomicus lying near, and mistaking it for Cannon-Shot, sprang into his dear
Master's Room with all speed, where when he came, the Witch indeed was flown,
but bearing the ugly noise of a rotten Cough, and smelling such a poisonous
stink, he thought there was some damned Design, and bawled out, Treason,
Treason, as if he would have torn his Throat. Nasonius could not prevent him,
because he could not speak for Coughing, so in rushed the Guards, and all
within Hearing, who all cursed the Stink, and some swore that they were got
into the Devils House of Office. Nasonius, as ill natured as he was, could not
forbear Smiling, and as soon as he could recover his Breath, said, My Friends,
I thank you for your Care, but be not too inquisitive, all is well, and perhaps
much better than you think, go to your respective Posts, and take care to be
ready early, for I intend to March by break of Day.

As for the Forts, Mendixia, and Furnium, they were neither great nor strong;
nor had the powerful Necromancer Archimedes, set any Spell, or Charms upon
them; only in whose hands soever they were, they afforded some advantage to
annoy the other, and to secure, or hinder Forragers; some thought that
Grandorsio did design to flight them, others said, that he kept them only as a
Bait for Nasonius, but however it was, they were but weakly Garrisoned. Hither
Nasonius hasted with all his Forces, and also with the recruits of those Aids
who had lost their way in a foolish Project of a Descent into Luystandia, and
upon that account had repaired to him; it was not possible for those small, and
weak Places to withstand so great a Force, yet at first they made a brisk
defense, but finding they could not hold out, they surrendered upon Honorable
Terms, and marched away to Grandorsio, to acquaint him with the truth of the
matter, and receive his orders; and so in a very short time, both these Forts
successively ^ell into the Hands of Nasonius, which not a little puffed him up:
And whereof, News was presently sent into Vtopia, where was great rejoicing;
but to secure what he had gotten, he put a very great number of Soldiers
therein, under the Command of Ginglero, who had done such Feats in Lyrania, and
left with him store of Cannon, Powder, Ball, and all sorts of Ammunicion so
that he seemed to b^ furnished to withstand a Potent Army And now the Season
for the Field seeming quite spent, away rode. Nas^nius in Triumph to Hol^o,
where under color of Hunting, he met with his Confiden^s, and the choicest of
the Heads of the Hydra, who all laid their Noddles together, and set their Wits
on the Tenters, in contriving how to s^ueeze the stupid, infatuated Vtopians,
and d^aining away their Coin, to leave them as Pennyless as Witless.

But now behold an unexpected turn, which altered the whole Scene of Affairs;
for when all thought the Campaign for that Year was ended, and while they were
rejoicing in Vtopia, and consulting, or hunting at Holoo, the fierce and
restless Giant Nicobelgus, having received private Orders all on a sudden, like
Lightning comes with a strong Army of Mad, Fiery Sparks, and demands
Restitution of both the Forts, Meudixia and Furnium, alleging that they were
only lent to make a Jest on, and as he could take them again when he would, so
to prove the truth of what he said, he would have them now. Ginglero trusting
in his Forces, Ammunition, and Provision, gave big Words at first, and dared
him to do his worst: But Nicobelgus, besides his resolute Army, had certain
Enchanted Engines, which were sent to him by the famous Necromancer Archimedes,
wherewith he sorely annoyed the Forts, and the Defendants; but above all, the
Conjurer had sent him certain Iron Balls, wherein, by his Magic Art he had
enclosed a great number of active, malicious Spirits, which being thrown into
the Air, made dreadful Sights, and would also without ceasing, spit down Fire
directly into the Faces of the Besieged, so that none were able to endure them.
Ginglero, and his Forces being affrighted, and unable to withstand such unusual
Assaults, yielded up both the Forts to the fierce Giant Nicobelgus, leaving
behind them all their Cannon, Ammunition, and Provisions, to the great
dishonor and damage of Nasonius, and the Associates: And thus in a short time
all their Glories were fullied, and their Joy turned into Mourning, so little
assurance is there in the enjoyment of any Humane Affairs.

CHAP. XVI. How Nasonius returning to Inferiana, kept himself and his Army in
an Enchanted Circle, and what Means the Giant Grandorsio used to get him out;
and how he discomfited his Host.
AFter so many shameful Miscarriages, Nasonius, though Impudent enough, could
scarce set on a Face to return to Vtopia; but go he must, for there the Goddess
Mammoneta had a great Hoard, wherein lay his self, and his Hopes, and indeed
thence only could he hope for Supplies to support both himself, and his
drooping Associates; but having sent Fatuitosa before, she so played her part
among the besotted Vtopians, that at his coming over, they received him with
joyful Acclamations, never regarding, or talking of their Losses, but expessing
all thankfullness, that the Person of their Idol had escaped; and as a
Testimony of their Joy, and their true Love to Mischief and Rebellion, quickly
furnished him both with Men, and Money, in a more prodigal manner than
formerly. Nasonius, thus plentifully provided, could scarce have patience to
wait for the Spring, but hasted away to Inferiana, that, if possible, he might
take the Field before the Enemy; and being come thither, he presently got
together both his, and the Associates Forces; but when he considered what an
Enemy he had to do with, his Heart smote him: For, his Enemy Grandorsio was not
only valiant, but naturally Crafty, and of the greatest Experience of all the
Giants, which fought in the Quarrel of the Mighty Gallieno. This made our
Knight stagger in all his Resolutions, and therefore that he might come to some
Issue, he retired into a certain deep hollow Vault, where Crampogna had obliged
herself to give him the mee^ing at any time, upon the use of a certain Call,
consisting of some odd, uncouth, Necromantick Words, which she had taught him.

When Nasonius had repeated his Beadroll, the Witch was forced to appear, but
she seemed to come in no very good Humor, and our Knight remmembring the
Affront he had before put upon her, now set himself all he could to Light a
Candle to the Devil, and to entertain her with the utmost Courtship of a
Froglander; and thus he began. My dearest Crampogna, I hope you can pardon a
thoughtful Man, who did not entertain you and your last Message in such manner
as I ought; it was the trouble of my Mind, which diverted my Thoughts, not any
want of respect to you, whom I highly honor, and next to Lucifero adore.
Forgive my neglect, and be the same kind Crampogna to me as formerly. I have a
bold, and cunning. Enemy to deal with, but I have a gallant Army, advise me
what to do. The Witch poutingly replied, You know you are much better at
Shiting than Fighting, and if you had taken the course, by all manner of Lies,
and Slanders, to beshite your Enemies, it would have stood you in more stead,
and done them more disgrace than ever you are like to do by drawing your Sword;
but something you must do with all these Forces, and that you may be sensible
that I am more kind than you deserve, I will give you such advice, that if you
be quick in pursuance of it, it will put Grandorsio into such a Rage, that he
will go near to endanger his whole Army; but be sure you warp not from it, for
if you do, mischief will befall you. At this his heart leapt for Joy, and with
a thousand Thanks he could not forbear embracing the ugly Hag, who put a stop
to his Courtship, by thus proceeding in her Discouse. There is (quoth she) a
certain place yclepied Vivaria, by nature strong, but still more strong, by
reason of certain Charms laid upon it by the Conjurer Archimedes, which are
still in force. Thither go and encamp and I will use all my Arts further to
secure you, so that Grandorsio shall not attempt any thing upon you, but to his
Damage, but be sure to keep you there. As Nasonius was about to make his
Compliment, he heard a rumbling noise, and therewith came so violent a Wind, as
made the Vault shake, and the Earth tremble under him, and while he stood
aghast, expecting the Issue, the Witch insensibly slipped away and left him alone.

As soon as Nasonius came to himself, he made haste away to his Army, and
marched directly to Vivaria, and there, according to the old Haggs advice,
Encamped, which when Grandorsio heard, it put him into a strange fit of
Passion, for he designed to have Encamped there himself. But, as soon as he
could get his Forces together, away he led them to Vivaria, intending by any
means to set upon Nasonius; but though his Rage was great, and his Arts many,
yet so strong were the Enchantments, which guarded the place, that he could by
no means come at him, or do any harm to his Soldiers, but if he approached too
near, received harm to himself. By chance, a certain Spirit gave notice of all
this to the Necromancer Archimedes, who was not a little concerned for his old
Friend, and Acquaintance Grandorsio, and to prevent the danger, if not too
late, he immediately dispatched away to him a certain Mercurial Devil, who
always attended him, hight Mephostophilo, who in a trice flying though the Air,
came to Grandorsio, meditating a rash attempt, and delivered him the following
Letter from the Conjurer.

Great Sir,
In vain shall you attempt any thing against Nasonius at Vivaria; and if you
do, you will come off with Shame and Dishonor: For there are certain of my own
Spells upon that place, which, it is not in my Power to undo; besides, all the
arts and helps that Magic affords, are made ^use of at present for the
Security of the place by others; but, if by any Arts (in which ^ need not
instruct you) you can draw him out from thence, you may defeat him, which is
the hearty desire of

Sir, Your most humble Servant, ARCHIMEDES.


Upon receipt of this Letter, Grandorsio altered all his Measures, and having
dispatched away Mephostophilo with (as is said) a very kind Answer (for the
Letter is unfortunately lost) he gave up all thoughts of setting upon Vivaria,
and set all his Wits on work how he might draw him and his Army out of that
unapproachable Place. To this end he considered that there was a certain place
called Episcopatum, which was of great consequence, though not very strong;
thitherwards Grandorsio marched with his whole Army, making a feint, as if he
would Besiege it; at this the Associates were all alarmed, and Nasonius to
prevent the danger, sent a considerable Body of Men from his Camp, who marching
another way, got into the Town to secure it. And now Nasonius thinking all
things safe, and wanting Provisions, sent a strong detachment under the Command
of Signieur Cabbagio, who marched many Miles, with Commission to steal Turnips,
and Roots, (and a few Sheep, and Oxen if they could get them) for Sauce.
Grandorsio being aware that he had weakened his Army with two such considerable
Detatchments, now sent away in good earnest a brisk under-Giant hight Villerio
to besiege Huana, whilst he himself lay in wait to set upon Nasonius, if he
should offer to march forth to the relief of it. This Huana, though no great
Town, was of some strength, but the more considerable, for that the taking of
it would leave Episcopatum naked, and open the passage to the last Barrier of
the Hydropick Country, which so affrighted the Heads of the Hydra, that they
plied hard with all the Associates, and all with one consent pressed Nasonius
not to suffer a place of such consequence to be ravished from them. Thus being
overcome with their complaints, and clamours, he rashly forsook his
impregnable, enchanted Camp, at Vivaria, and marched with all the Forces he had
to relieve Huana, which was just the very thing Grandorsio hoped, and wished
for: But, whilst he, and his heartless Forces made their slow Marches, Villiero
followed his Business so close, that he became Master of Huana, before Nasonius
drew near it, and sent his spare Forces to reinforce Grandorsio; the tidings of
this being brought to Nasonius, his Countenance changd, and his Heart so failed
him, that stout rubbing, and the help of the Brandy-Bottle, were scarce able to
keep him from fainting away, but being somewhat come to himself, he gave Orders
to march immediately back again to his Enchanted Camp at Vivoria. But when he
heard that Grandorsio had posted himself in his way, so that he could not
return thither, without hazarding himself, and his whole Army, he bitterly
curs^d those who had persuaded him to leave that place of Safety; and himself,
for not following the Witches Counsel; and all his Counselors, who had
advised to the making so great a Detachment, to the weakening of his Army;
though some say, that none gave such Counsel, but that it was purely his own
silly Contrivance, and that none ought to share with him in the Glory of it:
All these things concurring with his further Fears, put him into such a
vehement Passion, that scarce any durst, or cared to come near him, and that
working violently downwards, it so strongly perfumed his Tent, that when it was
afterward taken by Grandorsio, the peculiar Scent thereof, presently
discovered to whom it belonged. But to make what amends he could, for this
fatal Error, he chose a Place the most like to Vivaria, as in such a straight
he could find, and caused his Pioneers to fall to work, and called on all his
Devils, Witches, and Conjurers, to set their Spells, and Charms, whilst he with
a select Party rode out, to discover which way Grandorsio was bent; but
Grandorsio, who knew that the Pioneers, and Conjurers would quickly so guard
the Place, as to be a mighty Annoyance to him, was coming in all haste to
prevent it; which, when Nasonius perceived, he turned his Horse-Head, set
Spurrs to his Sides, and rode faster than ever did any Man for a Wager, and
would have thought Pegasus too slow, had He been under him, and before he, and
his swift followers could well reach the Camp, they all bawled out, like so
many Strenters, The Enemy comes, The Enemy comes, To Arms. To Arms.

Grado^sio was to lose no time, both to prevent Intrenchments, and
Re-inforcements, and accordingly strait drew up his Forces against Nasonius,
and now both Armies faced each other, and the Generals encouraged their Men;
Grandorsio told them of the Glories they had won, and the Experience they had
had of their Foe, nor did he stick to tell them of the danger, and difficulty
of assaulting an Enemy in his Camp, but then he spurred them on to it, by
showing the Immortal Honor of overcoming it, as also the necessity of doing it
now, while the Enemy's Army was weakened by so great Detachments sent away.
Nasnius had no great Victories to boast of, and was unwilling to tell his
Soldiers, that it was his guise always to run away; but he showed them their
advantage of Ground, and told them what unparalled Glory they should get, if
they could now overcome that Enemy, which they never could before; and though
the whole course of his Life was in a manner one continued husting humor, yet
now he was quite another Man, nand promised golden Mountains to them that did
bravely, and even with Prayers and Tears besought them to fight, whilst he, as
became a prdent General, retired to a place of Safety, from whence, upon
occasion he might give orders, or send Recruits. He could scarce slip away from
danger before the Luislanders came on with Fury, but were so stoutly received
by the Vtopian, Iberian, and Regomanian Forces, who had the advantage of
Ground, and resolutely maintained it, that the Field was covered with the dead
Bodies of the Luyslanders, and for several hours it was doubtful, which way the
honor of the Day would go; but Grandorsio still sending fresh and plentiful
Supplies, and Nasonius not taking sufficient Care to relieve his wearied Men,
the Luyslanders began to break into the Camp. The Hydropicks all this while,
instead of assisting their Associates, had kept themselves together in a safe
place, wisely leaving Fools to Fighting, and now like Crows, who it is said,
smell Powder at a distance, apprehending danger to come on, they thought it was
their time to be gone, and accordingly away they went, making the best of their
way. Nasonius endeavored to persuade them to stay, but they thanked him
kindly, and told him, that they thought it greater Wisdom to provide for their
own Safety, whilst the Armies continued Fighting, and secured their Retreat,
than to take his Counsel, and stay to have their Brains knocked out. Nasonius,
who was always careful to avoid danger, and loved Fighting as little as
themselves, (though it was necessary he should sometimes make a Bluster, and
Show) that they should not be judged wiser than he, without taking any Care, or
leaving any Orders, for his Army, immediately fled away as fast as the best of
them, and never made stop or stay, till he had rode twelve Leagues, and passed
two Rivers, and then dark night putting a stop to his Carrier, he put into a
Barn, and covered himself all over Head and Ears in Straw, setting a watch to
observe if any of the Enemy came after him. The Noble Duke of Bawwawia
maintained the Fight after this for about the space of two hours, till a Loyal
Subjet of the injured Eugenius, for his Master's sake then in the Service of
the Mighty Gallieno, the valiant Lyranian Lucanio, with his Horse, broke in
like Lightning upon the Enemy, seized all their Cannon, and turned it against
them, and trampled under Foot, or cut down all before them. And now all the
Associate Forces could do, was to shift the best for themselves they could; but
the Duke of Bawwawia causing a Bridge to be broken down to hinder the pursuit
of the Victorious Enemy, it proved fatal to a great part of his Forces, for
Thousands were slain like Sheep by the River side, and such as attempted to get
over, not being able to climb the high Banks, were drowned, till the vast
number of dead Bodies making a firm Bridge, afforded a way for the poor
remainder to run over, and save themselves. In this Battle many great Persons
of the Associates were made Prisoners, and many brave Persons slain on both
sides, amongst whom, none is to be more lamented than the gallant Lucanio, who,
after his wonted Generosity, neglecting himself to take care of the Prisoners,
and Wounded of the Enemy, his own Wounds ranckled, and killed him. The
Luyslanders lost many at the beginning of the Fight, but in all, first and
last, not so many by two thirds as the Associates, whose Army was wholly
broken, and had been totally and i^reparably lost, but that the long Fatigue
which the Luyslanders had undergone, disabled them from a through pursuit, and
make them willing to give off, and enjoy their Victory. However, what remained
of the Associate Army, was so dispersed all manner of ways, that it was some
Weeks before Nasonius could by any shifts get so many together as might seem to
counterfeit any thing like an Army. But, while he lay thus troubled with the
grumbling of the Gizzon, and conjuring up all the Devils of Hell to assist him
for his Revenge, Gallieno, with the Lady Victoria, were singing divine Hymns of
Thanks to the Caelestial Powers, and great Entertainments were made at Tutelia,
and over all Luyslandia great Demonstrations of Joy were every where solemnly
expressed for so signal a Victory.

CHAP. XVII. How the Green-headed Knight, Sabaudiero, attempted to take
Pineria, and how the Giant Sabaudocrato came upon him, betwixt whom there was a
Bloody Fight, in which Sabaudiero, and his Forces were overthrown.
LEt us for a while leave Nasonius, picking up his scattered Forces, and
revolving ten thousand Projects, in his Brain, how to do nothing, and see what
better Fortune the Associates met with elsewhere: Youth is forward, rash, and
greedy of Glory, and in Montania their Forces were thought to be much the
stronger, not only as having the advantage in number, but also, as consisting
for the most part of stout, and well-disciplin'd Men; this pricked on
Sabaudiero to do something, both for his Glory, and in revenge of his Losses;
and after a serious Consultation, where there was scarce one wise Head among
them, and that least set by, it was resolved to besiege Pineria, a Town strong,
and of great Consequence. And now without delay their Forces were drawn about
it; but the great Necromancer, Archimedes, had been there before, and raised
certain small magical Forts, which so guarded Pineria, that till one, or more
of them were taken, they could not come at it without running a desperate
hazard: And therefore that they might seem to act like wise Men, they resolved
in the first place to attack the Fort called Pontilla, which they did with
great Fury, and renewed from time to time with great Resolution; but on the
other hand, the Fort was as bravely defended by some select Men put therein,
there was nothing of Valor or Industry wanting on either side, there were
Mines against Mines, Charms against Charms, (for in those strong Countries they
are all addicted to Necromancy) and vehement assaulting, and as stout
repulsing: But in the end, their Charms being countercharm'd, the Fort woefully
battered, and they overpowered with numbers, they found they could no longer
maintain it, and yet resolved so to quit it, that it should do the Enemy no
good, nor they suffer the least in their Honor and Reputation. And accordingly
they secretly convey all their Cannon, Ammunition, and Provision into Pineria,
and then they had but one trick to try more, and that was a certain Spell, or
Charm left them by the famous Necromancer Archimedes, with this strict charge,
that they shoul never use it but in their last neccessity; and this they
thought the time, now the Fort was no longer tenable; and therefore they set it
on work, when presently all the Fortification fell a heaving, and suddenly flew
up into the Air and vanished, whilst the Besieged under coverture of the Cloud,
safely retired to Pinera, to reinforce that Place, and desend it against the
threatening Danger.

Sabaudiero was somewhat surprised with the Novelty of the thing as having not
often seen such Conjuring Tricks, but withal, proud that he had Conquered such
a Devilish place, he swore he would now have Pineria, or make it fly away after
Pontilla. They made themselves Cocksure of the place; for they took it for
granted, that Sabaudocrato had not sufficient Forces, and consequently that he
durst not adventure to relieve it. The noise of this Siege slew abroad into all
Countries, and the Associates mightily comforted themselves, that some
considerable Feats would be done on their part, which they hoped would force
Gallieno to recall many of his Forces out of Inferiana, by which means they
might become an equal, if not an over-match for those which should be left. But
the foolish Vtopians were so taken and besotted with this small Prank, that
therewith they more than balanced all their Losses in Inferiiana, and
elsewhere, and conffdently reported Pineria to be taken, before any direct
Assault was made upon it; and these Whimsies, and Conceits, working in their
giddy Brains, they magnified the rash Youncker Subaudiero, as if Orlando
Furioso, or Garagantua had been mere Weaklings, and Pygmies to him.

All this time the wily Giant Sabaudecrato lay lurking up and down in secret
and safe Retreats, as well to conceal, and augment the number of his Army, as
to give Encouragement to the unadvised Associates, to fatigue, and break their
Forces against a strong and resolute Garrison; but he no sooner had tidings
that Pine^ia was really in danger, but he fliely fell down to the relief of it,
before they were well aware. His unexpected coming, somewhat allarmed them all,
and various were their Opinions of it; some concluded him rash and unadvised,
who had been hitherto thought cunning; some said he was a crafty Fellow, and
that they ought to beware of him, but these were despised, and branded as
Cowards; some said it was only a sham, or bravado, and that he would as quickly
be gone again; but a Counsel of War being called, after a short debate (they
never making the least question of their superiority in number, and force, nor
staying for any Intelligence to know how strong he was) it was unanimously
resolved to break up the Seige for the present, and go to meet him, concluding,
that if they could fight him, and beat him out of the Field, then the
Garrisons, and strong holds having no hopes of Relief, would more easily submit
to them: But in the mean time they never thought what the danger might be on
their part, in case they were beaten, for they would not spoil their fine
Thoughts with such a melancholy Conceit.

The Associates drunk with assurance of Victory, if they could but find their
Enemy, marched away with all the briskness and jollity imaginable; but far they
had not gone, when contrary to their Expectation he appeared in Sight; for he
was as ready for them, as they for him: And now they too late perceived their
Error, for they might plainly see that he was equal, if not Superior to them
in number of Men: But however, their Soldiers being well disciplined, and of
late somewhat flushed, and eager, they presumed of the advantage in the
Stoutness and Valor of their Men, and therefore resolved to give Battle; nor
did Sabaudocrato at all decline it. Both sides seeming thus eagerly bent upon
it, the Generals drew up their Forces in Battle-Array, in a large Plain, where
all advantages for Ground, Numbers, and all other matters (except Brains) were
so equal on both sides, that there was likely to be as fair a Trial of Skill,
as had been known in many Ages. The on set was fierce on both sides and for
sometime it seemed doubtful, which way the victory would incline: After some
time the Left wing of Sobaudocrato made the Right Wing of Sabaudiero, where the
Altianians were, to give way: but to make amends for that, the Left Wing of
Sabaudiero, where the Iberians, and Regomanian were, made the Right Wing of
Sabaudocrato to go back in some disorder, so that still there seemed to be no
great odds; but Sabaudocrato wisely foreseeing the Danger, and knowing where
his Battle was weakest, had so posted the good Knight Prioro, that he might in
time of need come to their Succor, which he did just in the nick of time, and
thus re-inforcing, and rallying them again, the Ibe^ians and Regomanians were
slaughtered in great numbers, and being overpowered, were forced to retreat,
and Sabaudiero not succouring his Left Wing, it was utterly routed, and now
they were no longer able to stand, the best Men retired in as good order as
they could, but the greatest part of hi^ Forces lay at the Mercy of the
Luyslanders, who in their Fury made Mortal Havoc of them; which Sabaudiero
beholding, in Compa^^^^ (...) prevailed with Sicamber, a Valiant, but Wicked
Knight, the (...) old Refugio, to try if he could bring them off, which, with a
strong detachment of Horse he attempted, and covered the retreat of many, but
in the Action was himself mortally Wounded, and within a few days died. So
short an Enjoyment had he of the Fruits of his own, and his Father's Treachery.
The Forces of Sabaudiero thus utterly broken, he durst no more appear in the
Field, but put what were left into his Garrisons to strengthen them, in hope
they might hold out, Winter now drawing on; then fled out of his Dominions for
Safety of his Life, and to solicit the Associate Princes to supply him with
fresh Succors.

CHAP. XVIII. How the great Giant Allemano Mastix took the goodly City
Necariana, and how the Giant Grandorsio took the strong Enchanted Fort called
Caroloregium, and what Measures and Resolutions the Associates and Nasonius
took thereupon.
THis Disaster which happened to Sabaudiero, was upon many accounts very
grievous and prejudicial to all the Associates; for it was a strange Blow to
their Reputation, and People in all places made it their sport, and cast out
bitter Scoffs against them, that those who had so boasted of their Strength in
Montania, and told the World how sure they were of Victory, should be so
miserably beaten by those whom they despised; but which was worse, they were
forced to sit still, and look on, while the Enemy in all places ravaged and
spoiled, and did what he list; for they were not able to bring any Army into
the Field to face an Enemy, unless a small Force upon the great River,
Rhenusia, from whom they themselves did expect little good, and they were not a
little afraid that Sabaudiero would clap up a Peace with Gallieno, the way to
which seemed the less difficult, by reason of the near Relation between them,
and the Inclinations Gallieno had always shown toward it; and that would
utterly break all their Measures, and make their bad Condition desperate.

But still to increase their Sorrow and Shame, Misfortunes and further Losses
attended them in all places; the great Allemano-Mastix, had been a sore scourge
to them upon the flood Rhenusia; but to encounter, and (if possible) drive him
away, they had sent the puissant Knight Rabadenero, who was a villainous
Fighting Fellow, and had done Wonders against the Half Moon; but he finding
that the Scene was altered, when he came against the brave Luyslander, posted
himself securely, and would by no means be drawn to sight, for which, many
commend his Wisdom (of which he had scarce ever before given any Testimony) for
that he was inferior in number, and had to do with equally disciplined Men,
Allemano-Mastix, covetous of Glory, had an aching Tooth to try what this mighty
Man at Arms could do, and would sometimes make him fair offers, sometimes
ravage his Country before his Face, and was always by one means or other
provoking, or tempting him to Battle, but Rabadenero would by no means be drawn
to run the hazard.

Whilst the eager Luyslander was working his Brains to compass his design, it
came into his Head that there was a fair City hight Necariana, Dedicated to the
God Bacchus, which God, the Regomanians adore above all others, for that he was
both a Stout Fighter, and a Good Fellow; in this City the Bacchanalia, or
Feasts of their beloved God were kept, in which there was no great store
Victuals, but a World of Drink; and to that end and purpose, a vast Vessel was
made, or rather built, at the public Charge, which might contain Wine enough
to serve all the Comers to the Feast, from all Quarters; this Vessel was in all
those parts known by the name of Decumandolium Necarianum; and upon the Front,
or head thereof, was written in Letters of Gold, this Motto,

EX LVXET POCVLA SACRA
For this, or the like Reason, I suppose, that when they were mellow with their
Festival Cups, their dull Souls were enlightened, or their Eyes saw double,
which they took to be a great advantage, and therefore hated Sobriety, because
it always bereaved them of half the Goods they had, or which at least they
thought they had, whilst their Brains swam in Liquor. Allemano-Mastix concluded
with himself, that they would never suffer this Sacred Place, and the
Consecrated Vessel to be taken, but would rather fight it desperately at any
disadvantage; and therefore to draw them to a Battle (for otherwise he valued
not the place) he went and Besieged Necariana, giving out, that if he took it,
he would break the Decumandolium all to pieces, so that they should not be able
to celebrate the Feast of their darling God Bacchus.

The noise of this Siege presently slew through all Regomania, and all Persons
were mightily concerned for their Holy City, and impatiently urged Rabadenero
to relieve it; but he knowing his own want of Forces, and with whom he had to
do, could not be prevailed on; but that he might let them see it was not his
fault, he earnestly solicited all Parties concerned, for Supplies, but they
came so slowly, that it had been to as much purpose, if they had not come at
all; for a great part of the Inhabitants fled away at first, carrying their
Riches along with them, and though many stayed, and a great number of Soldiers
were put in to defend it, yet they drank so plentifully of the Sacred Liquor,
out of the mighty Vessel, that they had little mind to defend their Works, but
easily quitted them upon every Attempt and in the end, suffered the City to be
taken by Storm, making either none, or a very mean defense, whereupon, the
Luyslanders committed great Slaughter, (as is always done, where a Place is
taken by Assault) got great Riches, and broke the huge Vessel, profanly letting
all the Sacred Liquor run about; there were some few who fled into the Castle,
but being threatened with an Assault, they submitted upon easy terms, and thus
Allemano-Mastix became wholly Master of the place, to dispose of at his
pleasure.

The Regomanians were enraged at the taking their Holy City, and the affront
offered to the God Bacchus; and Rabadenero being now reinforced with his late
Supplies, resolved to give Battle to Allemano Mastix, to revenge this Injury.
But he led them a wild-goose Chase, while they followed stamping, and swearing,
and knew not where to find; and yet durst not march very fast, lest they should
fall into some of his Ambuscades, and so make the matter still worse, for they
were as afraid of his Craft, as they were of his Valor; and thus both Parties
standing on their Guard, and seeking their advantage, they were both too wary
to do any thing further; and therefore we will now leave them playing at
Bopeep, and return to great Giant Grandorsio.

While Matters stood thus with the Associates, and their Heads and Hearts were
full of Troubles, the restless Giant Grandorsio was contriving how he might
further distress, and vex them; and well remembering that he had been much
annoyed by a strong Enchanted Fort, called Caroloregium he thought this his
time to be revenged of it, and well knowing that none now durst appear to
interrupt him, or were able to hinder his Design, he marched thither, and sat
down before it. The nevvs of this bold Attempt made the Associates at their
Wits end, and though they could do nothing, yet to set as good a Face on the
matter as might be, they met to consult what to do; Nasonius, who was always
forward, and though Bashful in the Face of an Enemy, yet bold as any
whatsoever, when they were far enough off, made this Proposal, That he might
gather together all the scattered Forces, and drain all that could be spared
out of Garrisons, and go and raise the Siege: They replied, that they were not
at present, able to bring such a considerable force into the Field, as might
venture to encounter Grandorsio, and a miscarriage in the Attempt might be the
loss of their other Garrisons. Nosonius insisted upon it as his Privilege and
Prerogative, that no Town ought to be taken, but that he with an Army ought to
stand, and look on, or at least be within hearing. Answer was made, that he had
forfeited that Privilege, by not being present at the taking of Huana, when he
had an Army, and might have been there, and looked on his Belly full, if he
durst. Great wrangling there was, and many things were argued to and fro, but
in the end it was very gravely concluded, that it was not safe for them to
attempt any thing, but they would trust to the strength of the Place, and leave
Grandorsio to do what he could, whom in the bitterness of their Soul, they
bloodily cursed, whilst he, like the Fox, fared the better for it.

Caroloregium, was a Place strong, both by Nature and Art, it seemed to be
Dedicated to Mars, as thriving best in the time of War, and having few
Inhabitants besides Soldiers; it was not easily to be approached, as being
Situate at the meeting of two Rivers; and in the open part, in a great measure
guarded by a wonderful Enchanted Pond, or Lake; many mighty Spells had been
formerly set upon it by the great Necromancer, Archimedes, and the haughty Don
Ibero Formalitoso, setting no small value upon it, had put in the choicest of
his Soldiers to defend it, and commanded all his Conjurers to use their utmost
Skill to strengthen it against all attacks, so that by many it was thought
impregnable: But all this could not discourage the hardy and daring Grandorsio
from his Undertaking; yet in pursuing his Design, he met with many
difficulties, and was longer held in play, than some, who thought themselves
wise, laid wagers he would. When his Men drew near the Lake, strange and
terrible Flashes of Fire would rise out of the Water, and lamentably Scorch and
Burn them, when they endeavored to fill it up with Billets, either the
flashing Fires in a Moment consumed them, or the Lake swallowed them up, so
that they thought it had no bottom. Grandorsio being thus at a loss, sent to
his old Friend, that Devil of a Conjurer, Archimedes, who, by the Messenger,
sent him this Answer, that he should mind his Batteries, and his Bombs, but not
trouble himself about the Lake, nor any way concern himself as to it, for he
would take Care of that in a very short time, to his Satisfaction, that he
should be able to walk over it dry-shod. Having received this Answer, he
bestowed no more pains that way, but with his Batteries and his Bombs, so plied
the Town, that he scarce gave the Besieged any Rest; and on the other hand,
they were not wanting to themselves, but returned Cannon for Cannon, and with
continual Firing, gaul'd, or cut off the approaching Men, and as opportunity
served, made sudden Sallies and destroyed the Works, as well as Persons of the
the Besiegers. Grandorsio seeing their Resolution, and knowing that none could
appear in the Field to disturb him, made slower approaches, and with greater
safety to preserve his Men: But in the end, with his Flying Fireballs, he so
burnt the Town, that it was little but a heap of Ruins, and the Besieged were
forced to secure themselves by retiring into certain Enchanted Cells, made by
Magic Art, adjoining to their Walls and Fortifications; and to their farther
grief, the roaring Cannon had frighted a part of their Wall, so that there
appeared a Breach, whereat several Soldiers at a time might enter. While
Grandorsio was about this Work, the Conjurer Archimedes was not idle, or
forgetful of his Promise, for being one of general Acquaintance, and having
dealings with all sorts of Devils, he employed certain Subterranean Spirits,
who made such Cavities and Conveyances under ground, that suddenly, to the
amazement both of Besiged, and Besiegers, the Pond or Lake appeared dry.
Nevertheless, the Besieged still seemed obstinate, and all their Charms and
Conjurations did not yet fail them; for violent Flashes of Lightning, and
certain Fiery Spirits seemed to guard the Breach, that none could enter; but in
the end, their Breaches being daily made wider, the way to them laid plain and
open, and there being no hopes of relief, they Capitulated, to whom, Grandorsio
granted very honorable Conditions, which being accepted, and signed on both
sides, they marched forth, carrying the unwelcome News to the Duke of Bawwawia,
and the rest of the Associates, and Grandorsio put in what Forces he thought
fit, employing many to remove the Ruins, rebuild the destroyed Habitations, and
repair all damage done to the Fortifications, in which work he sent to
Archimedes for his Direction and Assistance, so that in a short time he made it
stronger than it was before.

It is to be observed, that, contrary to the relation of all Histories, and all
Countries known to us, that the Giants in these Countries generally beat the
Knights, and that the Giants are courteous, sweet-humour'd, and cheerfully
undertake the Protection and Relief of wronged Ladies, and all distressed
Persons, but the Knights, except some few, are proud, surly, injurious, and set
upon mischief. Such difference is there in the unknown parts of the World from
the known. But to return to our Business, it is doubtful whether the taking
this strong-hold caused greater Joy in Tutelia, or grief of Heart at
Sennopolis. The Associates having gotten nothing all this Campaign, but Shame
and Confusion, hung their Heads, and knew not how to look on each other; their
only Comfort was, that the Season of the Year for Action being past, Grandorsio
had dispersed his Forces into their Winter Quarters, and was gone to the mighty
Gallieno, to give him an account of all Transactions, and consult what was to
be done for the future; whereupon, the Associates met at Sennopolis, and held
serious Consultation how they might repair their broken Fortunes. Some said,
that their Moneys were spent, their Soldiers Slain, their Towns taken, and
that if Sabaudiero made a Peace, they were all undone, and that therefore it
behoved them to take Care of themselves: At this Nasonius rose up in a Rage,
asking if they intended to betray him, who had fed them with such Sums of Money
as they had never before seen, and urged their Promises, and solemn Oaths, that
no Peace should be made without his Consent. It was replied, that he himself
upon occasion, never stood upon such Formalities, and therefore it was
unreasonable for him to press any such thing upon them, unless he could produce
his Charter of Privilege, that he alone was not to be bound by any Promises or
Oaths. Nasonius smelt that their design was to get more Money, and therefore in
a calmer Style, answered thus: That it would be an Eternal Shame to give over
thus, that there was no want of Men, which they could raise abundantly, and
that he had made so many Beggars in Vtopia, that he did not question, but that
in a short time he should out of them raise a formidable Army, and that if
Money was wanting, they should be supplied to their Hearts desire, for Vtopia
was not yet above half drained, and he was resolved not to leave one Penny in
the Kingdom, rather than any Associate should want; and that at present to
secure Sabaudiero, he would send him more Money than his barren Dukedom ever
afforded him, and make him think himself the Richer for his Loss. At these
Golden Promises they began all to prick up their Ears, and talk complyingly;
and so, some Pittance at present being distributed among them, and an agreement
made, what share he would afford to every one, they came to a Resolution, that
they would all raise more than their former Quota's, and try their Fortune^ the
next Year with greater Forces and Courage than ever.

Nasonius could scarce sleep for thinking what large Promises he had made,
which it was not possible he should perform, unless he could most shamefully
gull the Vtopians out of their Money, of which he was somewhat doubtful at this
time, because by reason of his great Losses, and ill Conduct, he must return to
them under some kind of Disgrace but that he might consult what to do, he
repaired to Holoo, where he found his damned Mistress, Ambitiosa, newly
returned from the Revels at the Plutonick Court. To her he made a long and
lamentable Complaint of his Misfortunes, expostulating with her, why she had
deserted him at such time; as he most needed her Advice and Assistance. Quoth
she, There are certain Laws of Hell (unknown to you) which indispensably
required my Presence there; but withal, she told him, that his Misfortunes
befell him through his own Rashness, and Inconsiderateness, in that he had not
followed her Counsel; but (said she) if you will yet follow my Advice, I will
do all I can for you. This somewhat cheared his Spirits, and after a seeming
passionate Salute, he entreated her to open her Mind. She bade him to make
haste to Vtopia, without any the least Fear: for said she, I have sent before
you, Fictitiosa, and Fatuitosa, and before you can possibly get thither, the
one will have framed so many Lies in your behalf, and the other made them
believed, that when you come, you shall be received with Ringing of Bells,
roaring of Cannons, making of Bonfires, and all the Windows of their Houses set
with glaring Farthing Candles, as if they were all in a Flame, so that you
shall return in such a Triumph, as the most Famous Greeks or Romans never knew
or heard of. But when you come thither, above all take care to caress the
Bethlehmites of Dom. Com. give them Offices, Places of Profit, large Pensions,
larger Promises, stick at nothing: I have prevailed with Mammoneta and
Fatuitosa so to bewitch them, that they shall not only afford you Supplies
beyond your expectation, but contrive such Tricks, and find out such ways and
means, as shall make all the Moneys in the Kingdom run into your Exchequer.
Nasonius overjoyed with these Promises and Prognostics, after a plentiful
return of Thanks, in the kindest Expressions his sour Nature could squeeze
forth, took his formal leave, earnestly begging that she would not be long
after him, to advise and assist him in any difficulties, that might arise, and
then in all haste departed for Vtopia, to put her advice in Practice.

What is to ensue, History cannot at present inform us, it belonging to
Astrology, or rather, it being wrapped up in the Shady Leaves of Destiny. To
prejudge of which (leaving the Foppish Almanack-Makers to fool weak People with
their silly Predictions from the Stars) we may frame a more solid Prognostic
from the immense Riches, vast Power, and highest Wisdom of King Gallieno: The
former of which can never be exhausted by the Wars, whilst the multitudes of
Ships he has taken from the Vtopians, (reckoned to be above Two Thousand Five
Hundred, since the War began; and perhaps near as many from the Hydra, and the
great Contributions he raises upon his Enemies Countries) bring him in such
huge supplies, besides his own vast Revenues. Secondly, from his Power, which
increases daily, He having raised for the next Year, upwards of Sixty Thousand
Soldiers, besides Recruits, and knowing how to use the Victories he still
obtains, as well as how to get them. And lastly, from his Wisdom which lays all
his Designs in the best Methods, out of a true and exact a Knowledge of all
that his Enemies can do; His intelligence of what they aim at, and his
proportioning the Causes, he lays to the effects he intends, in comparison of
which; the best Policy of the Associates is merely Childishness: Every Man of
good Sense, being able to discern that their Projects are laid in no steady
Tennent and carried on disorderly and distractedly; as if they proceeded from
Men merely awaked out of their Sleep, or half frighted out of their Wits by the
Surprises he gives them. This high Wisdom I say, is that, which (being peculiar
to himself) gives a dazzling Luster and Glory to all his Designs, and entitles
him to the ^rotection and Assistance of Divine Provid^n^e.

Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia.
Whole Heaven does for Success engage,
When Sovereign Prudence War does wage.
FINIS
POSTSCRIPT.
BEfore the Devastations made by these Bloody Wars, the places where these
things appeared were generally very rich, and plentifully stored with all
manner of Commodities, but the Merchant, who for his gain: had a long time
traded in these unknown, unheard of Parts, during these Convulsions, had
undergone no little trouble, and sustained great losses, and now by some means
coming to the knowledge of these future Counsels and Revolutions, weary of
these continual Dangers, and ^earing the Storm, gathered together all his
Effects he could, and Embarked for England, his own Country, where he lately
arrived, and now resides in London; his Name is Mr. Non-such, a courteous, and
affable Person, and very free and open ^n his Discourse: He dwells at the sign
of the ^^ico^ns-Horns, in the Oudemi^n-St^eet, whither if any please to repair,
they may have from him a very large and satisfactory account of these strange
Countries and Actions; but he has told so no of his Friends, that he left a
greater share of his Effects behind him, than he is willing to loose, and
therefore intends speedily to adventure one Voyage more, and if it please the
Fates, that he return in safety, he shall then be able to give a further, if
not a full ^ccount of all the strange Revolutions, Hellish Contrivances, Cruel
Wars, and Infinite Convulsions, which have now almost wasted those goodly
Foreign Nations so little known in these parts of the World.

The Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen the following Errata's, which
among others less considerable, slipped in the Press.
Page 3. line 1, for the Throw read be thrown. p. 5. l. penul for which, r.
such. p. 11. l. 22. after to, insert go. p. 12. l. 7. for Gentlewoman, r.
Gentleman p. 17. l. 6. for trickss, r. tricks. p. 26. l. 1. r. Proboscis. p,
28. l. 31. for willy, r. wily. p. 30. l. 74. for i, r. in. p. 34. for would,
r. should. p. 37. l. 19. dele (and put it in the beginning of l. 20. ib. p. 39.
l. 5. for send, r. go. p. 42. l. 28. dele Eugenius. p. 46. l. 18. for as'd, r.
asked. ib. l. antepenult. for them, r. them. p. 47. for Grendosio, r.
Grandorsio. p. 18. l. 27. for places, r place. p. 51. l. 4. for Bordeering, r.
bordering. ib. l. 5. for Form^litosa r. Formalitoso. p. 54. l. 21. for
Fambriua, r. Sambrina. p. 56. l. 15. for, yet as; r. as yet. p. 61. l. 32.
after with, insert in Contents of Chap. 14. for Dunkirkia, read Balwinopolis.
p. 72. l. penul. for self, r. heart. p. 76. l. 21. for Stenters, r. Stentors.


