A serious and Faithful REPRESENTATION Of the Judgments of MINISTERS OF THE
GOSPEL Within the PROVINCE of LONDON.

Contained In a Letter from them to the General and his Council of War.

Delivered to his EXCELLENCE by some of the Subscribers, Ian.18. 1649.

Proverbs 24. 11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto
death, and those that are ready to be slain: If thou say, Behold we know it
not; does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keeps thy
soul, does not he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to
his works? Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler Printer
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1649.

A LETTER From Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of LONDON, whose
Names are Subscribed: Delivered to His Excellency by some of the Subscribers,
January 18. 1649.
With desire to have it communicated to the General Council of the ARMY.
May it please your Excellency, with those of your Council:
WHereas of late diverse Applications have been made, as well in writing as by
verbal Messages, inviting the Ministers of London, or some of them, to meet
with the Officers of the Army, in their consultations about matters of
Religion; We, Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of London, hold it
our Duty, as then to refuse any such meeting as was proposed; so now to give
your Lordship and your Council the Reasons of that Refusal, least by our
silence we should seem to be wanting in that ingenuity and Candor which becomes
all, but especially the Ministers of Jesus Christ. And understanding that some
of our Brethren, at one Conference before your Lordship and some of your
Council, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Calamy. Mr. Whitakers. Mr. Sedgwick, etc.
and at another with some of your chief Officers, Mr. Whitaker. Mr. Calamy. Mr.
Ash, etc.
have already manifested their dislike, both of your late Actions toward many
of the Worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons, and what likewise you
have published in your late Remonstrance and Declaration, as your intention for
settling the Affairs of the Kingdom, (as we were informed by some of them, and
willed thus to signify,) We thought fit hereby to manifest our Concurrence
with those our Reverend Brethern; Humbly desiring, That while we use that
Plainness and Freedom which becomes the Abassadors of Christ, this our
performance may not be misinterpreted, either as a transgressing the Law of
Christian meekness, or an exceeding the Bounds of Ministerial liberty; We
being commanded to cry aloud, and to lift up our voices as Trumpets, to show
the People their Transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Had a Conference been desired with us only to have given you resolution,
whether the ways wherein at the present you are walking, are agreeable to the
Word of God, (which Case indeed had been suitable for private persons to have
propounded, and for Ministers of the Gospel to have resolved) We should most
willingly and freely have delivered our Judgments (as our forementioned
Brethren have done) concerning these your practices; and have given you this
our Advice, grounded upon Scripture; Namely, That in stead of proceeding
further in such unwarrantable courses, you should have testified your timely
and godly sorrow for what (so clearly against the direct Rule of the Word) you
have already acted.

And if only for the clearing of this Case, a Conference had been desired, It
was from the first professed that we should be ready and willing to meet, where
and with whomsoever, to assert and maintain our Judgemnet therein. But as if
the justness of your way were already granted by us; We were only invited to
contribute our assistance in prosecution of what you had undertaken, which we
conceive to be out of your Sphere; And for us to have joined in any
consultation of this nature, would have made us accessory unto them; guilty of
the evil which is in them, and even partakers of other men's sins, contrary
to the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 5.22 2. These. 5.22
who bids us abstain even from all appearance of evil, and have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11.
but reprove them rather.

It is already sufficiently known (besides all former miscarriages) what
Attempts of late have been put in practice against lawful Authority:
Especially by your late Remonstrance, and Declaration published in opposition
to the proceedings of Parliament; As also by seizing and imprisoning the Kings
person, without the knowledge and consent of Parliament, and by that late
unparalled violence offered to the Members of it, forcibly hindering above one
hundred of them (if we mistake not the number) from sitting in Parliament,
Imprisoning many of their Persons; though many of them are known to us to be
men of eminent Worth and Intergrity, and who have given most ample Testimony of
their real Affections to the good of the Kingdom; and besides all this, there
is an intent of Framing and contriving a new module, as well of the Laws and
Government of the Kingdom, as of the Constitution of a new kind of
Representative (as you call it) in stead of this and all future Parliaments;
and this to be Subscribed throughout the Kingdom, under the notion of an
Agreement of the People; as is Declared in your late Remonstrance, of November,
16. 1648. page 67. All which practices we cannot but judge, to be manifestly
opposite to the lawful Authority of those Magistrates, which God has set over
us, and to the Duty and Obedience* which by the Laws of God and Man, and by
our manifold Oaths and Covenants, we stand obliged to render to them. And
therefore we judge it our Duty, rather to testify our utter dislike, and
detestation, then to give any (though but implicit and interpretative)
approbation of them.

We remember the advice of Solomon, Prove. 24. 21.
Fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change; And that of Paul, 2 These. 3. 6.
Withdraw from every Brother that walks (...) Tit. 3. 1.
disorderly, and not according to the Traditions which you have received of us:
Of which this is one, Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates: And, Romans 13. 1. 2.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no power but of
God, the Powers that be, are Ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. The fear of God therefore (whose Ordinance is violated,
when Magistracy is opposed) makes us afraid of meddling with those who without
any color of Legal Authority, merely upon the presumption of Strength, shall
attempt such Changes as these are. A^^ We cannot but be deeply affected with
grief and astonishment, to see that an Army, raised by Authority of Parliament,
for the preservation of the Privileges thereof, and of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, should contrary to their Trust, and many Engagements, do that which
tends to the manifest subversion of them all.

We have not forgotten those declared Grounds and Principles, upon which the
Parliament first took up Arms, and upon which We were induced to join with
them; (from which We have not hitherto declined, and We trust through Gods
grace never shall.) We remember, That when the King, with a multitude of Armed
men, demanded but a small number (in comparison of those now secluded by you)
of the Members of Parliament: It was deemed such an horrid violation of their
Privileges, and an act so injurious, and destructive to the good of the
Kingdom, as had not (then) any precedent or parallel; And of what nature it was
judged to be, by a Parliament then free and full, may appear by the Order of
the House of Commons of January 3. 1641. When, hearing but of a purpose in the
King to seize upon some of their Members, they Declared, If any Person
whatsoever, shall offer to Arrest, or Detain, the Person of any Member of this
House, without first acquainting this House therewith, and receiving further
Order from this House, That it is lawful for such Member, or any Person to
assist him, and to stand upon his or their Guard of Defense, and to make
resistance, according to the Protestation taken to Defend the Privileges of
Parliament; and by the Declaration of January 17. 1641. That the Arresting of
any Member of Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a Legal
proceeding against them, and without consent of that House, whereof such Person
is a Member, is against the Liberty of the Subject, and a breach of Privilege
of Parliament; And the Person which shall Arrest any of these Persons, or any
other Member of the Parliament, is Declared a public Enemy of the
Commonwealth.

And this violation of their Privileges, was that which did occasion first a
Guard, and was afterward one Reason of raising an Army: But that an Army thus
raised by their Authority, and for their Preservation, should now so far exceed
that Act which was then esteemed without parallel, could hardly have been
imagined by us, had not our eyes been Witnesses of it.

And although both Houses of Parliament (who are jointly together with the
King, entrusted with the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom) saw cause to take up
Arms for their own Defense, against the attempts made upon them by the King
and his evil Councillors; and for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion
established (which was then endangered by the growth of several Errors and
Innovations;) and for the securing of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions
of the Kingdom, which they apprehended then to be undermined by several
illegal encroachments: Yet this cannot be pleaded as any justification or
precedent for you (who, in reference to the Power of Magistracy, are but
private persons) to usurp an Authority over King and Parliament, and to
intermeddle with affairs which belong not to you. For the Laws of God, Nature,
and Nations, together with the Dictates of Reason, and the common consent of
all Casuists allow that to those which are entrusted with managing the Supreme
Authority of a State or Kingdom, which they do not allow to a multitude of
private persons, though they have strength in their hands to effect it.

And moreover, although the Parliament thus took up Arms for the defense of
their Persons and Privileges, and the Preservation of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; Yet was it not their intention thereby to do violence to the Person
of the King, or divest him of his Regal Authority, and what of right belongs
to him, (as appears by their many Declarations in that behalf:) Much less was
it their purpose to subvert and overthrow the whole frame and fundamental
constitution of the Government of the Kingdbm, or to give power and authority
to any persons whatsoever so to do.

And therefore we apprehend our selves obliged thus to appear for the
maintenance of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, together with the
Constitution, Power and Privileges of Parliament, and the settled Government of
the Kingdom; both, on the one hand, against all Malignant Counsels and
Designs for the introduction of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical power in the King;
and, on the other hand, against all irregular licentious proceedings of private
Persons, tending to the subversion of them, and to the introduction of Anarchy,
Confusion, Profaneness, and Irreligion.

And we are the more strongly engaged thus to adhere firmly to these our former
just Principles, by reason of the several Oaths and Covenants generally taken
throughout the Kingdom, as by the Protestation of May 5. 1641. wherein we do in
the presence of Almighty God promise, vow and protest, according to the duty of
our Allegiance to maintain and defend with our lives, power and estates, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate, and the Power and Privileges of
Parliament. As also by the Vow and Covenant, wherein the Lords and Commons have
declared, that there had been a treacherous and horrid design to surprise the
Cities of London and Westminster with the Suburbs, and by Arms to force the
Parliament: And finding by constant experience, that many ways of force and
treachery are continually attempted, etc. Required, That all that are
true-hearted and lovers of their Country should bind themselves each to other
in that sacred Vow and Covenant, wherein we declare our abhorring and detesting
the said wicked and treacherous design, and that we would according to our
power and vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like
nature. And likewise by the Solemn League and Covenant for the Reformation and
defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King, the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdoms, etc. Wherein we have Covenanted, That we will
sincerely, really and constantly in our several Vocations, endeavor to
preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and Preserve and Defend
the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms; that the World may bear
witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or
intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and greatness.

In all which obligations, though the matter of them may be in part, of Civil
concernment, yet the bond and tie of an Oath and Covenant is Religious, sacred,
and inviolable. Which though some may esteem no more then an Almanac out of
date, yet we look upon it as the Oath of GOD, in whose Name we have sworn, and
who will certainly require it at our hands.

We know with what a jealous eye, and severe hand, the LORD avenged the quarrel
of his Covenant made by Zedekiah to the King of Babylon, though extorted from
him, and prejudicial to him. Ezekiel. 17. 14. 15, 18, 19.
Shall he prosper (says God) shall he escape, that does such things? Or shall
he break the Covenant, and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord, seeing he
despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant (when so, he had given his hand) he
shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine
Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I
recompense upon his own head. We dare not therefore (when we have lift up our
hands to the most High God) by the violation of a more righteous Oath, provoke
the wrath of the LORD against us, who is the searcher of all hearts, and to
whom we must give an Account at the Great Day.

Instead therefore of joining in Consultation with you; We do earnestly entreat
you in the name of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, whose Ambassadors we are,
That you would commune with your own hearts, Consider the evil of your present
ways, and turn from them; Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent and
do your first works. You were once honorable and precious in the eyes of us
and others of Gods servants, while you kept in Gods way, and within your own
sphere; you had our hearts, our help, and our Prayers for success therein:
But alas! you have eclipsed your own glory, and brought a Cloud over all your
excellencies. You are now walking in bypath of your own, wherein we dare not
say, Psa. 129. 1. 8 2 John v. 11.
The blessing of the Lord, be upon you, We bless you in the name of the Lord,
nor bid you God speed, lest we be partakers of your evil deeds. Instead of
preserving the Truth and purity of Religion and the Worship of God; we fear you
are opening a door to desperate and damnable Errors and Heresies against the
Truth of God, and to many licentious and wicked practices against the worship
and ways of God. How is Religion made to stink by reason of your mis-carriages,
and like to become a scorn and a reproach in all the Christian world? How are
the faces of Gods faithful servants covered with shame, and their hearts
filled with sorrow and grief (...) thereof? How is the Golden Cord of
Government broken in sunder? the Honor and Authority of Magistracy laid in the
dust? How has the Parliament, which sustained the force and opposition of
professed Enemies for many years, been made contemptible and torn in pieces by
professed friends in one day?

You cannot but know how fully and frequently Gods Word commands and
inforceth obedience and submission to Magistrates, forbidding also and
condemning, (and that under pain of damnation,) such practices as these of
yours are. As likewise what severe threatenings and exemplary judgments from
God have been denounced against, and inflicted on the Contemners and Opposers
of this his Ordinance. You know what a Brand the Apostle Jude sets upon those
that despise dominion and speak evil of Dignities. Jude v. 8. 11
Woe unto them (says he) for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam for a reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Corah.

You know the sad examples of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram in their mutinous
Rebellion, and Levelling design against Magistracy and Ministry, in the Persons
of Moses and Aaron, You take too much upon you (said they to Moses and Aaron)
Seeing all the Congregation are holy. (...) Or Saints.
Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Cougregation of the Lord?
Which Moses fears not to call A gathering together against the Lord, and warnes
the people to avoid their company, Number. 16. 3. 11, 26. 32, 33 29.
Depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least
ye be consumed in all their sins; After which the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, with all that appertained to them: And yet there were in
that Rebellion a considerable number of eminent men, two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, Verse 2.
famous in the Congregation, men of Renown.

And consonant to the tenor of the Scriptures herein, has always been the
constant judgment and doctrine of Protestant Divines both at home and abroad,
with whose judgments we do fully concur; disclaiming, detesting and abhorring
the wicked and bloody Tenants and Practices of Jesuits, (the worst of Papists,)
concerning the opposing of lawful Magistrates by private Persons, and the
murdering of Kings by any, though under the most specious and colorable
pretenses. Which Jesuiticall Principles and Counsels we fear, may have too
great a concurrence with, if not an influence upon these late transactions.

Now we desire you seriously, and as in the sight of God, to examine your own
hearts and ways, and to deal with your selves as sometimes Nathan did with
David. Put case some other party of men in the Kingdom, whose principles had
not been concurrent with yours, should have attempted acts of such a nature, as
those that you have performed; as seizing the Kings Person, and removing him
from place to place without and against his and the Parliaments consent: would
it not have been judged by you an intolerable contempt both of his and their
authority? Put case they and their confederates had attempted the removal of
the Parliaments Guards, secured or inhibited a great number of their Members,
contrived and promoted new Modules of their own, destructive to the being both
of this and all other Parliaments, with other acts of the like nature; we
appeal to your own consciences, what clamours and accusations against them
would from your selves have proceeded. And if in other Persons you would
condemn the Fact, the Lord grant you hearts to see who are the men. Was it once
a crime of the higstest nature, to endeavor the subversion of the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, to dissuade the calling, or persuade the dissolution of
Parliaments; to countenance Arminians, or connive at Papists: and can it be now
commendable to contrive the subversion of the whole Laws and Government of the
Kingdom all at once; and instead of a few errors to allow, (as we fear some
amongst you endeavor,) a total impunity, and universal Toleration of all
Religions? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: He knows how frequently you
condemn that as a great crime in others, which you would have accounted a
virtue in your selves; But God who is no respecter of Persons allows no such
rule. Romans 1. 32.
Those who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are
worthy of death; not only do the same things, but have pleasure in, (or
consent with) them that do them, in judging another condemn themselves. And
think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such things, and do
the same, Romans 2. 1. 3
that thou shall escape the judgment of God? No surely, we are sure the
Judgment of God is according to truth, Ver. 2. 6. 11.
against them which commit such things, Who will render to every man according
to his deeds; For there is no respect of persons with God.

We desire that you would not be too confident on former Successes. If God have
made you prosper while you were in His way, this can be no warrant for you to
walk in ways of your own, and promise your selves Success therein; Nay, if
through Gods permission (for reasons best known to himself) you have had or may
have Success in an evil way, yet is it no justification thereof, nor
encouragement to proceed therein. Yea, you know, that it is one of the greatest
Judgments, when God suffers men to prosper in sinful courses. Eccles. 8. 14.
Wise Solomon tells us from his own experience, that there be sometimes just men
to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; again, There be
wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous: There
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, Eccles. 7. 15.
and there is a wicked man that prelongeth his life in his wickedness: Eccles.
8. 11.
But, because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, shall
therefore the heart of the sons of men be fully set in them to do evil? God
forbid.

And therefore the Providence of God (which is so often pleaded in justification
of your ways) is no safe rule to walk by, especially in such acts as the Word
of God condems. God does not approve the practice of whatsoever his Providence
does permit. When David, in the cave, had an opportunity to destroy Saul, (who
was then in actual pursuance of him for his life,) David's men make use of such
an Argument from Providence, Behold, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 6, 7, 13.
say they, the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver
thine enemy into thine hand that thou may do to him as it shall seem good
unto thee, but David neither durst himself, nor would permit his men to make
use thereof; but says, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him. Again, when
David found Saul sleeping in his Trench, behold a Providence (might Abishai
have said) God, says he, has delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day,
1 Samuel 26. 8, 9.
now therefore let me smite him, etc. No, says David, Destroy him not, for who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? But if,
to follow Providence, had bin a sufficient warrant; David should have taken
another course. In sum, if this be a good warrant, nothing can be a sin, for
nothing can come to pass at all, unless the permissive Providence of God
afford an opportunity.

Nor is it safe to be guided by Impulses of Spirit, or pretended impressions on
your hearts, without or against the rule of Gods written Word. For by this
means the temptations of Satan, and the motions of Gods spirit will be put in
equal balance. And we desire you likewise to consider, whether any History,
sacred or profane, records any example of an impulse of spirit falling upon
Multitudes of Persons at the same time, putting them all at once upon
performances contrary to morrall Precepts; as also, whether such Persons who
are acted by an impulse of spirit, can Command others who want it, (nay, who do
not so much as pretend to have it) to do that unto, which themselves pretend to
be so incited? We know that it is the duty of Christians, to try such
instigations by the Word of God, and examine how well they agree thereunto,
that they may accordingly judge, whether it be the voice of God, or the voice
of Satan, and of their own corrupt hearts, that prompteth them. To the Law and
to the Testimony, Isa. 28. 20.
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in
them. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
The Apostle Peter directs the Jews to whom he wrote, to adhere to the word
written, as to a more sure word of Prophecy. By the same Rule, whereby we must
try the spirits, we must also try the impulses of spirit, otherwise we do
exceedngly strengthen the divils hands against our own souls, and tempt him to
tempt us.

If beyond all this you plead Necessity of doing thus, least what you pretend
as a glorious work, might else miscarry, and therefore venture on these ways,
which are by your selves confessed to be irregular and not justifiable; We
answer, that no necessity can oblige a man to sin; God stands not in need of
our sin to carry on his own work. Job 13. 7.
Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? says Job.

And yet this Plea of necessity is of the less weight in your case, because,
we fear, the ends you aim at, are no more justifiable then the means you use;
and the necessity pleaded is either merely pretended, or at least contracted by
your own miscarriages.

But if at any time a Precept of God may be dispensed with upon a Necessity:
Yet, we suppose your selves will grant, That this necessity must be Absolute,
Present, and Clear; not Doubtful, Uncertain, and Conjectural, as that which is
alleged in your case must needs be, it being discerned only by your selves
and your own party. It is most apparent to us, that there was of late no
necessity at all of these your irregular practices; the Parliament being (till
forced by you) full and free, acting what was Covenanted for, and (if we mistake
not) what was agreed upon long before by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.
Besides, you have engaged your selves by an Oath to preserve his Majesty's
person, and the Privileges of Parliament; and this is most clear, That no
Necessity can justify Perjury, or dispense with lawful Oaths; That dreadful
flying Roll being ready to seize upon him that swears falsely by the Name of
God. Zech. 5. 4.
An example of which severe judgment from God, for the violation of an Oath,
you have in Saul, who though he did out of a good intention, in his zeal to the
children of Israel, slay the Gibeonites (a people formerly accursed, and who
had fallaciously procured a Covenant from Joshua above two hundred years
before) yet for Saul's breaking of that Covenant, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 6.
was the whole Kingdom of Israel, and his posterity in particular, most
severely punished by God.

We do therefore upon the whole matter, seriously beseech you, as in the sight
of God, to recede from these evil ways, and contain your selves within your
own bounds, to learn John Baptists Lesson for Soldiers, Luke 3. 14.
Do violence to no man (or, put no man in fear) neither accuse any man falsely,
and be content with your wages. Numb. 32. 23.
But if you persist in these ways, behold, you have sinned against the Lord,
and be sure your sin will find you out; and take heed, lest, when the hand of
God shall overtake you, 1 Pet. 4. 15,
and turn the wheel upon you, you be found to suffer both as evil doers, and as
busybodies in other men's matters.

And when you shall thus return to your duty; as we shall have cause to bless
God for it, so we shall not need to fear those threatenings which some of us
have received (we say not from your selves, yet) from Messengers directed (as
they informed us) immediately from your selves, Mr. Peter's, etc.
to some of us, That if we persist to stir up the people to Sedition (for so it
seems our bewailing your sins before the Lord, is interpreted) and Soldiers do
us a mischief, we may thank our selves; That if there follow another War, you
will give quarter to none that stands against you; That you will spare neither
man, woman, nor child, English or Sranger. But if these our Exhortations
prevail not, we have discharged our duty, and, we hope, delivered our own
souls; and if it be our portion to suffer, Ezekiel. 33. 9. 1 Pet. 4. 16. 1 Pet. 3.
17. 1 Pet. 2. 20. Psalm. 116. 15. Psa. 9. 12. Mr. Peter's. Dan. 3. 17. 2 Pet. 4.
19.
we trust we shall suffer as Christians, and for well-doing, and that such
sufferings shall be acceptable with God; in whose sight the death of his Saints
is precious; Who when he makes inquisition for blood, forgets not the cry
of the humble; and though some of us were told by one of the Messengers sent
from you, That if we put our selves upon suffering, we shall have suffering
enough: yet we know, That the God whom we serve is able to deliver us: To whom,
in the discharge of our duty, we commit the keeping our souls, as to a
faithful Creator.

And thus out of a zeal to Gods glory, a care to discharge our duties, and an
hearty desire after the comfort and salvation of your souls, we have freely and
faithfully declared our judgments concerning your late and present
proceedings. If the Lord please to make it effectual for your Reformation, we
and all the Churches of Christ shall have cause to bless God for you; but if
for our sins, and the sins of the Land, 1 Samuel 3. 18
the Lord make you instruments of misery and confusion (which your present
actings do certainly tend to) we will say with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good. But we hope better things of you, and subscribe our
selves,

Jan. 17. 1649. Your servants in the Lord, Thomas Gataker, Pastor of
Rotherhith. George Walker, Pastor of John Evangelist. Arthur Jackson, Pastor of
Michael Woodstreet. Charles Offspring, Pastor of Antholines. Henry Robrough,
Pastor of Leonards Eastcheap. Nicholas Profet, Minister of the Word at Fosters.
Thomas Case, Minister of MaudlinsMilk-street. Stanly Gower, Min. of the Gospel
at Martins Ludgate. Andrew Janeway, of Alhallows on the Wall. Samuel Clark,
Minister of Bennet Fynk. Thomas Clandon, Pastor of Alhallows Barking. John
Wall, Minister of Michael Cornhil. James Cranford, Pastor of Christophers.
James Nalton, Pastor of Leonard Fosterlane. Thomas Cawton, Paster of
Bartholomew Exchange. John Fuller, Minister of Buttolphs Bishopsgate. Francis
Roberts, Pastor of Austins. William Ienkin, Pastor of Christ-Church. Eldidad
Blackwell, Pastor of Alhallows Undershaft. William Harrison, Minister of
Grace-Church. John Sheffield, Minister of Swithins. Matthew Haviland, Minister
of Trinity Parish. George Smalewood, Pastor of Mildreds Poultrey. William
Tailor, Pastor of Stephens Colemanstreet. Christopher Love, Pastor of Anne
Aldersgate. Robert Mercer, Minister of Brides. Ralph Robinson, Pastor of Mary
Woolnoth. William Blackmore, Pastor of Peter's Cornhill. Francis Peck, Pastor of
Nicholas Acons. Stephen watkins, Minister of the Gospel at Saviors Southwark.
William Wickins, Pastor of Andrew Hubbard. John Wallis, Minister of Martins
Iron-monger-lane. Thomas Manton, Minister of Stoke-Newington. Tho: Gouge,
Minister of Sepulchers. Tho: Watson, Pastor of Stevens Walbrook. Nathaniel
Staniforth, Minister of Mary Bothaw. John Halk, Preacher at Alhallows on the
Wall. John Glasscock, Minister of the Gospel at Andrew Undershaft. Thomas
Whately, Pastor of Mary Woolchurch. Jacob Tice, Pastor of Buttolph
Billingsgate. Jonathan Lloyd, Pastor of James Garlickhith. John Morton, Pastor
of Newington-Buts. Ioshuah Kirby, Minister of the Word. Arthur Barham, Pastor
of Helens. Ben: Needler, Pastor of Margaret Moses. John Wells, Minister of
Olaves Jury. Robert Matthew, Minister of Andrew Wardrobe.


FINIS.

