A FRIEND TO THE SICK: OR, THE Honest English Man's Preservation. Showing the
CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, and CURES Of most Occult and Dangerous DISEASES Which afflict
the Body of Man. WITH A PARTICULAR DISCOURSE OF THE DROPSY, SCURVY, AND YELLOW
JAUNDICE And the most Absolute Way of Cure.

Whereunto is added, A True Relation of some of the most Remarkable Cures
effected by the Author's most Famous Cathartique and Diuretique PILLS,
wherewith was cured his late Grace GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE, etc.

Set forth for the Public Benefit, By William Sermon Doctor in Physic, One of
His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed by W. Downing for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain. 1673.

To His Illustrious Grace, Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington,
Baron Monk de Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes, etc.
My Lord,
AS Your Grace is both a Popular and Public Peer, I have humbly made bold to
offer this Public Treatise at the Altar of Your Illustrious Name: And if, my
Lord, the Offering be too mean for so magnificent an Altar, Let it be Burnt,
and the Flame thereof may give me light to see my present Presumption.

My Lord, Other Apollogy or Plea I have none, besides that never-dying
Obligation I owe your most Renowned Father of Blessed Memory, whose Diffusive
Goodness has not only made Me, but indeed three Kingdoms to be his Debtor.

Since then, My Lord, Bonds which are so justly due, must in all Equity be
discharged, and the sublimity of his present Station cannot Permit me to Cancel
them to Himself; Yet Give me Leave then to Confess them to His Magnanimous Son,
your Thrice Noble Self, the Inheritour of his Heroic Spirit, as you are of his
Paternal Possessions.

To the Plenitude and full Fruition of both which, that your Grace may
Gradually Arrive, and with your Years increase your Heirs and Honors, is the
most Cordial Prayer of Sir,

Your Graces most Humble and most Faithfully Obedient and Devoted Servant,
William Sermon.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Worthy Reader,
IT may perhaps be thought an high Presumption (especially by such that judge
nothing well done, but what they have the honor to do themselves) for me that
may be accounted the least of all men, able to put my self to such a public
Censure of those most Learned and great Proficients in this Honorable and most
Noble Art.

However, because I would not hide my Talent that the Lord has given to me,
and so be termed an unprofitable Servant, having through the wonderful goodness
of God, found out those and such like Remedies, and that by a diligent Care,
and long Study, have had thereof large Experience, (which is the Daughter of
Time, the Mother of Wisdom, the true Rewarder of Travel, though the Jewel of a
few) and not doubting but that they will prove very profitable, not only to the
Diseased Patient, but to the young Student in Physic; for whose sakes I could
by no means neglect the Publication hereof.

Another, and the most principal Obligation, was from a serious Consideration
of the Great Necessity, and Lamentable Misery that I daily behold, some of the
meaner sort of people, being intollerably tormented with most dangerous and
grievous distempers, and must absolutely perish having not wherewithal to be
at great Charges in long and tedious courses of Physic.

Neither to give to old Dives his large fee beforehand, without which he will
not put his foot into the Styrup, nor his horses in the Coach.

These Reasons seriously considered, were the absolute Motives to force me more
to the publishing of this small, and I hope beneficial Treatise.

And that the Honest English Man may reap thereby the greater Benefit, I have
purposely omitted all Philosophical, Eloquent, and hard crabbed words, (though
not Ignorant thereof) which more affright the honest and harmless Patient, then
Cure his languishing Disease.

Yet notwithstanding the real and best of my Endeavors to promote the Interest
of my Countrymen, and to do them service, in giving them some certain Rules how
to help themselves in times of Necessity.

Black mouthed Envy, that severely Barks though, cannot Bite, will still
Snarle, and look upon me with a squint Eye, as if I had done some Injustice to
the very Laws of Friendship, and common Society.

And the grand Reasons are, that my Pills in the Dropsy, have wrought more
wonderful effects then any other Medicines yet have done.

Since which time, to defraud the Ignorant, every fracturated fellow in their
Pamplets pretend to Cure the Dropsy, though it be but with Aloes, and Sena,
etc. infused in Brandy, and the Lungs of an Ox applied to the Belly, which
preposterous Courses have of late killed many, some of good worth.

But perhaps some of the forementioned will be apt to Judge that I have
published this Treatise purposely to promote my own Interest, because I have in
some Chapters made mention of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills; in answer to
which, I will assure the Reader I have not made mention thereof but where they
are absolutely necessary, and I question not, but those that are acquainted
with me and them, will believe that what I have here imparted, is to the utmost
of my power really to promote the welfare of my Country, and not my own
Interest, (Which in Duty to God and Man I am bound to do) this being first
intended not for private use, but for a public good.

So not valuing the Threats of some of the same faculty, knowing the snares
they have laid for others, themselves will be taken in: When I shall be from
their rigid Malice sheltered under the Wings of the Almighty, and there live
above the Praise or Dispraise of Men.

But yet must humbly acknowledge my self, Dear Contrymen,

Your most humble and faithful Servant to Command, W. Sermon
From my house in Eastharding-street near the Sign of Goldsmiths hall, between
Fetter-lane and Shoe-lane London July 12. 1673.
In Libellum Laboresque Gulielmi Sermon, Med. Doctoris.
SAlve Paeoniae non portio parva Palaestrae,
Successus^; novos priscu succ^ssibus add;
Vt, Qui, Sanatum Magnum stupuere Monachu^,
Heic Sanatrices mire^tur Amice Medelas.
Quam Populi commune bonum, communibus instas
Instaurare Bon^s, A^glo testabitur Orbi
Iste Tuus Sermon liber, Q^e ^liscutis omnes
Morborum occultas ca^sa^, calamoque Mederis.
Se auspiciis debere Tais, Natura Senilis
Agnoscit tandem, and ventura fatebitur aetas
Laudum quanta Tuo debet Monumenta labori.
Tunc cum morbiug^s vestris Sermon Medelis
Vanescet sensim, vacuasque facesset in auras
Invidiae Malesana Cohots; and lurida Famae
Latricis, Dignisque Comes Detractio Factis
Hydra retundetur, vulsisque venefica linguis
Spicula sublato praetendet Vana Veneno.
Sic vaticinatur, Tuissimus P. Fisher.

To his Worthy Friend Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, Upon his Publishing a Treatise,
Entitled A Friend to the Sick, or, The Honest Englishmans Preservation.
When DROPSIES did Sick
Nature seek to Drown,
And SCVRVIES too like a Beleagur'd Town,
Surrounded her, and called in the Wild Rout
Of that French Moth, the Pox, the sullen Gout,
And other Rude Distempers Man to Win,
And She her self thus Blockt up to take in
Then Sir, that Active Balm your healing Pill,
Into these crumbled Ruins did Distill;
Peic'd up those Breaches, which these Foes had made,
And Beat back those that did the Fort Invade.
Whilst your brisk Pen such noble Rules Compiles,
They will Redeem Man from their future wiles,
And make him with just Gratitude Confess,
Faint Nature can, then Vigorous Art do less.
Thomas Philipott.

To the most worthily well Deserving of both Rich and Poor, W. Sermon, Doctor
in Physic, one of his Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, on his so Beneficial
Tractate, and Treatise, Entitled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The Englishmans
Preservation.
When Books speak Loud, and Learnedly Confute
Fond SCIOLISTS, 'twere Malice to be Mute
And stifle that acknowledgment is due,
Dear Sir, to this most useful Piece, and you
Whose safe and Sovereign Rules prevent our Ills
And prove your Pen as powerful as your Pills.
Hipocrates and Gallen here are shut
Like Homers Iliads couched up in a Nut:
Since in these few Octavo sheets are shown
Most Maladies and Medicines which are known,
And by your Dextrous Skill, confirmed your own.
On then succesful Sir! and never Regard
Detracting Tongues, Virtue's her own Reward.
And your Miraculous Cures, both old and New,
Can testify them not more strange then True,
And Maugre Malice, speak your Crowned success
In most Distempers, either Great or Less.
So Believes the Admirer of your skilful Industry, and true Honourer of your
much obliging Self W. Faldo, Hospitii Grayensis I. C.

To my Honored Friend, Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, One of His Majesty's Physicians in
Ordinary.
REnowned Sir, had I an Argels Quill,
'Twere sit to write Encomiums on your Skill.
Your admirable Skill, whose Fame resounds
From shore to shore of this vast ^^lands Bounds.
Physicians all admire, and none dare s^^^e
At Your Great Cure wrought on Great ALBEMARLE.
Which lent swist motion to Fames spreading Wing,
And gained you favor with our LORD the KING.
Yet not this high particular can raise
Sufficient Trophies to your General Praise.
Your Knowledge Universal^s, and ^^ies
Through all the Spears of Physick's Mysteries.
The Plague, that Generalissimo of all
Diseases, by your Skill's vast Power does fall.
The Dropsy, Jaundice, Scurvy, and the Gout,
Your valiant Pills put to a Total Rout.
These drain Hydropick ^ens, make that Ground good,
Which worse than useless under Water stood.
How many thousands, who had made their Wills,
Do yet survive by these Life-saving PILLS!
Diseases which in Ambuscado lie
To ruin Man, your Medicines make fly.
Yea, the whole Host of Maladies you Rout,
Strong fortified Distempers you sorce out.
Diffusive, Noble Soul! Even all these rare
Secrets of Art, sreely as GOD gives Air,
You do communicate to all Mankind,
That in this BOOK the SICK their HEALTH may find.
Art's long, Life's short, said wise Hippocrates:
Which Aphorism your power inverts with case.
Great be your Profit, many be your Days,
And may your Honor still increase.
So prays Honored Sir, Your Humble Servant, Edward Cocker.
July 7. 1673.
To His Honored Friend, The Worthily Accomplished AUTHOR, On this his no less
Acurate than Useful Treatise; Entitled, A FRIEND to the SICK: or, The English
Man's Preservation.
Physic it self grew desperate Sick of late,
And languish'd under an unhappy fate.
To its Assistance all the Sons of Art
Were called, their Choice Arcanums to impart.
First some in State, and Coaches gilt, advance,
With Reverend Plush, and Learned Ignorance;
Who view their Magic Glass, the Vrinal,
And make it more their Business how to call
Diseases, than to Cure them; such as still
Act by Old Book, and in rare Method Kill.
But these proved so unable to restore
Art's former Health, they but afflict it more.
For Nature no such Mystique Course affords,
To Cure Diseases only with hard words.
Of Swaggering Quacks there next appears an Host,
With lying Bills on every Pissing Post.
Fellows that scorn to Dose it by Retail,
But Cure by Wholesale, whatsoever you ail.
Such silly Dog-Leaches, a Man would scarce
Entrust them to give Physic to an Horse.
The Healing Art, by Factions thus oppressed,
Ret^^^d a while, Brave Doctor, to your Breast;
And those that now would find it out, must look
In This Rich Magazine of Health, your Book;
In whose small Volumn (you so much have wrought)
Cause, Symptoms, Cure, of each Disease is taught.
He that alone could cure Great MONCK before,
Was sit Decaying Physic to restore.
Which by your pains lifts up its drooping Head,
And Liberally for Common Good is spread.
Your well-try'd Medicines here in Public hurld,
(Like Sol) at once enlightens half the World.
Though sneaking Envy nibble at your Name,
In Golden Leaves it is Registered by Fame.
And after Ages shall admire that Skill
Which thus Composed Your BOOK and matchless PILL.
So assuredly prophesies, Worthy Doctor, Your most Humble and Affectionate
Servant Hen. Care, (...)
Julii 1673. 6 H. P.M.
To my Worthy Friend Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, On his New and Excellent Piece
Entitled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The Honest Englishmans Preservation.
LEt Zoylus Roar, and Envy Mount above
The Spheres, and there those mighty regions move
Until they Burn, Resolving to defeat
Thy rare Productions, by their scorching Heat,
Their threatening Power shall then be narrowed by
An Awe from Thee, Great Ingenuity!
Sit still brave Sir, and only Laugh to see
The Poor Attempts of Silly Enmity;
Hurt thee they cannot, for Nature promised thee
Her best Assistance, in Epitome.
Thou have brought forth unto the Public View,
A sparkling Light that scorns an empty show.
Its Nature's Store to which she may resort
In her worst Exigents, as to a Fort
That will secure her from the Painful Threats
Of Dropsy, Gout, and from the Foppish Cheats
Of Base Pretenders, whose dull Fancies pry
Not to the Center, but superficially
Do flutter up and down they know not where,
Until dark Error takes them in his snare.
In every Line the Judge Experience sits;
Trying the Causes, Symptoms, and then sits
Some brave Balsamic, that commands the Rage
Of Natures Foes to quit that Noble Stage
Whereon they thought to muster up such Aid,
As quite the Microcosm to invade.
Go on brave Sir, and fly on the Wings of Fame,
The unparalleled Attempts have got the Name,
Preserver of Great Natures Noble Frame.
M. S.

On this Elaborate WORK OF Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, Entitled, A FRIEND to the SICK:
or, The English Man's Preservation.
Avaunt, dull Quacks, you that pretend to Skill,
Yet scarce know how to write a Pocky Bill.
Whose Lines, as well as Art, is all so base,
Fit only to adorn a Pissing Place.
Who by pretense of a most Cordial Liquor,
Do cause the Grave-maker to earn money quicker.
Such as St. Hugh's Bones did produce of late,
Near to the place y^leped Aldersgate.
But here is Arts Masterpiece in few lines writ,
Shows the Diseuse, likewise the Cure of it.
A General Good! and who can more assure,
Than he who our late General did Cure.
More might be said, but when all is set forth,
All things come short in all things of its worth.
WILL. WINSTANLY

To His Honored Friend, Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, One of His Majesty's Physicians in
Ordinary, On his Book now Published, Entitled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The
Honest Englishmans Preservation.
VVElcome, Brave SERMON! to the Public Stage;
The Glory and the Envy of the Age.
When called by Sovereign Command to heal
That Grand Physician of out Commonweal,
The Matchless MONCK, Bristol (whose throning Poor
Were cured each day at your Bethesda-door)
In Tears and Sighs took a constrained Adieu,
And parted both at once with Health and You.
So shivering stands the Forlorn Muscovite,
When Sol with-draws his all-refreshing Light,
And dooms him to a dismal half-years Night.
It Is now twelve years since first I took your Pill,
And proved the virtue of your mighty Skill.
By whatsoever Disease I Am set upon,
I fly to That as my CATHOLICON.
But it is in vain, and does but make thee less,
To think a Verse thy Praises can express.
Let thousand's which thy wond rous Medicines save
From Deaths assaults, and the devouring Grave,
With general Acclamations bless your Name,
And build you Monuments of lasting Fame.
Long may you live, and when at last you fly
To glorious Mansions of Eternity,
Forget not Languishing Humanity.
No matter for a Tomb or Epitaph,
Leave your Receipt, your Memory is safe:
That, that alone your Fame shall celebrate,
And make you known to Times extremest date.
Go on, and prosper to a Glorious End,
Circled with all kind Wishes from
Your Friend and Servant, RICH. BULL.

The English Man's Preservation.
SIr, You surprise me! If this Book of Cures
Health in distempers of each kind procures
'T will make men bold to sin: some do abstain
From Vice, not for its own sake, but the pain.
Knew these the means of health which you prescribe,
Doubtless, sans fear, the vice they would imbibe.
Those Golden Virtues which in Youth were shown,
Will Vices seem, when once your Cures are known.
Calista laughs at Socrates, when he
With cloudy brow condemns her Venery.
Your Book's her Buckler; nothing dreads her Spirit;
Sh' has faith in that; let Papists preach of Merit.
Thus whilst you keep their Bodies from decay,
Their Souls neglected are, as Pluto's prey.
Sir, Let your Wisdom stoop, and take from me,
With leave I Will say it, a better Recipe
Than's in your Book, a Dose will men advance
More than your Pills or Prescripts, Temperance.
To all your Cordials in the Prime
Prescribe true Aqua-Vitae taken in time.
And every morn let Herb of Grace
Amongst the rest your Recipe's take place.
This done, my Muse shall style you to the end,
The Sick Man's Preservator, and her Friend.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF the Pain in the Head through Heat. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the pain in
the Head through cold. P. 6. Chap. 3. Of the pain in the Head through the
French Pox. P. 10. Chap. 4. Of the Vertigo. P. 14. Chap. 5. Of the
Falling Sickness. P. 21. Chap. 6. Of the Apoplexy. P. 33. Chap. 7. Of the
Palsy. P. 40. Chap. 8. Of the Convulsion or Cramp. P. 49. Chap. 9. Of the
Catarrhe. P. 55. Chap. 10. Of the Eyes. P. 65. Chap. 11. Of the Ears. P. 74.
Chap. 12. Of the Nose. P. 77. Chap. 13. Of the Toothache. P. 85. Chap. 14. Of
the Blackness and Rottenness of the Teeth, and Exulceration of the Gums, etc.
P. 89. Chap. 15. Of the Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat. P. 93. Chap. 16. Of the
Quinzy. P. 97. Chap. 17. Of the Kings Evil. P. 104. Chap. 18. Of the Asthma, or
Difficulty of Breathing. Page 109. Chap. 19. Of the Pleuresie. P. 113. Chap.
20. Of the Ptisick or Consumption, p. 118. Chap. 21. Of the pain in the
Stomach, p. 125. Chap. 22. Of the weakness of the Liver, p. 130. Chap. 23. Of
the stoppage of the Liver, p. 137. Chap. 24. Of the Dropsy, p. 143. Chap. 25.
Of the Scurvy, p. 159. Chap. 26. Of the Jaundice, p. 168. Chap. 27. Of the
Stone in the Kidneys, p. 174. Chap. 28. Of the Ulcers in the Reins, p. 181.
Chap. 29. Of the Stone in the Bladder, p. 186. Chap. 30. Of the Ulcers in the
Bladder, p. 191. Chap. 31. Of the Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins, p. 194.
Chap. 32. Of the French Pox, p. 200. Chap. 33. Of the Plague, p. 211. Chap. 34.
Of the Gout, p. 223. Chap. 35. Of the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, p. 230. Chap. 36.
Of the Invention and most Remarkable Cures Effected by those most Famous
Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, p. 234.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 5. for suffisticated read sophisticated, p. 10. l. 2. for Chap.
II. read III. p. 23. l. 2^. for Mumme read Mumia, p. 26. l. 2^. for affected
read effected, p. 103. l. 5. for stronger read strong, p. 247. l. 23. for Mr.
John Ford, read Sir Henry Ford.

A FRIEND TO THE SICK: OR, The Honest English Man's PRESERVATION.
CHAP. I. Of the Pain in the Head through Heat.
PAins in the Head through Heat, are often caused through the immoderate heat
of the Sun, or by standing near great flames of Fire, through hot Baths, and
violent Motion, strong and hot Scents, and many times through hot Distempers,
sometimes through over much drinking of Brandy, and other strong and hot
Spirits, and also by drinking of Wine; especially that which is suffisticated;
and sometimes this Disease is caused through furious passion, anger, wrath, etc.

The Signs through heat are not only Pains; for if you but touch the outward
part of the Head, you may perceive it to be exceeding hot, and the Skin more
dry then ordinary, and the Eyes become Red, etc.

The Cure of which Disease may be performed as follows.

The Patient ought to for bear all sorts of Meats that are of hard digestion,
and Milk, and all such Food that fume up into the Head; also let him abstain
from Carnal Copulation, trouble of mind, malice, anger, wrath, and let his Body
be kept open with the following Glister.

Take Mallows, Sage, Strawberrie, and Violet-leaves, of each one good handful.
Being Cut and Bruised, Boil them in one Quart of Water, to the consumption of
half, then strain it, and add thereto of the Lenitive Electuary one Ounce and a
half, Diacatholicon one Ounce, Oil of Lillies and Violets, of each six Drams,
Sal Prunella one Dram; mix them well together, and give it to the Patie ^n
Glister-wayes.

Or make use of the Pills made as follows.

Take of the Pills of Cochia, and Alaephangine, of each one Dram, Tartarum
Vitriolatum, one Scruple and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Betony, make them up into twenty Pills; whereof take two at night, and three in
the morning, once or twice a week.

You may also take Conserve of Roses two Ounces Manus Christi Simple, half an
Ounce, Pearl prepared, one Dram; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of
Violets, make then up into an Electuary, and take the quantity of half a
Wallnut first and last.

Or make use sometimes of the following Potion; for it does not only cool, but
mitigate the pain.

Take Syrup of Violets, and Syrup made with the Juice of Citrons, of each one
Ounce, with the Distilled Water of Cichory and Endive, of each four Ounces; mix
them, and make a Potion thereof, and take one part in the Morning, and the rest
at Night warm, repeating the same as need shall require.

And you may apply outward Medicines made as follows.

Take Rose Water, four Ounces, Vinegar of Roses, half an Ounce, Oil of Roses,
two Ounces, the White of two Eggs; mix them well together, and with double
Linen Clothes apply it to the Temples, and sore part of the Head.

Or take white Poppy Seeds, and beat them to Powder; being mixed well together
with the Yelkes of new laid Eggs, apply it to the parts aforesaid; for it
gives ease in the most extreme pain of the Head, coming of heat, as I have one
hundred times experienced.

Or take one good handful of House-leek, Oil of Roses and Woman's Milk. of each
a small quantity; being beat well together, apply it to the part grieved.

Or take the leaves of Mallows, and the leaves of Willows, of each two
handfulls, Flowers of Melilot and Camomil, of each one handful, the Flowers of
Poppies, half a handful; boil them for the space of half an hour in a
sufficient quantity of Water, and apply it to the part pained, as before
directed.

Or take the Flowers of Lillies, Violets, and Roses, of each two handfulls,
Vervain, Camomil and Mallows, of each one handful, Powder of Red Sanders, two
Drams, Camphir, one Scruple; being Cut and Bruised, put them into a Bag, and
boil it in a sufficient quantity of Water with a little Vinegar of Roses, and
apply the Bag warm to the fore part of the head, and to the Temples, when cold,
make it warm in the foresaid Liquor, and repeat it as need require.

You may anoint the forehead and Temples with the Ointment, or Oil of Roses,
or with the Oil of Nightshade, made as follows.

Take May Butter without Salt, one Pound, Oil of Roses, eight Ounces,
Nightshade, half a Peck; being bruised, boil them well together in an Earthen
Vessel, after which strain it hard, and keep it for use; for it is of wonderful
virtue

Or take the distilled water of Night shade, House-leek, and Letuce, of each
one Ounce, the Water of Camomil, six Drams, Viniger, half an Ounce; mix them
together, and make moist a Linen Cloth therein, and apply it to the forehead,
and to the Temples, and doubt not of help; but let none of the foresaid cooling
Medicines be applied to the hinder part of the head, least you do harm; for
that part of the head cannot suffer cooling without damage'

CHAP. II. Of the Pain in the head through Cold.
THE cold pains in the head are often caused through the extreme coldness of
the Air, especially when the Patient is constrained to continue long therein
with his Head bare, etc. and many times by applying of cold Medicines.

The signs of pains in the head caused of cold are quite contrary to those of
heat; for though the pain be violent, yet by touching you cannot perceive the
head hot, neither are the Eyes red, nor the Face dry, but pale and full, and
the Eyelids swell, and are somewhat Black, or of a Leaden Color, etc. and the
Patient seldom desires cold things, neither can he receive comfort thereby.

Such that are troubled with this Distemper, must use exercise and motion, as
walking or riding; but let not the Air be too cold, the head must be kept warm.
Let the Patient labor to be merry, and cast away Melancholy and sadness, and
all perturbations of the mind.

Let him abstain from Milk and Fish, etc. which are cool in operation, and
drink thin Wine, or such Liquors as do but moderately heat; the Body must be
kept soluble with Glisters, or Supositors, etc.

You must not apply to the head Medicines that are extreme hot, neither such
that are exceeding cold; least you hurt the Brain.

In order to the cure of this Disease.

Take Oil of Rue, one Ounce, the Chemical of Rosemary and Lavender, of each one
Scruple; being mixed well together anoint the fore part of the Head and Temples
therewith, and likewise the Nostrils, and the Orifices of the Ears,

Or take the Oil of Dill and Orris, of each one Ounce, Oil of Marjorum,
Rosemary and Amber, of each one Scruple, Oil of Euphorbium, ten Drops, mix them
well together, and use it as before directed.

Take Betony, Mints, Marjorum, wild Betony, of each one handful, the Flowers
of Lavender, of each half a handful, Caraway Seeds, half an Ounce, Cloves, two
Drams; being cut small, make a quilt thereof with Silk, or Linen Cloth, and
apply it to the Head warm, sprinkled first with a small quantity of the best
Vinegar, and with some Spirit of Lavender, if you can with convenience have it.

And let the Patient take Camomil, Betony, Sage, Origan, Bay Leaves, Staechaes,
Rosemary, and Melilot Flowers, of each one handful; being boiled in a
sufficient quantity of Water, let the fume thereof go up into the Nostrils and
Mouth.

Or take Bay Berries, two Drams, Zedvary, half an Ounce, the tops of Rosemary,
half a handful; being cut and bruised, boil them in one Quart of white Wine,
to the consumption of half, and bath the head therewith, and apply it warm to
the same, with double Cloths.

Or take Juniper Berries, Camomil, Rue, the Flower of Gray Peace, of each one
handful; being quilted in a small Cloth, boil them in Wine, and apply it to
the Head warm, repeating the same as need require.

Or take Lavender and Rosemary Flowers, of each one Ounce, Marjorum, half an
Ounce, being put in a convenient Glass, pour thereto two Quarts of Rose Water;
and stop it up close, and let it stand for the space of nine days in a cold
Seller, after which distill it, and keep it for use; for it takes away the
cold pains of the Head, etc. to admiration, the fore part of the Head and
Temples being bathed therewith every Morning for some time together.

I told you before it would be necessary in this Disease to keep the Body
soluble, in order to which you may make (...) of the Glister, or some of the
Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo, and assure your selves that they
will prove very profitable.

CHAP. II. Of the pain in the head through the French Pox.
THose that are infected with this Disease, have a perpetual pricking and sharp
pain in the head.

The cause of which arises from the Putrefaction of the Blood, contained in
the Veins and Meninges, or of a Windy Spirit in the Arteries of the same.

The sign of this Disease is manifest and accompanied with the rest of the
signs of the French Pox, as tumors in the Muscles, and skin of the head, etc.

Which Disease being cured cease; in order to which make use of the following
Medicines.

Begin with the Glister; for it will draw back the matter that causes the pain
in the head.

Take Nettles, Bay Leaves, Mercury, Rue, Marsh Mallows, Betes, of each one
handful, the Roots of Pollipody, one Ounce, the bark of Broom, and the Seeds
of Carthami, of each half an Ounce, the Flowers of Camomil and Staechas, of
each one Pugil; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Water, to the consumption of half, strain it and take thereof one Pint, to
which add Confectio Hamech, and the Juice of Orris Clarified, of each one
Ounce, Hiera simple, half an Ounce, Oil of Castor, Rue, Dill, and Honey of
Roses, of each one ounce, common Salt, one Dram; being mixed all well together,
make a Glister thereof, which administer to the Patient in the morning fasting.

The next day it will be necessary to open the Cephalic Vein in the right Arm,
which will also be a means to take away the vicious humors.

After which make use of the following Pills.

Take Pills of Arabic; and Pills of Faetida, of each one Dram, Troches of
Alhandal six Grains, the Chemical Oil of Marjorum, twelve Drops; mix them
together, and make them up into twenty Pills, of which take five every second
or third morning six hours before Dinner.

Or take Extractum Rudij, and the extract of Black Helleber, of each two Drams,
Mercurius Dulcis six times sublimed, four Scruples, Gum Guaicum, two Drams, Oil
of Guaicum, (...) Scruple, the Pills of Arthriticae, four Scruples, mix them
together, and of every Dram make six Pills, whereof take two at night, and
three in the Morning twice or thrice a week.

Or you may take of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, (of my own invention,)
one at night, and two in the morning (more or less) according to the age and
strength of the Patient; for they do not only expel pain in (...) head, caused
through the French Disease, but most other violent pains, especially those
caused by taking Mercurial Medicines for the Cure of the aforesaid Distemper,
and that from Idle fellows that are ignorant of the nature and quality of
Mercury; but much more how to dispel it when got in the head.

Notwithstanding taking of the Pills, let the Patient apply to his Head the
Plaster of Betony; which he may have made up by the honest Apothecary, and let
him also make use of the following Liquor.

Take Betony three or four good handfulls, the Flowers of Rosemary and
Lavender, of each one Ounce, boil them in four quarts of running (...) in a
Vessel close stopped, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and sweeten
it with Sugar Candy, of which let the Patient take a quarter of a Pint hot
first and last.

Or take the tops of Rosemary, one handful Betony two handfulls; boil them,
and sweeten it with Sugar Candy, and take thereof as before directed.

With this very Method I have cured many sorely tormented not only with pain in
the Head alone, but with corrupt and pocky matter issuing forth of the Eyes and
Nostrils.

You may anoint the head with the following O^^^^ent, the hair being first
shaved off.

Take age, Rue, Staechas, Lignum Vitae rasped, o^ each one handful, Renish
Wine, eight Ounces, old Oil, one Pound; boil these together till the Wine be
consumed, then strain it, and if you please mix therewith a little Wax, and
anoint the head often with it.

Or take Penny oyal, Wild Betony, Origan, Sage, Savin, Savory, of each two Drams
Bayberries, Olibanum, Costus's Pellitory of Spain, Caster Euphorbium, of each
one Scruple; mix them and make it into an Ointment.

Or take Venice Treacle, Mithridate, C^^^^ Rue, of each half an Ounce, with a
sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Juniper Berries; make them into
an Ointment, and anoint the head therewith as before directed.

CHAP. IV. Of the Vertigo.
THE Virtigo is a preternatural Motion of the Animal Spirit, in the farther
Ventricle of the Brain.

The principal cause of this disease ^ometh from the Brain it self, being
disten^^^^^d, or evil assected, or from the mouth of the Stomach or Womb, etc.
offending the Brain, and sometimes by over much drinking, (especially) that
destructive Liquor called Brandy, do cause this distemper, the Stomach being
poisoned therewith, from which windy and noxious Vapors affect the Brain;
causing a giddiness in the Head, so that all Objects seemingly turn round, the
Patient being not able to stand, but fall down except he laid hold on some
thing to bare himself upon, which Disease if not timely prevented; will change
it self into several other deadly Distempers, as the Falling Sickness,
Apoplexy, etc. being somewhat related thereunto.

The Cure may be performed as follows, as soon as the fit is over, and the
Patient having recovered a little strength, if the Body be costive or bound.

Forthwith make use of the following Suppositor.

Take Honey and Salt, and mix therewith one Scruple or half of a Dram of
Troches Alhandal: boil them together, and make thereof a Suppositor according
to Art, and thrust it up into the Fundament.

Or take the Leaves of Mercury, Wormwood, Betes, Mallows, Centaury, Betony,
Dill, Camomil Flowers, of each half a handful; being cut and bruised, boil
them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of half, then strain
it, and to one Pint of the Liquor add Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Dill, of
each one Ounce and an half, Heira simple, ten Drams, common Salt, one Dram; mix
them together, and make a Glister thereof, which put up into the Fandament
according to art.

If the Vertigo come of a choleric humor; it will be necessary for the
Patient to drink of the Liquor made as follows, three day together.

Take Syrup of Cichory, insusion of Roses, (...) each two Ounces, Distilled
water of Endive an^ Cichory, of each four Ounces, the distilled Wat^^ of
Wormwood three Ounces.

Mix them together, whereof take on^ part in the morning, the rest one hour
before Supper.

After which the more to evacuate choleric humors.

Take the bark of Mirobolanes and Citrons, of each three Drams; being bruised,
boil them in the distilled Water of Cichory and Burage, of each three Ounces,
after which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Roses, Solutive, one Ounce,
Diacatholicon, and the Lenitive Electuary, of each half an Ounce.

Being well mixed, and a Potion made thereof, take it betimes in the morning,
and fast after it six hours.

If the Vertigo come of a crude and melancholy humor, the Pills following will
be very proper.

Take the Pills of Arabic, Cochiae and Aurea, of each 15. or 20. Grains,
Troches of Agarick, ten Grains, with a sufficient quantity of Honey of Roses,
make them up into seven Pills.

Which are to be taken three at night going to Bed, and the rest in the Morning
if need require.

Or, Take the Pills of Inde, and Lapis Lazuli, of each 15. or 20. Grains, make
them into seven Pills, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of
Fumatory.

And take them as before directed.

Or, Take Heira Picra Simple, and make it up into Pills as big as Gray Pease.

And take thereof three at a time every second or third night at the hour of
sleep; for they are of excellent use, and good against vicious Juice, which
oftentimes Furr the Tunicles of the Stomach, and for such idle fancies as the
Brain suffers thereby.

The Pills of Faetidae taken once or twice aweek, are also a very good remedy
against the Vertigo.

So are my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, taken two or three at a time, more
or less, according to the age and strength of the Patient.

For they above any yet found out, are of most excellent use to cleanse the
Stomach of all pituitous matter, so hinders the ascension of Vapors from
thence, that so frequently hurt the Brain: The like Virtue they have in all
other Distempers that affect the same, which in the following discourse shall
be more plainly demonstrated.

Medicines which strengthen the Stomach and Brain in this distemper, are made
as follows, and are exceeding profitable.

Take Misselto of the white Thorn or Oak, Gallingal, Mace, of each one Dram and
a half, Nutmegs, Rosemary, of each one Dram, Cloves half a Dram, Sugar one
Ounce, mix them, and beat them into fine Powder, and take the quantity of one
Dram every night going to Bed for fourteen days together.

Or, Take Mustard Seed and Hemp Seed, of each a like quantity, and infuse them
in Vinegar 24. hours, then strain it, and take thereof one or two Spoonfulls at
a time every morning fasting.

Or, Take Cummin Seed, and infuse it for the space of 12. hours in the best
White Wine Vinegar, after which dry it very well, then take two Drams thereof,
Fennel Seed, Anniseed, Anacardii, of each half an Ounce, Hysop, Marjoram,
Cardamoms, Cubebes, Rosemary, of each two Drams, Gallingal, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each one Dram, double refined Sugar five Ounces.

Mix and make all into fine Powder, and take a small quantity thereof every day
after Meals upon toasted Bread so long as it lasts; or make it up into an
Electuary with Syrup of Betony, and take it as before directed.

To strengthen the Brain if the Vertigo come of a cold cause.

Take dry Marjorum, Cinnamon, Cloves; of each one Scruple, Cubebes, Mace,
Nutmegs, of eech one Dram, Rocket Seed two Drams; being cut into small pieces,
mix them well together, of which let the Patient take a small quantity, and
chew in his mouth every morning fasting as long as need shall require; and each
time let the Nostrils be stopped, till the taste thereof be gone forth of the
Mouth.

If Phlegm be the cause of this Disease, the following Gargarisme will prove of
special use: However it will be requisite if Phlegm be not the cause.

Take Rocket Seed half an Ounce, Pellitory of Spain, three Drams, Betony and
Marjoram, of each half a handful; cut and bruise them, and boil them in White
Wine and Water, of each half a Pint, to the consumption of half, strain it, and
add thereto three Ounces of Honey of Roses, and gargle therewith once or twice
a day; for it does most wonderfully attract or draw the pituitous matter from
the Brain, etc.

So does the Juice of Black and Red Beets, or the Juice of Sow Bread, being
snuffed up into the Nostrils.

If the Disease prove violent you may safely bleed in the Cephalic Vein, not
too much at a time; but take it forth at several times, least the Patient
faint. When the body is purged according to the aforesaid directions, apply
blistering Plasters to the Nape of the Neck, and Hand-rists; or apply Cupping
Glasses to the hinder part of the head, with scarification.

CHAP. V. Of the Falling Sickness.
THe Falling Sickness is a Convulsion, or for the most part a praeternatural
motion of the whole body, and most commonly depriveth the Patient both of
Reason and Sense.

There are three differences in this Distemper.

The first is caused when this Disease comes only through the disease in the
Brain, as it falls out, when sharp Choler, or gross and tough Phlegm does
obstruct the passage of the Spirit in the Ventricle of the Brain; and if this
distemper comes of a gross humor, it does suddenly seize upon the Patient,
and is quickly gone again.

The second Cause is through an evil affect in the Orifice of the Stomach, that
may be when the Brain labors to expel the Vapors that arise up to it from
the Stomach.

The third cause is from Vapors which, ascend by consent from most parts of
the Body, or else from some particular Member, which the Patient may perceive
like to cold Air creeping up to the Brain, but this does but seldom happen.

The signs of the Falling sickness are many; in some sadness and forgetfulness,
etc. in others a foolish state both of Body and Mind; troublesome dreams; the
Headache; and fullness in it; more especially in passion or anger, the Face
commonly pale, and the motion of the Tongue inordinate, and oftentimes they
bite it.

As soon as this Disease seizes upon the Patient, he falls down and is plucked
up together, he snorts, and sometimes cries out, many tremble and turn round.
The only sign of this Disease is foaming at the Mouth, which happens most to
Children and young people.

In the fit of the Falling Sickness, as soon as the Patient falls down, open
his Mouth with a stick, the haft of a Knife, or with the handle of a Spoon, and
after his Mouth is made clean by taking away the foam with a Rag or Feather,
give him to drink the following Julip.

Take the distilled Water of Lavender, three Spoonfulls, Syrup of Cowslips, one
Ounce, Spirit of Vitriol, or the Oil of the same well rectified, 20. Drops;
beingmixed together give it as before directed.

The Chemical Oil of Angelica given in the foresaid Water, and Syrup, does also
take away the Fit.

Or, Take Red Coral, Pearl prepared, of each half a Scruple, Unicorns Horn two
Scruples, the Skull of a man hanged, or killed by chance, half a Dram, the
Roots and Seeds of Peony, of each half a Scruple, Musk three or four Grains;
being mixed and made into fine Powder, give to the Patient in the Fit from half
a Dram to two Scruples, or a whole Dram to the stronger sort, first infused for
a small time in the distilled Water of Lavender.

Or, Take white Helleber, Marjoram, of each one Scruple, Castor and Euphorbium
of each four Grains; being mixed and made into fine Powder, blow a small
quantity at a time through a Quill up into the Patients Nostrils.

Or, Take the Seeds of Nigella, half a Dram, Nutmegs, Peony Roots, Mumma, of
each 10 Grains, dried Marjorum, six Grains, Musk, two Grains; all being made
into Powder, blow it up into the Nostrils as before directed.

Those and such like I will assure you are of excellent use in the very fit of
this Disease.

How to prevent and Cure the Falling Sickness,
Take Syrup made with the Juice of Betony and Cichory, of each half an Ounce,
the distilled Water of Lillies of the Valley, two Drams, Musk, twelve Grains,
mix them well together, and take a small quantity thereof first and last with a
Liquorice stick.

Or, Take Rosemary, Betony, Sage, of each one Ounce, the Roots of Cichory, and
Citron Pills Candied, cut in very small pieces, of each half an Ounce, Species
Diamoschi dulcis, Diambra, of each one Dram and a half, Misselto of the Oak or
White Thorn, Red Coral prepared, the Skull of a Man, and the Ashes of a Cuckoo,
of each one Dram, the Seeds of Peony two Drams, Oil of Cynamon, 10 drops; with
a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Betony, make it up into an Electuary
according to Art; whereof let the Patient take every morning fasting the
quantity of half a Wallnut.

Or make use of the following Powder.

Take the Roots of Cichory and Red Mugwort, of each one Dram, Misselto of the
White Thorn, the Skull of a Man, of each four Scruples, Peony Seed two
Scruples, Red Coral prepared, Unicorns Horn, of each one Scruple, Pearl
prepared half a Scruple, Musk ten Grains; being mixed and made into very fine
Powder, let the patient take the quantity of one Dram at a time, about the Full
and Change of the Moon, or near the approaching of the Fit, in three or four
Spoonfulls of the distilled Water of Lavender.

Or take young Swallows, burn them in their Feathers, altogether in a new
Earthen Pot, covered very close, and after they are taken forth of the Pot, add
thereto as much Castor, and beat them well together, and put it into a Glass,
and add thereto sour Vinegar, and let it so stand three days, after which
distill it in a Glass according to Art; of which precious Water give to the
Patient one Spoonful at a time every Morning forty days together, and doubt
not of a good success.

Or, Take Assafaetida, Galbanum, Castor, of each one Dram, make them up into
30. Pills, with the best Oil of Amber, whereof take one every third morning,
after which fast two or three hours,

Or, Take Misselto of the White Thorn, Peony Roots dried, and beat into fine
Powder, of each one Ounce the best Castor in Powder two Drams, Leaf Gold one
Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of the best old Mithridate, Mustard, and
Oil of Amber in equal parts; being beaten all together in a Marble Mortar, make
it up into Pills as big as white Peace, of which take three or five every day
first and last for three Months together, etc.

With this very Medicine ( with the use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills,
to keep the body soluble.) I cured Mrs. Elizabeth Hampton in the Year 1662.
then belonging to Sir Robert Byrons Lady, who Lodged at the Countess of
Peterbrough's in St. Martins Lane in the Fields: This Cure was perfectly
affected in one Spring and Fall, though some years most horribly afflicted
therewith, often falling suddenly down, sometimes in the Church, at other times
in the fire, etc. to the great hazard of her life, who ever since remains well
and free from the least Symptoms of those Fits.

Many have been cured by opening the Vein in the Forehead, called Vena Frontis,
and by drinking first in the Morning from two Drams to one Ounce of Vinegar of
Squills.

Some have been cured by Vomits made with the Salt of Vitriol, which may safely
be given from two Grains to seven in any convenient Liquor; every fourth or
fifth day, till the Patient have taken it six or seven times,

Or, Take Conserve of Rosemary, Betony and Lavender Flowers, of each two
Ounces, Mithridate and Ringo, Roots Candied, of each one Ounce, the Powder of
Saxafras six Drams, Castor three Drams, Elkes Hoof, and the Powder of a man's
Skull that was never buried, of each two Drams, the Seeds of Gith, and the
Roots and Seeds of Peony, Wild Rue and Pelitory, of each one Dram, with a
sufficient quantity of Oxymel of Squills; make it up into an Electuary, and
take as much as a large Nutmeg every Morning.

Many have received much good by Vesicatories or Blistering Plasters applied
to the proper parts.

And by a Seton or Skein of Silk drawn through the Neck.

Others (as it were) past all hopes of recovery, have been perfectly cured by
opening part of the Skull with a Trepan, some distance from the Sutures, to let
the evil Air forth.

But the last cannot be safely attempted without good advice, and a very
skillful Chirurgou.

For the Falling Sickness in Children.
In the first place if need require make the body soluble with a gentle
Glister, or with a Supositor, after which give to the Child some gentle Purge.

Take the Syrup of Cichory, with Rubarb from half an Ounce to an Ounce, or the
Electuary of Diacarthamum, from a Dram to two Drams.

Or, Take the Tincture of Hiera Picra, from ten drops to twenty, and give to
the Child in some proper Liquor, as the distilled Water of Cowships, Black
Cherries, Peony or Lavender, sweetened with Sugar.

And take the fresh roots of Peony, cut them in small pieces, and hang them
about the Child's Neck, and bind them upon the Hand-rist, and repeat them as
they grow hard.

Or, Take the distilled Water of Black Cherries two Ounces, the Syrap of Peony
one Ounce, Pearl prepared one Dram, Spirit of Rue ten drops, and give thereof
to the Child one Spoonful in the fit.

Or take a small Mouse, the Skin and the Guts taken away; only the Liver, Heart
and Lungs remaining therein, which put together in some Earthen pot close
covered, and burn it to Ashes, then powder it very small, and divide it into
three parts, and give one part thereof to the Child every Morning in a small
quantity of the distilled Water of Beech-tree Flowers.

The Juice of Rue is also very good, being given four or five drops at a time
with the distilled Water of the Flowers of Hogs Fennel, called Mathern, or May
Flowers.

In the same Water you may give to the Child the Powder of the middle Claw of
the fore Foot of a Hare.

The Afterbirth of a sound Woman which is delivered of a Male Child, dried and
made into fine Powder, and one Scruple thereof given to a Child at a time in
Black Cherry Water, is a present remedy.

Half a Grain of Musk given in Wine or the foresaid Water twice a day, will
also help: or take the Powder of the Roots of wild Valerian, and give thereof
ten Grains at a time in Milk, or in any of the foresaid Waters, and it Cures.

Or, Take the Flowers of Lillies of the Valley, the Flowers of Lime-tres or
Tile, May Flowers, of each one good handful, Lavender Flowers half a handful,
Peony Roots two Ounces; being cut small, boil them in one Quart of Water, with
half a Pint of white Wine, and one pound of white Sugar, in a stone Bottle
close stopped, and set in a pot of water for two or three hours; but open not
the Bottle till it be cold, then strain it and keep it for use; of which give
to the Child one or two Spoonfulls at a time; for I will assure you it is a
very excellent remedy, and has cured many which have been lest past recovery.

Or give to the Child in the very Fit, all the Gall of a Black sucking Puppy
(being choked) in the distilled water of Tile-flowers; but for a Girl take the
Gall of a Bitch Whelp.

There may be safely Blistering Plasters applied to the Nape of the Neck,
Cupping Glasses to the Shoulders and Loins, with Scarification, provided the
Child be a year and half, or two years of Age.

CHAP. VI. Of the Apoplexy.
AN Apoplexy is a sudden privation both of the Sense and Motion of the Body,
and an interruption of the Animal Functions.

There are two sorts of Apoplexies, the one strong, the other more mild; the
strong is a most sharp Distemper, and strangleth a Man forthwith, (or if not
presently prevented, turns to a Palsy) and is seldom cured.

But the milder sort is curable; for in it both Motion and Sense remain, but
both very stupid heavy, and exceeding dull.

The cause of the Apoplexy is (too frequently in these days) drunkenness,
falls from high places, blows, etc. also it happens of Phlegmatic Humors which
does fill and obstruct at one time the principal Ventricles of the Brain; very
cold Air which congeals or thickens the moist Excrements of the Brain, is also
oftentimes the cause of this distemper, and it frequently comes through gross
melancholy humors.

The Symptoms or Signs of this deadly distemper, are violent pains in the Head,
swelling of the Neck Veins, a Vertigo, and a brightness or a kind of glittering
before their Eyes, panting of the Body, a coldness of the extreme parts,
without any cause visible, dull and slow in motion, and in sleep oftentimes
gnaw their Teeth, their Urine little in quantity, and black, much like to Rust,
and the Canker in Metals, and has a settling in the bottom like to flower.

Such that are troubled with the Apoplexy have not always evil Symptoms
perceived before hand, but fall down suddenly as if they were struck with
Thunder, and they lie with their Eyes fastened, and snort without Sense, Motion
or Understanding, differing from the dead only by Breathing, and that with much
difficulty.

This Disease for the most part happens to old men that are decrepit, and of a
Phlegmatic Complexion, and to the great drinkers of Brandy, and decayed Wine,
too much made use of in these days, were the Truth known.

The Cure of the milder sort of Apoplexy may be performed as follows.

If the Cure be not too desperate in plethorick or full Bodies, where strength
will permit, open the Cephalic Veins; but take not away too much blood at a
time, but rather at several times: I have often seen the Jugular Veins on both
sides the Neck opened not without wonderful success: However bleeding ought
not to be attempted without very good advice.

But give to the Patient the Glister made as follows.

Take Lavender, Hysop. Pennyroyal, Centaury, Marjoram, Betony, Rue, Origan,
Sage, of each half a handful, Seeds of Fennel, Carawayes, Seselis Agarick,
Pollipody, Pulp of Colocynthis, of each two Drams: cut and bruise them, and
boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the consumption of half, then
strain it, and to one Pint of the strained Liquor; add thereto Sal Gemme one
Dram and a half, Hiera Picra one Ounce and a half, Oil of Rue, Castor and
Bay Berries, of each half an Ounce, the Extract of black Hellebor one Scruple;
mix them altogether, and make a Glister thereof.

Or, Take hard Honey, half an Ounce, Euphorbium half a Scruple, the Powder of
Colocinthys twenty Grains, Sal Gemma two Scruples; boil them together, and make
Suppositories thereof, and fix Threads thereto, that after they are put up into
the Fundament, you may draw them forth at pleasure.

When you have done thus, provoke the Patient to Sneese with the following
Powder.

Take Pellitory of Spain, Marjoram, white Hellebor, of each half a Scruple,
Euphorbium and Castor, of each five Grains; being made into fine Powder, snuff
it up into the Nostrils, or blow it up through a Quill, but a little at a time.

Or make use of the Powder directed in the Chapter of the Falling sickness,
made as follows,

Take the Seeds of Nigella half a Dram, Nutmeg, Mumia, Peony Roots, of each ten
Grains, dried Marjoram six Grains, Musk two Grains; all being made into fine
powder, blow a small quantity thereof up into the Nostrils.

For it is most wonderfully effectual in the Fit of the Vertigo, Falling
Sickness, and Apoplexy,

In places where such ingredients cannot be soon obtained; take Nutmeg, Ginger
and sweet Marjoram, or Ginger alone, and blow it up into the Nostils, as before
directed.

Or let the Patient smell to Galbauum Castor, Opoponax, or Sagapenum; which
will be a means to raise and stir him up.

It will also be necessary to anoint the Patients Back bone with the following
Ointment.

Take Oil of Euphorbium, Castor, of each one Ounce, Oil of Costinum one Ounce,
the Oil of Petraeleum and Juniper, of each two Drams, with a sufficient
quantity of Virgins Wax, make it into an Ointment.

And take every Morning fasting the quantity of a Nutmeg of the Electuary made
as follows; for it is a great preseruative against the Apoplexy.

Take the Conserve of Sage, Betony, of each half an Ounce, Rosemary one Ounce,
Venice Treacle, three Drams, the Confection of Anacardit two Drams, Diambra and
Diamoschi Dulcis, of each one Dram, Powder of Castor, and Seeds of Rocket, of
each half a Dram with Syrup of Betony; make them up into an Electuary, to which
mix Oil of Vitriol two Scruples, Oil of Cinnamon ten drops stirring it well
together.

Or, Take Rosemary and Lavender-flowers, of each one handful, Roses, Violets,
Staechados, Origan, of each half a handful, Pellitory, Peony Roots, Gallingal,
of each half an Ounce, Sea or Mountain Onign, two Drams, Cubebes, one Dram,
Cloves, Cardamoms, Cinnamon, of each twenty Grains; being cut and bruised, boil
them in one Pint of the distilled Water of Marjoram, and a Pint and a half of
Betony Water mixed together, after which strain it, and sweeten it with half a
pound of the best Sugar, or with eight or ten Ounces of the Syrup of
Staechados; and take thereof three or four spoonfulls every Morning fasting.

Purging Medicines proper in this Disease are made as follows.

Take Extract of black Hellebor, from 10 Grains to 15, Rosin of Colocynthis
three Grains, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, six drops, Tartar Vitriolatum, Powder of
Castor, of each ten Grains, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water
of Sage; make them into a Potion which you may take every third Morning if need
require.

Or, Take Pills of Euphorbium, Cochiae, Aureae, of each 15 or 20 Grains,
Troches Alhandal three Grains, with the distilled Water of Marjoram, make them
up into seven Pills, of which take three at night, and four in the Morning;
especially near the Full and Change of the Moon.

Or take the Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo.

Or make use of the following Liquor.

Take the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Betony and Lavender, of each one good
handful, Castor two Drams, Sugar Candy four Ounces; boil these in one Gallon
of Water to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and drink thereof at
any time hot; for it is of excellent use to prevent the Apoplexy.

CHAP. VII. Of the Palsy.
THe Palsy is a distemper wherein the one half of the Body, either the right
or left does lose both Sense and Motion, and then it may be called a general
Palsy. But sometimes it happens in one Member only, as in the Head, the
Tongue, the Hand, and the Yard, Leg, etc.

In the Palsy sometimes Sense is only lost, and sometimes Motion alone, and at
other times both Sense and Motion.

The cause of this Disease is through abundance of gross, tough and clammy
Humors, which obstruct or stop the Sinews, hindering the Animal faculty, that
it cannot come from the Fountain to the Members. Sometimes it is caused through
immoderate Cold, at other times through excessive heat or inflammation; or by
some Schirrus or hardness in the Back bone, or in the parts adjacent, or in
other Sinewy parts over much pressed or crushed; by which means the Animal
faculty cannot pass: Many times it is caused through a Fever, and that
principally engendered of melancholy, possessing the mind, and changing the
temperature thereof: It is frequently caused three manner of ways, sometimes of
Melancholy it self, and sometimes by the alteration of the Blood in the Brain,
and through inflammation and evil affect of the Stomach and Sides.

The signs of the Palsy are many, as sadness, fearfulness, envy, hatred,
strange fantasies or imaginations,

This is no acute Disease, but Chronical, or of long continuance, and for the
most part curable, especially in young people, or when the paralitick Member
does not become less, or change his Color; for if so, it is hardly curable.

In this Distemper his Diet ought to be slender and drying, and for the first
two or three days let him altogether abstain, or be content with Broth made of
Barley unhusked, or with Mede, etc. after let him have Meat of good Juice, and
of light digestion, and that well Roasted. Let him eat Partridge, Larks, and
such like, Pine-nuts, and Almonds. Let him take of Savory, Sage, Parsley,
Fennel, Hysop and Marjoram.

And forbear all things that are cold and moist, as Fish, Fruit, etc. and drink
sparingly, except of Honey and Water, wherein is boiled Sage and Cinnamon.

Or of the drink made as follows.

Take Gallingal, long Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, of each one Dram,
Cardamoms one Dram and a half, Ginger half an Ounce, the best Cinnamon two
Ounces; boil them altogether in three or four Quarts of running Water, to the
consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto eight Ounces of the best
Sugar, and drink thereof a small quantity at a time first and last.

In the time of Cure drink no Brandy; neither any other strong Spirits of that
Nature: Also forbear Wine, except a small quantity toward the latter end of
the Cure. Exercise and motion is good, also mirth; sleep in the night, but not
in the day.

The Cure ought to be began with Blood-letting, if age and strength will
permit; (especially where fullness abounds) but it ought to be taken away with
moderation, least the Body should be over much cooled, and also observe to open
the Veins on the well and whole side, and a day or two after cleanse the Bowels
with the following Glister.

Take Sage, Betony, Camomil, Mercury, both sorts of Mallows, of each one
handful, Calamint and Rue, of each half a handful, Staechados half an Ounce,
the Seeds of Ammeos and Fennel, of each two Drams; Cut and Bruise them, and
boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the consumption of the third
part, strain it, and take a Pint thereof; to which add the Electuary called
Benedictum Laxativum, and Diacatholicon, of each half an Ounce, the Extract of
black Hellebor 20 Grains, Oil of Rue, Oris and Bays, of each six Drams, Sal
Gemmae two Scruples; being mixed together, and a Glister made thereof, put it
up according to Art.

You may make use of the Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo; for they
are uery proper in this Distemper.

The next day after Purging make use of the sweating Potion made as follows.

Take Venice Treacle one Dram, the Powder of Virginia Snakeweed, one Scruple,
Oil of Vitriol well Rectified, ten drops, Syrup of Cowslips, one Ounce, Carduus
Water three Ounces; mix them all well together, and make a Potion thereof,
which take in the Morning, and sweat as strength will permit, repeating the
same as need require.

To comfort and strengthen the Vital and Animal Spirits; especially in persons
afflicted with this Disease, make use of the following Cordial Julip.

Take of the distilled Water of Cowslips and Lavender, of each three Ounces,
Syrup of Betony and Cowslips, of each two Ounces, Spirit of Lavender, and
Castor, of each one Ounce and a half, Oil of Vitriol Rectified 20 drops, or as
much as will cause it to be of a sharp taste; of which take one Spoonful first
and last, or at any time when ill or fainty.

Anoint the Region of the Back with the following Ointment.

Take Oil of Nutmegs, Nard Oil, and Oil of Foxes, of each one Ounce, the Juice
of Sage and St. Johnwort, of each three Drams, Sagapenum dissolved in Juniper
Water, two Drams, Powder of Castor and Euphorbium, of each one Dram; with a
sufficient quantity of Wax make it up into an Ointment.

Or, Take the Oil of Juniper berries, Euphorbium and Castor, of each half an
Ounce, Oil of St. Johnswort and Terpentine, of each one Dram, the Water of
Juniper, three Drams; mix them all well together, and anoint the parts affected
therewith; for it is also of excellent virtue.

Or, Take Oil of Earthworms, Foxes and Castor, of each one Ounce, Lucatelles
Balsom, two or three Ounces, Spirit of Sack, half an Ounce, the Chemical Oil of
Rosemary, one Dram and a half; mix them well together, and anoint the Back
therewith hot, and the other parts affected, and cover them with warm Cloths.

Another Ointment of excellent use in t he Palsy, and weakness of the Limbs,
pains in the Joints, etc.

Take Bay Leaves, Rue, St. John's Wort, of each three handfulls, Camomil, Sage
and green Rosemary, of each one handful, cut and bruise them very small, then
add thereto Neats-foot Oil three Pints, Caraway Seed bruised one Ounce and a
half, after which boil them all together over a gentle fire, till the Oil
become Green, and the Herbs dry, then strain it, and add to the strained Liquor
one Bull or Steers Gall, six Ounces of the best Aqua Vitae, Oil of Turpentine
three Ounces; boil it again two or three walms, and keep it for use.

With which precious Balm anoint the paralitick Member twice a day.

How to Cure the Palsy in the Tongue. First, let the body be well purged with
the Pills before directed.

Or, Take of the Pills of Assaiereth, Cochia, Troches, or Extract of Agarick,
of each two Scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of
Sage, make them up into Pills, ten in number; whereof take two at night and
three in the Morning.

The next day take Mustard made with Elder Vinegar, and often chew in your
mouth, in the same manner you may use Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, or hold
in your mouth half an Ounce of Spirit of Lavender; mixing therewith one or two
Grains of the Powder of Euphorbium; all which have been known of wonderful
effect. In such cases some apply blistering Plasters to the Nape of the neck.

For the Palsy in the Hands.

Take Elder-leaves, and make a decoction thereof in strong Beer, add thereto
good store of Mustard, and bath your hands therein hot.

Some rub the Hands with Camomil with good success.

Or anoint them well with the Ointments before directed, and wear Hare Skins
upon the parts affected.

For the Palsy in the Bladder and Yard

When the Palsy is in the Bladder, the Urine is stopped, and sometimes it
passes away without the consent of the Patient.

So anoint the lower part of the Belly and Privy parts with the following
Ointment. Take Oil of Nard, Rue, Cummin, of each half an Ounce, Opoponax,
Castor and Galbanum dislolved in Butter, of each a quarter of an Ounce; being
mixed well together, use it as before directed, and inject a small quantity
thereof into the Bladder warm; but if the Urine be stopped, then first force
the Patient to make Water, by putting up into the Yard a Catheter.

The Palsy in the Yard does also stop the Urine, the Sperme, and does hinder
Copulation: So make use of the same Remedies directed for the Bladder.

Or take the Oil of Pepper, Euphorbium, and Costinum, of each an equal quantity
with Wax, make them up into an Ointment, and anoint the Yard therewith.

You may anoint the Hips and Loins with the Ointment directed for the Back, and
give the Patient to drink Medicines that will provoke Urine: Also the Spirit of
Castor, or the Powder thereof in the distilled Water of Lavender, is very
effectual.

Or let him make use of the Medicines made as follows, that have power to
erect the Yard.

Take Diasatyrion one Ounce, Powder of Castor one Dram; being mixed together,
take the quantity of a large Nutmeg at a time: And Bath the Yard with Wine
wherein has been boiled Sage and Elder, with a small quantity of Pellitory of
Spain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Convulsion or Cramp.
THe Cramp is a Disease in which the Sinews are drawn or plucked up against the
Patients will.

Of which there are three sorts.

The first is called in Latin Distentio; and that is when the Neck does remain
altogether without motion, and not to be turned to either side; but must be
held upright.

The second is called Tensio ad Anteriora, in which Disease the Head and Neck
are drawn down to the Breast.

The third is called Tensio ad Posteriora; in which Distemper the Head is
attracted or drawn backward down to the Shoulders and Back.

The Causes of this Disease according to Hypocrates, are supposed to be two;
that is to say fullness and emptiness of the Sinews in the body, and sometimes
it happens through the biting and stinging of venomous Creatures, and the over
much use of Venery, more especially when it is made use of upon a full Stomach,
is the cause of this Disease, and many times it is caused through Embecillity
or weakness, and by the loss and want of Blood.

If the Convulsion or Cramp be caused of fullness, give to the Patient Diet
that is hot and dry.

But if it be caused of emptiness, his diet ought to be moist; therefore let
him be nourished with fat Broths, and Flesh of easy and light digestion. Let
his Drink be small and thin Wine, etc. except he chance to be in a Fever, then
let him make use of Barley Water, and the decoction of Cinnamon; and let him
also be provoked to sleep with Diacodium, or with the Syrup of Poppies, etc. He
ought to use no exercise, neither Medicines that empty the body, and let his
drink be such that is frequently given in Hectic Fevers.

The following Glister will also prove of excellent use.

Take Betony, Marjoram, Sage, Mercury, wild Betony, and the lesser Centaury, of
each half a handful, Caraway and Coriander Seeds; of each half an Ounce; being
bruised and cut small, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the
consumption of half, strain it, and take one Pint thereof; to which add Hiera
simple one Ounce and a half, Diaphaenicon one Ounce, Oil of Rue two or three
Ounces, Sal Prunella one Dram; mix them well together, and make it up into a
Glister, which administer warm to the Patient.

After which if the body be Plethory or full, let blood, and that in a large
quantity out of the middle Vein, but take it forth by degrees, and not all at
once.

After which give to the Patient the Drink made as follows, five Ounces at a
time first and last.

Take Betony, Marjoram, Sage, Hysop, of each one handful, Carduus Water,
Germander, the lesser Centaury, of each half a handful, Annis and Caraway
Seeds, of each half an Ounce; cut and bruise them small, and with three Pints
of Mede or Metheglin mixed therewith, boil them for an Hour and a half, after
which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Staecados and Betony, of each three
Ounces; and take it as before directed warm.

After which make use of the following Pills.

Take the Troches of Agarick, Sagapen, Pills of Faetida, of each one Scruple,
Troches of Alhandal five Grains, with Honey of Roses; make them up into five
Pills, which let the Patient take after his first sleep.

You may anoint the parts affected especially the Nape of the Neck and Back
with the Ointment and Oil directed in the Chapter of the Palsy.

Or bath the parts with the following Bath.

Take Ground Pine, Sage, Betony, Camomil, Origan, the Roots of Marsh Mallows,
Elicampane, of each two Ounces, Seeds of Faenugreek, three Ounces, Sulphur one
Pound, Alum half a Pound; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water, and make a Bath thereof, with which bath the Patient in the
Morning before dinner, and rub it well in over all his body if need require; or
else in the particular Member that is affected.

After which anoint the Nape of his Neck and Back, and all parts affected, with
the Ointment made as follows.

Take Oil of Earthworms, white Lillies, of each half an Ounce, Oil of
Costinum, Turpentine, of each three Drams; with a sufficient quantity of white
Wax make it up into an Ointment.

Or take Oil of Roses, Violets, of each three Drams, Oil of Foxes, Camomil, of
each two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of white Wax make them into an
Ointment; to which add the Mueilages of the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Linseed,
Fanugreek, of each half an Ounce.

And anoint the parts therewith as before directed, and after you have anointed
them, cover them with a hot Sheep Skin, Lamb or Cat, and when it is cold make
it hot again with Oil of Lavender, and Dill, etc.

You may give to the Patient Cordial Julips, wherein is mixed Spirit of Castor,
and Spirit of Lavender, and such like.

And purge the Head with the following Gargarisme.

Take Roots of Pellitory of Spain, and the Seeds of Rocket, of each half an
Ounce; being bruised, boil them in one Pint of Wine to the consumption of half,
and add thereto Oxymel of Squills, two Ounces, Hiera Piera half an Ounce,
wherewith let the Patient Gargle his Mouth every Morning fasting.

And make use of the sneesing powder made as follows.

Take Marjoram, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, of each two Scruples, and dry
it; being beaten to a fine Powder, snuff a small quantity thereof up into the
Nostrils.

CHAP. IX. Of the Catarrh.
ACatarrh is an unnatural defluxion of an excrementitious Humor falling from
the Head to the inferior parts, as to the Nostrils, Mouth and Throat, etc. and
does cause Appilation; it is caused Coryza; and when it does descend to the
parts of the Throat, it is called Branchus; and when it falls to the Breast;
or to the Lungs, then it is called the Catarrh.

The cause of this Disease is often, either through outward coldness or heat,
also of Vapors arising from too much or evil nourishment; sometimes by the
Odor or Scent of hot and cold things, also by the over much use of Venery,
especially in those who are animated thereunto through the use of provoking
Medicines, other violent Exercises, and too much sleep, etc. also does cause
this Distemper.

The Symptoms or Signs are heaviness in the Head, dullness of the Senses long
sleep, and much snorting, a snotty running Nose, more then ordinary spitting,
the body often or altogether Costive, and much troubled with Wind.

If this Disease come of a very cold Humor, the Patient will be sensible of
much cold, the Face pale, the Spittle sweet sour Belchings, slimy and watery
Matter, and a general Phlegmatic constitution of body.

If the Humor distilling is hot, it will appear by the redness of the Face,
thirst, salt, and very sharp inflammations, pains and Ulcers in the Mouth, and
most commnoly a choleric constitution of the whole body.

There are two sorts of Catarrhs, the one hot the other cold.

The hot Catarrh is cured by Medicines which discharge the Matter found
offending, which does thicken and take away, as also by Correcting the
distemper of the parts, sending and receiving the same.

So forthwith let Blood, (especially where the Body is full, if age and
strength will permit) and take it by degrees forth of the Liver or middle Vein
in the right Arm; or as occasion serves open the Vein under the Tongue.

After which give to the Patient the following Potion.

Take Rubarb four Scruples, Myvabelans rubbed with Oil of sweet Almonds one
Scruple and a half, Yellow Sanders ten Grains, infuse them in a sufficient
quantity of Purslain and Letuce Water; after which strain it, and add thereto
Syrup of Roses Solutive and Manna, of each eight Drams; make it up into a
Potion, and give it in the Morning all at once.

Or make use first of the following Glister.

Take the Flowers of Violets and Camomil, Dill, Mallows, Mercury, wild Betouy,
of each one handful, Cut and Bruise them small, and boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water to the consumption of half, then strain it, and to one Pint
of the strained Liquor, a^^ Hiera simple one Ounce and a half, Oil of Camomil
three Ounces, common Salt one Dram. Mix them well together, and put it up into
the Fundament Glister ways.

You may give to the Patient to drink a decoction made of Tamarinds and cold
Herbs, to which you may add some purging Medicines, as Senna, Rhubarb, etc.

Or make use of the following Julip.

Take the four great cold seeds, white Poppy Seeds, of each two Drams,
Plantain, Purslant and Letuce, of each one handful, Red Poppies, Violets and
Water Lillies, of each half a handful; boil them in a sufficient quantity of
running Water, to one Pint, strain it, and add thereto Syrup of dried Red Roses
and Violets of each one Ounce and a half; being mixed together, divide it into
three parts, and drink one part thereof first and last so long as need require.

Or instead thereof use the distilled Water of the forementioned Herb, or the
Emulsions of the four cold Seeds, which are all of a specific virtue to
thicken the Humor.

And also make use of the Ointment made as follows.

Take Oil of Roses and Water Lillies, of each one Ounce, Rose water half an
Ounce, Vinegar of Roses two Drams. Mix them well together in a Silver Dish over
some Coals, and anoint the Head therewith, and with Lint apply it warm to the
Temples.

An excellent Foot Bath for the Catarrh.

Take three Quarts of Lie made of wood Ashes, red Wine one Quart, add thereto
Camomil and Bay Salt, of each one handful. Let them boil together for a small
time, and bath the Feet therewith first and last.

Or, Take Betony, Dill, and Camomil Flowers, the Leaves and Flowers of Poppies,
and willow Leaves, of each a good quantity; and make a Bath therewith, and bath
their Feet therein as before directed; after which apply to the Soles of the
Feet warm, the green Buds or Leaves of the Oak bruised and beat well together,
with a small quantity of Salt and Vinegar.

The more to restrain the flux and thicken the Humor.

Take Syrup of Poppies, dried Red Roses and Syrup of Violets, of each two
Ounces; of which take an Ounce thereof every night going to Bed.

Or, Take the Species called Diatragacanth frigid. one Dram, Conserve of old
Red Roses three Drams, fine Bole washed in Rose Water, and the Powder of
Mastick of each one Scruple and a half, with the Syrup of dried Red Roses; make
it into an Electuary according to Art; whereof take as much as a small Nut
every night last.

Another to spose the Gatarrh or defluxion of Rheum.

Take the finest Bole washed in Rose Water, and prepared, two Drams, the best
white Starch one Dram, Gum Arabic, and Gum Tragacanth, White Poppy Seed, of
each half a Dram; beating all into fine Powder, add thereto Conserve of Red
Roses two Ounces, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Poppies, make them
up into an Electuary; whereof let the Patient take often the quantity of half a
Wallnut.

The Cure of the cold Catarrh consists in the preparing and evacuating of the
offending Humors, and by the clear taking away that which flows to the Breast.

In the first place if the Liver be hot, breath a Vein; for oftentimes it is
observed, that Men troubled with a Catarrh have a hot Liver, but a cold Brain;
but if the Liver is not hot, and the Patient in Years, and no great (...) of
Humors to be sent to the Brain from other parts, you may well forbear bleeding.

And make use of the following Glister.

Take Origan, Marjoram, Betes, Mallows, Nercury of each half a handful, Dill,
Camomil, ^^d Melilot Flowers, of each one Pugil, Rosemary ^^owers two Pugils,
Caraway Seeds half an Ounce; Cut and bruise them small, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of half, strain it, and to one
Pint hereof; add of Benedicta Laxativa, half an Ounce, Hiera simple one Ounce,
common Salt me Dram; mix them, and make thereof a Clister, and put it up warm.

After which make use of the following Potion.

Take the Roots of Fennel, Liquorice, Sparagus, of each half an Ounce, Balm,
Betony, Hysop, Rosemary, Dill, of each half a handful, Flower of Staecados,
and the lesser Centaury, of each two Pugils, Ginger half a Dram Cinnamon one
Dram, Caraway Seed two Drams; cut and bruise them, and boil them in four Pints
of Hydromel in some convenient Vessel, for the space of two hours, then strain
it, and add thereto Syrup of Betony, Hysop and Staecados, of each two Ounces;
being mixed well together; take five Ounces warm every day three hours before
supper

The Pills made as follows are also good in this Distemper.

Take Pills of Agarick and Cochia, of each half a Dram, with Honey of Roses
make then up into five Pills; whereof take two at night and three in the
Morning.

Or, Take Diacatholicon and Diaphanicon, of each half an Ounce, the distilled
Water of Betony and Hysop, of each two Ounces; being mixed together, make a
Potion thereof, and take it in the Morning six hours before Dinner.

Or, Take my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, one at night and two in the
Morning; more or less according to the age and strength of the Patient; for
they b^yond all Medicines carry off sharp, salt, and watery Humors: so helps
the Catarrh, and all other defluxions of Rhume, either hot or cold.

The day following, after you have purged according to directions, it will be
necessary that you make use of the following sweating Potion.

Take Conserve of Rosemary and Venice Treacle, of each two Drams, the distilled
Water of Juniper Berries two ounces; Mix it, make it into a Potion, and take it
in the Morning fasting, and sweat as strength will permit.

When the defluxion falls upon the Jaws, Lungs and Stomach, make use of the
Medicines that causes sneesing, which are made as follows.

Take the Juice of Red Betes, the Juice of Marjoram, of each half an Ounce,
Virgin^ Honey one Dram; Mix it together, and make it warm, and snuff it up into
the Nostrils two or three times every Morning a small quantity at a time.

Or, Take the Powder of black Hellebor and Sugar in equael parts; being made in
fine Powder, snuff it up into the Nose.

But if the defluxion falls upon the Eyes and Nose in particular, then make use
of the owing Gargarism.

Take Sage, Hysop, Roses, of each half a handful, Cubebes two Drams, Roots of
Pellitory of Spain, Rocket Seed, of each half an Ounce, Passularum one Ounce;
Cut and Bruise them, and boil them in Vinegar and Water of each one pound to
the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto Honey of Roses two
Ounces; Make it into a Gargarisme, and Gargle the Mouth therewith every Morning
fasting.

And to dry up the superfluous moisture that falls from the Brain upon the
Lungs.

Take Diambra, Diamoschi Dulcis, of each half a Dram, Conserve of Rosemary one
Scruple, the best Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebes, of each two Scruples, white Sugar
dissolved in the distilled Water of Juniper four Ounces; being all mixed well
together, add thereto Chemical Oil of Aniseed ten drops, the Chemical Oil of
Cinnamon two drops, and take a small quantity thereof first and last.

Laudanum is also of most excellent use, given from two Grains to five going to
bed, likewise you may give an Ounce, or an Ounce and a half of Syrup of Poppies
in the manner aforesaid.

Blistering Plasters rightly applied, and Issues made behind the Ears, are
very profitable to help distillations from the Head.

there are many other Distempers that spring from the Brain, which here I must
omit.

CHAP. X. Of the Eyes.
THE affects of the Eyes are many, as inflammations, or hot impostumes, etc.
Caused of a Distillation from the Brain, or of corruption of Blood mixed with
Choler, and oftentimes by stripes or blows, and such like.

The Cure of some Distempers in the Eyes may be performed as follows.

For inflammations in the Eyes, in the first place it will be necessary, if
strength and age will permit, to open a Vein, taking forth a sufficient
quantity of Blood.

After which let the Patient make use of the following Potion.

Take the bark of Mirobolans, two Drams, the choicest Rhubarb one Dram, white
Ginger one Scruple; being bruised, infuse them one night in six Ounces of Goats
Milk, then strain it, and add thereto half an Ounce of the Lenitive Electuary,
and make it into a Potion, which take in the Morning six hours before Dinner.

Or, Take Pills of Cochiae and Aureg, of each one Scruple and a half, with
three or four drops of the water of Fennel; make them up into seven Pills;
whereof take three at night going to bed, and four in the morning; but first
anoint the Eyes with a drop or two of the Oil of Fennel.

Or, Take the Pills called Pilulae Alaphanginae, and the Extract of Rudij, of
each one Scruple, with two or three drops of the Chemical Oil of Fennel; make
them up into five Pills, whereof take two at night and three in the morning,
repeating either of them as need shall require.

For the inflammation of the Eyes.

Take Oil of Roses three Drams, Tutia and Camphir, of each one Dram, with a
sufficient quantity of white Wax make them up into an Ointment; and going to
bed, anoint the little Corner of the Eye therewith, and let as much go in as a
Lin-seed, and close your Eyes till it be dissolved.

Or, Take the White of one new laid Egg, and as much Rose water, of Camphir
one Grain; being mixed well together, spread it upon fine Hemp Towe, and apply
it to the Eyes, and when it is dry, make it moist again with the foresaid
Medicine.

This draws forth the inflammation, and mitigateth the pain.

Or, Take Rose Water and Woman's Milk, of each two Ounces, Camphir four Grains;
mix them together, and drop thereof into the Corners of the Eyes first and
last, or make Lint or Wool moist therein, and apply it to the Eyes going to bed.

Or, Take of the great Flies, that in the Spring time creep forth of hard
Walls, and distill them; of which Water drop into the Corners of the Eyes, and
it will take away the inflammation and redness.

Or, Take the distilled Water of Beechtree Flowers, and make Rags moist
therein, and apply them to the Eyes.

Or, Take the Water distilled from the Flowers of Hogs Fennel, Garden Fennel,
Celendine, and Elder Flowers, of each a like quantity, and make Jews-ears moist
therein, and apply them to the Eyes.

Or make use of the water of Hogs Fennel alone in the foresaid manner; for it
is of excellent use.

Or, Take white Vitriol half an Ounce, white Sugarcandy one Ounce, Camphir two
Drams; being beat to Powder, add thereto of the distilled Water of Eyebright
and Fennel, of each one Pint; and in a new Earthen pot, being covered close,
let it boil gently to the consumption of the fourth part, when cold put it into
a Glass, and keep it close stopped for use.

And dip a Linen Rag therein, and apply it to the Eyelids, being first shut;
for it is of wonderful virtue in such cases.

How to Cure the Cataract, or Pearls in the Eyes.
Take a Copper Basin, which is not Tinned, and spread in the bottom thereof a
sufficient quantity of Salt, then a quantity of Strawberries, then Salt, so do
till the Basin be full; after which cover the Basin very close, and put it
under ground one foot or more deep, for the space of a Month, then take it
forth and distill it, of which precious Water drop into the Eyes Morning and
Evening.

Or take the Roots of Burr-docks, Cichory and Celandine, of each a like
quantity, bruise them; and sew them up into a piece of Cloth or Silk, and hang
them about the Neck, and when they are dry, take fresh, and when you are well
burn the Boots.

Some have found good by wearing the Roots of water Pepper, seven or eight in
number, hanged about the Neck, which Roots must be gathered upon St.
Batholomews day before the Sun rise.

Or, Take Hemlock one small handful, Bay Salt two Ounces; being beat well
together, and apply it to the contrary Hand-rist for the space of 24 hours;
which will take away the Pin and Web at four five times dressing.

Take Borau, and burn it till it be very white and dry, then beat it to fine
Powder, and with a Quill blow a small quantity thereof into the Eyes.

Or, Take white Vitriol two Drams, one Clove of white Ginger, Camphir one
Scruple, dissolved in one Spoonful of Aqua Vitae; put them all together in six
Ounces of Rose Water in a Glass well stopped up, and so let it stand for three
Weeks, then drop it into the Eyes as before directed, and you will find it to be
a very good remedy to take off the Cataract.

Or, Take the Stone called Lapis Judaicus, white Vitriol, of each a like; beat
it to fine Powder, and put it into the hollow part of an Egg roasted hard,
first being cut through the middle, and the Yelk only taken forth; after which
join the Egg together again, and so let it continue certain days in a Glass, or
some Earthen Vessel well glazed, then strain it, and add thereto a sufficient
quantity of the distilled Water of Penyroyal, and stop it up very close in a
Glass, and cover it with Past, and set it into an Oven with Brown Bread, and
when it is cold take it forth, and keep it for use, and with Lint or fine
Linen Rags apply it to the Eyelids, (being close shut) repeating the same
till the filme or spots depart.

Or, Take Red Ants Eggs, and put them into a glazed Vessel, and stop it close,
then cover the same with Rye Past, and Bake it with Brown Bread, and when it is
cold break the Pot, and take forth the Water very carefully, and keep it for
use; of which drop into the Eyes as cause requires; for it does not only help
the Cataract, but most infirmities of the Eyes.

For Blows in the Eyes.

Take the Roots of Cichory, and bruise them very well, and mix therewith the
White of an Egg, and apply it to the Eye.

Or take Celandine and Agrimony, of each a like quantity; bruise them well
together, and apply the same to the Eyes, repeating it as often as need require.

This is good for most Diseases in the Eyes, and abateth the pains caused by
inflammations.

For swelling of the Eyes.

Take a fine Linen Rag, made moist in Wine, and apply it to the Eyes, and upon
that another made moist in Sorrel or Rose Water.

For the Pin and Web.

Take one Dram of the fine Powder of Liquorice, Ginger half a Dram; being mixed
well together, blow a small quantity thereof into the Eyes, and it helps.

Another excellent Remedy for the Cataract, Pin, and Web.

Take good store of Crickets, which commonly are in Bake-houses, etc. bruise
them well, and strain forth the Juice, and drop one drop into the Eye thrice a
day; and though the Patient be as it were blind, he shall be restored.

Ear Wax put into the Eyes is also of excellent use, so is the Oil that may be
taken forth of the great Bone in a Gooses Wing.

The Gall of a Cock, mixed with the like quantity of Honey, and the Eyes
anointed therewith, clears the sight. The Gall of an Hare, and the Gauls of
Eles are also very good.

Or, Take the Juice of Alehoof, (which is the right ground Ivy) the Juice of
Celandine, and Field Daisies, of each a small quantity; and after you have
clarified it, mix therewith a little fine Sugarcandy, and drop it into the Eyes
first and last; for it is not only a good Remedy for all pains, redness, and
waterness of the Eyes; but for the Pin and Web, and all manner of Filmes
growing over the sight.

The Juice of Alehoof alone, mixed with two or three Corns of Bay Salt, and a
little Honey will effect the same.

Much more might be said touching the Diseases of the Eyes, and the several
Cures thereof; which I shall leave to the skillfull Oculist.

Only for all Rhumes, hot, sharp, salt and Watery Humors, which deflux or fall
upon the Eye,s; though caused through the worst of Distempers, as the French
Pox, etc. make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, according to
Directions.

Or if possible, of a better Medicine, which did I but know, I would inform you
of.

CHAP. XI. Of the Ears.
THE Ears are incident to many infirmities, as violent pains, sound and noise,
deafness, thick and slow hearing, inflammations, etc.

The pain in the Ears is often caused through cold taken in Journeys, cold
Baths, also it happens to many through not distempers, and sometimes through
inflammations, and many times sharp Humors coming of the French Pox, etc. do
absolutely cause pains and pricking in the Ears.

The sound and noise in the Ears is for the most part engendered of a windy
Vapor, or of tough and gross Humors, and many times through the weakness of
the Members, as it often happens upon the recovery of a Disease, some Humors
affecting the Sinews thereof; it may also be caused of outward things, as of
cold, heat, or by a Fall, or Blow on the Head.

Deafness, thick and slow hearing, the Original of which is often from the very
Birth, and many times afterward, which happen either through choleric
Humors, ascending to the Ears, or through gross and raw Humors, stopping the
Instruments of hearing.

Inflammations often break forth in the Kernals, which are by the Ears, and is
caused of abundance of hot Blood, being mixed either with Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy, and sometimes it is caused of Humors compact in the Head, and the
rest of the Body through Diseases, especially Fevers.

How to Cure the Pains of the Ears caused through Cold.
Take Pills of Cochiae, Rudij, and Alaphangenae, of each one Scruple, the
Chemical Oil of Rosemary, six drops; mix them together, and make it up into ten
Pills, whereof take two at night and three in the Morning till they are all
taken.

After which apply to the Ears the following fomentation,

Take Mallows, Marsh Mallows, the lesser Centaury, wild Marjoram, Sage, Mints,
Wormwood, Camomil and Penyroyal, of each one handful, Melilot, Staechas,
Camomil, and Rosemary-flowers of each half a handful, Cloves and Cinnamon
bruised, of each five Drams; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Wine and
Water in equal parts to the consumption of half, and often bath the Ears
therewith hot with a Sponge, and apply thereto some of the Herbs at a time hot,
repeating the same as need requires, and take not cold.

For it does not only help pains in the Ears, but deafness.

Or take a hot Loaf, made with one part of Caraway Seeds, and cut it through
the middle, and apply it so to the Ears.

Or, Take Oil of Rue, Nard, Dill, Spike, Euphorbium and Lillies, of each alike,
with which anoint the Ears, or black Wool made moist therein, and stop the
Ears up with it.

Or boil Rue, Rosemary or Garlic in Water, and let the Fume thereof go up into
the Ears through a Funnel.

Or take the Oil of Rue and bitter Almonds; being mixed together, put it hot
into the Ears, and stop them up with black Wool, made moist with the same.

How to Cure Pains in the Ears caused through Heat.
Take Violets, Mercury, Mallows, of each one handful, the Flowers of the
lesser Centaury, Camomil and Melilot, of each half a handful, being cut and
bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of
half, then strain it, and add to one Pint thereof, Hiera simple one Ounce, Oil
of Camomil and Violets, of each one Ounce and a half, of the Lenitive Electuary
half an Ounce, Sal Prunella one Dram, being mixed well together, put it up
Glister ways,

And the next day open the Cephalic Vein, especially if there be inflammation.

And take Oil of Roses and Woman's Milk, of each three or four Drams, the White
of an Egg, being well mixed together, drop it into the Ears warm.

Or take the Oil of Roses wherein have been boiled the Flowers of Willows, half
an Ounce, Vinegar of Roses two Drams; being mixed together, make black Wool
moist therein, and apply it hot to the Ears.

And Purge with the Medicine made as follows. Take the Lenitive Electuary one
Ounce, the Electuary of Roses two Drams, the distilled Water of Cichory six
Ounces; mix them together, and make a Potion thereof, which take in the
Morning, and fast after it six hours.

And the more to ease the Pain.

Take the best Opium one Scruple, Castor two Scruples, being dissolved in three
Ounces of Woman's Milk, and warmed, drop it into the Ears; for it is a very
excellent and safe Medicine.

How to help the sound and noise in the Ears, and deafness.
Take Bay Berries one Ounce, bruise them, and boil them in one quart of white
Wine, and let the fume thereof go up into the Ears hot through a Funnel in the
Morning, and at night going to bed.

Or take Ants Eggs, and boil them well in sweet Oil; being strained; add
thereto a small quantity of Neats-foot Oil, and drop it into the Ears.

Or take Salt Peter two Drams, Pellitory of Spain one Dram, Saffron one
Scruple; being beat to fine Powder, mix therewith a little Vinegar, and make
them up into small Cakes, then dry them, and keep them for use, and when need
require mix a small quantity thereof with Vinegar, and drop it into the Ears;
for it cleanses and purifieth them to admiration, so helps hearing.

Another excellent remedy for noise in the Ears.

Take VVomans Milk, Oil of Roses, of each three Drams; in which dissolve two
Grains of the best Opium, and drop thereof into the Ears.

Or take the Juice of sweet Marjoram two Drams, Oil of Cloves one Scruple, in
which mix two Grains of Musk, and drop it into the Ears warm.

Or take Rosemary, and boil it very well in Spring Water, and let the Fume
thereof go up into the Ears through a Funnel, and Syringe the Ears therewith,
after which put into the Ear a small piece of the middle of a roasted Onion,
and stop them up with black Wool, repeating the same as need shall require.

You may also Syringe the Ears with stale Urine, or with the Urine of a young
Whelp that can hardly go.

Or take a small quantity of the fat from the Kidney of Mutton, and tie it up
in a very thin Rag, and infuse it three days and three nights in your own
Water, and put it into the Ears, changing the same as need require,

The Juice of Aleho of or ground Ivy droped into the Ears, takes away the noise
and deafness, so does a Goats Gaul.

The Chemical Oils of Rosemary, Lavender, Nutmegs, Castor and Amber, etc. are
also of wonderful virtue to help deafness, being dropped into the Ears, first
mixed with a Woman's Milk.

CHAP. XII. Of the Nose.
IN the Nose are several distempers, as filthy rotten stinking Ulcers, caused
through corrupt sharp and salt humors, etc.

Bleeding at the Nose proving destructive to many, is oftentimes outwardly
caused by Falls, Blows, or by violent Exercise, or heat of the Sun, etc.

The Polypus is a fleshy matter growing in the Nostrils, caused through gross
humors falling to the same, and oftentimes it happens through a melancholy
humor, etc.

The Nose is also affected with putrid or rotten Ulcers. Caused by the French
Pox, or Venerial sports.

For the cure of deep and rotten Ulcers in the Nose, called Ozene, take the
juice of Calamint, and with a feather put it up into the nostrils, or blow the
powder of the same therein with a quil, or anoint the nostrils with honey,
which will bring them to a scurf or scab, that will fall of in four or five
days, and when they are fallen of take the ointment of Roses and anoint the
Ulcers therewith, and the more to Cleanse the same, dissolve Egyptiacum in
Barley water, and syring the nostrils, or snuff it up therein.

Or anoint them with the juice of Pomegranats boiled first in a Brazen Vessel
to the consumption of half.

Or take a whole Pomegranate, and boil the same in wine, and snuff it up into
the nostrils.

Or take Sugar of Lead dissolved in Plantain water, and syring the nostrills
which will both dry and heal.

Or make tents of dried Gentian, and put them up into the nostrils, for they
will dilate or open themselves. Then take salt of Gemme two drams, Mastick and
Frankincense of each one dram. Being made into powder, add thereto the juice of
Celandine one ounce, oil Olive half a pint, and let them be boiled to an
ointment, after which anoint the tents therewith, putting them up as before
directed.

And sometimes with a feather touch the Ulcers with strong Vinegar, wherein is
mixed the powder of Album Graecum; if after all this there remain pains in the
nostrills, Take oil of Mirtles, Roses, of each an ounce, Litharg of Gold and
burnt Lead of each two scruples, fine Bole, Venus white Lead, the powder of
Pomgranate peels, of each one scruple, white Wax as much as is sufficient to
make them up into an ointment which anoint the part affected therewith.

In the cure of these Ulcers, and such like, in the beginning the head ought to
be strengthened, and dried, because they often happen through corrupt humors
flowing from the head to the nostrils, so in the first place shave the Head,
and apply thereto the Plaster called Emplastrum Stephaniaion, etc.

Or anoint the head with oil of Roses, wherein is mixed a small quantity of
Roch Alum in sine powder.

Or take unripe Galls, and Willow leaves bruised and mixed with Vinegar, and
apply to the head, by which means the foresaid Remedies shall have the better
effect.

For the bleeding at the Nose, if strength and fullness permit, open the vein in
the Arm and take it forth at several times, and not all at once, it is also
good to put the Patients feet in hot water, rubbing them up and down, etc. and
strong binding of the hand wrists, and above the knees, etc. is also of
excellent use: let large Cupping-glasses be fastened to the sides; if the Blood
flow from the right nostril, fasten the Cupping-glass upon the Liver, and if
from the left nostril upon the Spleen, if from both nostrils apply Cupping
glasses to both places, you may also apply them to the Shoulders with
Scarification.

Apply to the Forehead juice of Lettuce, Sorral, Plantain, Sheppards purse, and
knot Grass, with a sponge, etc.

Or apply the Herbs bruised to the foresaid place, or the distilled waters of
the same with linen Clothes made moist therein, or apply to the privy parts
linen Clothes made moist with Vinegar or cold water, blow into the Patients
Nostrils a small quantity of the Powder of a Toad prepared, or mix a little of
the same with Paste, and apply it to the Palate with your fingers.

If that take no effect, give to the Patient four Grains of the Powder thereof
in two or three spoonfuls of Plantain water, or in the distilled water of Hogs
Dung, for it has been found effectual where no other Medicine would prevail.

Or take the juice of the leaves of Nettles, a quarter of a pint at a time
sweetened with Sugar; for it is also a certain remedy against bleeding at the
Nose, etc.

Or make Tents with Lint, and dip them in the juice of Nettles, and put them up
into the Nostrils.

Or you may burn the blood that comes forth of the Patients Nose, and blow
thereof up into the Nostrils, for it is also of excellent use.

Or take Egge-shells wherein Chicken have been hatched, being made into fine
Powder, blow it up into the Nostrils.

Or take the Powder of the best Aloes, and roll it up with Wool. Or the hair
cut off the belly of a Dog, make Tents therewith, and put them up as before
directed.

How to cure the Polypus, which is a fleshy matter growing in the Nose.

After you have applied the forementioned remedies, etc. to the head, and
purged sufficiently,

Take the juice of the Cyprus Tree, and dip Tents therein, and often put them
up into the Nostrils.

The juice of Aron- roots, commonly called Cuckoo pint, roots, used as before
directed, will effect the same.

The juice of Garden Dragons, are also very good for the purpose aforesaid, etc.

Or take three ripe Pomegranates, the one sower, the other sweet, and the other
between both, bruise them in a Wooden or Marble Mortar, strain it, and boil the
juice to an Ointment, and dip a rag or lint therein, and put it up into the
Nostrils, for it dries and consumes the matter without pain or sharpness.

Or take the flowers and peels of Pomegranates, Shumach, of each one pound,
Grapes that are not ripe one pound and a half, infuse them in a sufficient
quantity of Vinegar, 24 hours after which distill it, then add thereto Roch,
Alum half a pound, White Vitriol one ounce and a half, and distill them
altogether the second time, and touch the part often therewith: but if you
perceive that it is not strong enough, add to the forementioned water a small
quantity of Orpiment and Sandarach.

Or take red Precipitate one scruple, Honey of Roses half an ounce, being mixed
well together, apply to the part affected with a Tent.

Or take the white Ointment of Roses one ounce, red Precipitate one dram, mix
them well together, and apply it as before directed, for they are both of
wonderful virtue to consume proud flesh.

You may also take Plantain water one ounce, Spirit of Vitriol two drams, and
mix them together, and touch the Polypus often therewith.

Or in the same manner use the water that the Goldsmiths separate Gold withal,
called the second water.

How to cure the putrid or rotten Ulcers in the Nose, caused by the French Pox.

Take Plantain water two ounces, Syrup of Mulberries and Honey of Roses of each
half an ounce, Sugar of Lead two drams, and siringe the Nostrils often
therewith.

And often anoint the Nostrils with a feather made moist in the Ointments before
directed, mixed with red Precipitate, with which I have cured many.

Or firinge the Nostrils with the distilled water of Cucummets, and strong
Vinegar, in equal parts, sweetened with syrup of Mulberries, and the syrup made
with the Bramble-berries; after which apply Tents dipped in the following
Ointment.

Take Album Graecum three drams, Vinegar of Squills and Honey of Roses of each
half an ounce, Mercurius Dulcis one dram, mix them very well together, and
apply it as before directed, changing the same as need require.

Or take spring water, and boil therein a sufficient quantity of the inward
bark of an Elm-tree, strain it, and make it somewhat sharp with spirit of
Vitriol, and often siringe the Nostrils therewith.

Or wash the Ulcers three or four times a day with the water made as follows.

Take Mercury sublinate (commonly called White Mercury) half a dram, Roch-Allum
one dram, both in fine Powder, Red-Rose-water four ounces, Plantain water
twelve ounces, boil them altogether in some new-glased Vessel, to the
consumption of the third part; after which strain it, and keep it for the
foresaid use.

Or take Plantain water and Red-Rose-water of each one pint, Roch-Allum and
Mercury sublimate of each two drams, Camphir one dram and a half; powder what
is to be powdered, and boil them altogether in a glased Vessel to the
consumption of the third part as before directed, which keep close stopped for
use, for they both dry exceedingly, you may sometimes anoint the part with the
forementioned Ointment, or with the Ointment of Roses alone to keep the Ulcer
supple, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Toothache.
THe Toothache is caused several ways, either from a flux of humors cold and
flegmy, or hot and watery, sharp and salt, etc. And those humors deflux to the
Membranes of the Jaws, and to the holes wherein the Teeth are, and to the Nerve
placed in the root of the Jaw, etc. and sometimes the pain in the Teeth is
caused through inflammation of the Gums, etc. but when a swelling rises upon
the Gums or Jaws, the pain of the Teeth cease. Much more might be said as
touching the pains of the Teeth, etc. which here I must omit.

If the pain comes of hot humors, open a Vein on the same-side in the Arm: but
if the pain come through cold, bleeding will not be profitable.

And the day following let the Patient purge with my Pills, etc. and if need
require, apply blistering Plasters to the neck, or behind the ears, which do
much draw back the humors.

Or take of the best Aqua Vitae and Sallet-Oyl of each one good spoonful,
Pepper beat to fine Powder from two scruples to a dram, being mixed well
together, drop two or three drops into the contrary ear, and stop it up with
black wool dipped therein, and lie upon the other side. This is most proper if
the pain come of cold.

Or take of the best Opium and Bees Wax of each a like quantity, and work it
well together before the fire with your fingers, wherewith mix a small quantity
of Lint and put it up into the hollow Tooth: for if the pain come of heat, it
will give present ease, and cures in a short time. If the pain come through
cold, take Sugar and Pepper beat in fine Powder, being melted together in a
Brass, Copper, or Silver Ladle, and made up in round Balls while hot, held
between the Teeth, gives present ease.

To hinder the defluxion, apply to the Temples the Plasters made as follows.

Take Gum Elemi and Mastick of each alike, melt them together, being spread
upon Silk, apply them to the Temples.

The Plaster called Emplastrum ad Herniam applied as before directed.

Or the Plaster of Mastick is likewise effectual.

An excellent remedy for all manner of pains in the Teeth.

Take Pellitory of Spain two ounces and a half, cut and bruise it small, after
which put it into a Glass-Vessel, and add thereto one pint of the best
Sallet-Oyl hot, shake them well together, and stop the Vessel close, and let it
stand in the Sun, or some other warm place for 14 days, stirring or shaking the
same once a day: after which strain it, and add thereto white Vitriol half an
ounce, Amber five drams, both in very fine Powder, and put it up in the Glass
again: being close stopped, let it stand for one week, shaking it every day as
before directed; and so keep it for use, and upon occasion with a feather drop
one drop thereof upon the aching Tooth or Gums, keeping the same for a small
time in the mouth, and it will help.

Or dissolve in a quarter of a pint of Springwater one dram of the Powder of
Roman Vitriol, and hold thereof in the mouth.

Or take the distilled water of Rosemary, and keep the same hot in the mouth,
and it will give ease.

Or take red Sealing-Wax two drams, Roche Alum burnt one dram, mix them well
together, and apply it to the Teeth, or put thereof into the hollow Tooth.

Or take the Powder of double refined Sugar, and Powder of White Pepper of each
alike, being melted in a Brazen or Coppet Ladle, make it up into small Balls,
and hold them between your Teeth, and it gives present ease in all cold causes.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Blackness and Rottenness of the Teeth, and Exulceration of
the Gums, etc.
BLackness and Rottenness in the Teeth, is often contracted by the evil humors
sticking to them, which in process of time does corrode and cause them to be
rotten, etc.

The cause is through defluxion of vicious humors, etc. or of filthy vapors
that ascend, that are ingendered of evil nourishment from the distemper of the
stomach, etc. which corrupt the good nourishment, sometimes falls or blows
causes the Teeth to be corrupt, and often times by taking too much Mercury
inwardly or outwardly applied to cure the Pox, etc. And there are many women
that frequently make use of Mercurial waters to beautify their faces, or to
make themselves more fair, by which means their Teeth are made black, and
corrupt, etc.

To make them white again, Take Spirit of Vitriol, and dip there in brown
Paper, and roll the Paper up into little Balls, and rub the Teeth therewith.
Oil of Sulphur used in the like manner will also cause the Teeth to be
exceeding white.

Or you may take Spring Water, and drop therein a sufficient quantity of Spirit
of Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur, and so gargle the Mouth and Teeth therewith.

Some take Aquafortis and dip Paper therein, and rub the Teeth therewith; but
you must have a care that you touch not the Gums.

Or take white Corral and Pearl of each two drams, beat them into fine Powder,
and rub your Teeth therewith, and they will become very white.

Or take the ashes of Vine-branches, and rub your Teeth therewith.

Or take the hard Crusts of Rye or Barley bread, burn them, and make it to
Powder, and the Teeth rubbed therewith will cause them to be white.

To make rotten Teeth sound, Take the juice of Watercresses and White Wind in
equal parts, mix them together, and rub the Teeth and Gums therewith, and often
gargle the Mouth with the same.

The ashes of Tobacco is of excellent use to cleanse the Teeth, and to make
them white.

Or take Alum, white Corral, the Roots of Snakeweed, of each half an Ounce,
beat them to powder, and often rub the teeth.

Or take Pumestone, white Corral, Alablaster, fish Bones, Tarter, Orris-Roots,
Pebblestones, of each two Drams, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each one dram and a half,
Sal-Armoniack, half a dram, Amber-greese and Musk, of each five grains, being
mixed and made into fine powder, rub the Teeth therewith, and wash your mouth
with Rose Water and Vinegar, or with Spring Water and Vinegar, which will serve
as well.

Or take common Salt, white Marble, Pomestone, white Corral, of each two drams,
Mastick, Citron-peels, of each one dram, Musk three grains, being beaten and
mixed altogether, rub your Teeth therewith, for it will not only cause the
Teeth to be white, but cleanses the Gums, etc.

Another certain remedy for corrupt Gums.

Take Honey one spoonful, Nutmeg and Cloves in powder, of each one dram, Juice
of Sage two spoonfuls, beat them well together till it be like to an ointment,
wherewith anoint the Gums and Teeth, after which, take Mastick and Myrrh of
each two draws, and boil them in half a pint of Red-wine to the consumption of
half, and wash the Gums and Teeth first and last therewith.

Or take Alum two drams, powder of Red-Corral, one dram and a half, Pumestone,
and Fish-bones, of each one dram, burnt Hartshorn, Mastick and Frankinsense,
Cl^^^^s, Myrrh and Nutmegs, of each half a dram, beat them into fine powder,
and (...) them together, with which rub your (...) and Teeth.

Or take Barley Meal, Salt and Honey, and rub the Teeth, and wash your mouth
after with Vinegar and water.

Notwithstanding all this, you ought to purge with proper Medicines, and to
Bleed if need require, and to scarifie the Gums.

CHAP. XV. Of the Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat.
THe Ulcers of the Mouth, are caused through sharp and salt Humors, or of
Vapors from several parts ascending to the Jaws.

They often happen to those that have hot Livers, or malignant Fevers; and to
such that are tormented with Venereal distempers, etc.

If Age and strength will permit, this Cure ought to be began with
Blood-letting, for it draws back the humors, and moderateth their sharpness
by cooling the Body.

You may also apply Horse-leeches behind the Ears, and under the Chin, and
Blistering Plasters to the Neck-pit, and the next day after Bleeding, and as
need shall require, purge with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, etc. (for
they beyond any, does expel sharp, salt humors, and also the evil and poisonous
Humors offending the Nose, Mouth, and Throat, too often caused by Mercurial
Medicines) after which make use of the Gargarism made as follows.

Take the distilled water of Honey-suckles, Plantane and Rose Water, of each
two ounces, Syrup of dried Red-Roses, and Syrup of Mulberries, of each one
ounce, Sugar of Lead two drams, mix them well together, and often Gargle the
Mouth therewith.

Or take Knot-grass, Plantane-leaves, and Bramble-leaves, of each two good
handfuls, Pomgranate-flowers, red and yellow Sanders, of each one ounce, boil
these in a sufficient quantity of Running-water to the Consumption of half,
then strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Mulberries, and dried Red-Roses to
make it sweet, and use it as before directed, if there be any inflammation, you
may add thereto some juice of Purslain, Houseleek, and Nightshade, and a small
quantity of Sal Prunellae, or raw Alum, but let it not be made too sharp with
either.

And if there be no Inflammation, you may touch the Ulcer with a stick with a
ragg tied to the end thereof dipped first in the Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol,
and it helps forthwith, if the Ulcer be simple; but to Children, mix with these
Spirits Honey of Roses, so that it may be but a little sharp, and with a little
Lint fastened to the end of a Stick, etc. apply it.

Or take the juice of Housleek, and fresh Cream, mix them well together, and
anoint your Mouth therewith.

When the Mouth and Almonds are so much Ulcerated, that the Patient cannot
swallow.

Take the distilled water of Elder-flowers, Plantane-water, and the water
distilled from the Black-Thorn-flowers, of each alike, dissolve therein as much
Venus soap as a Walnut, sweeten it with a small quantity of the Syrup of
Mulberries, and gargle the Mouth often therewith, if these take not effect, add
to either of the Gargarisms a small quantity of Egyptiacum, and gargle
therewith.

Another excellent remedy for the Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, etc.

Take Vine-leaves, or the tops when the Leaves are not to be had, the inward
bark of the Elm-tree, of each one handful, Roch-Allum, Ginger grossly beaten, of
each half an ounce, Album Graecum one ounce, boil all these in one quart of
water, to the consumption of half, strain it and sweeten it with honey or Syrup
of Mulberries, and gargle the Mouth and Throat often therewith; this is most
proper where there is no Inflammation.

Or take Plantane-water eight ounces, Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Mulberries
of each two ounces, Sugar of Lead six drams, Roman-Vitriol one dram, mix them
together, and use it as afore-directed, for they are of wonderful Virtue to
help the Ulcers in the Mouth, Pallet, and Throat, caused by the French Pox,
etc. Those and such like Gargarisms, will prove the more effectual if the body
be well purged with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, with which I have
cured many, that for some years before had been sorely troubled with red and
watery Eyes, and full of filthy matter caused through the forementioned disease.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Quinzy.
THe Quinzy is an Inflammation of the Throat and Jaws, of which there are
(according to Authors) four sorts:

The first is when the Jaws are inflamed.

The second is when neither the Jaws nor other parts either inward or outward
are inflamed, and yet the Patient in danger of choking.

The third is when the inward and outward parts about the Throat are inflamed.

The fourth is, when the Joints between the Head and Neck are loosened, and the
part appear hollow, and the Patient sensible of pain when but touched.

The Quinzy is caused through some flux of Humors which fall from the Head to
the Throat, etc. or from abundance of Blood preternaturally flowing to the
foresaid parts; and sometimes it may be caused from vapors arising from the
Stomach to the Throat, etc.

The Quinzy is known by the Signs following:

The Patient breathes with much difficulty, except the Neck be held upright,
and can hardly swallow without violent pain.

In some there appears redness in the face and Neck, and a Fever, etc.

This Distemper often kills in four and twenty hours.

Therefore without delay open a Vein in the Arm upon the same side, or open the
Vein under the Tongue. Some with good snccess open the Jugular Veins. But take
not the Blood forth at once, but at several times, lest the Patient faint, etc.

Let the Incision be somewhat large, lest the thinner part of the Blood come
forth, and leave the grosser part behind, which is many times the absolute
Cause of this deadly Distemper.

If the Patient be of the Female Sex, open the Vein in the Anckles; more
especially if her Monthly Sickness be obstructed.

When Bleeding cannot with Convenience be admitted, Give to the Patient the
Glister made as follows:

Take Calamint, Rue, Sage, Betony, Origan, Peny-Royal and Hysop, of each half a
handful; the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, and Seselis, of each three drams; the
lesser Centaury one handful, the Roots of Polipody four ounces, Agarick two
drams, Pulp of Colocinthidos one dram and a half; Boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water, to the consumption of half, strain it, and take thereof one
pint: To which add, Benedicta Laxativa, and Hiera Piera, of each one ounce,
Honey of Roses one ounce, Diaphenicon four drams, Oil of Rue, Bays, and Castor,
of each half an ounce, Salt Gemme one dram: Mix them all well together.

And give it to the Patient Glister-ways.

Or instead thereof let him take the following Potion:

Take of the Lenitive Electuary one ounce, Cream of Tartar ten grains, Rosin of
Jallap six grains, the distilled Water of Fumatory or Cichory four Ounces.
Being mixed together, give it in the morning to the Patient fasting.

Or take of the best Senna in very fine Powder one ounce, Ginger one dram,
Clarified Honey two ounces; let them be well mixed together by simpering over
the fire: of which let the Patient take as much as a large Nutmeg at a time,
which will keep the Body open, and in such cases be of excellent Use.

And often take of the Drink made as follows, especially if inclinable to a
Fever.

Take the best Pruins two pounds, Wood Sorrel and Dandelion, of each one
handful and a half; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity
of running water, to the consumption of half: Strain it and keep it for use.

And let the Patient gargle his Mouth and Throat with the Gargarism made as
follows:

Take Oaken Leaves one handful, Flowers of Roses and Pomegranates, of each one
pugil and a half; the Rind of Pomgranates half an ounce, Burnt Allom twenty
grains. Being cut and bruised, boil them in a pint of Plantane or running
Water, to the consumption of half, strain it, and add thereto Syrup of
Mulberries two ounces; mix them together, and gargle therewith.

Or take Ground-Ivyor Ale-hoof, the Leaves of Violets, of each half a handful,
Dandelion one handful and a half; boil them in a pint and half of Barley-water,
strain it, and dissolve therein Honey of Roses one ounce and a half, Spirit of
Vitriol twenty drops; mix them well together, and make use thereof as
afore-directed.

Or take Nightshade, Plantane, Woodbineleaves and Bramble-leaves, of each one
handful; boil them in one quart of water, to the consumption of half, strain
it, and add thereto Syrup of Mulberries three ounces, Sal Prunella one dram
and a half; mix them, and make a Gargarism thereof.

And to heal the parts excoriated, Take Honey of Roses, and Syrup of
Mulberries, and Album Graecum, and let it dissolve in your mouth, swallowing
the same.

Or take the Bark of Pomgranates two drams, the Flowers of the same one pugil,
Liquorish three drams, Jujubes in numbertwelve, three Figs, Raisins three
drams; being cut and bruised, boil them in a pint and a half of Barly-water;
strain it, and dissolve therein Syrup of Maidenhair and Honey of Roses, of
each one ounce, and gargle your Mouth therewith.

Or take Elder-Flowers and the Flowers of Red Roses, of each one handful, Album
Graecum one dram; boil them in a sufficient quantity of thin Beer or Ale, then
strain it, and add thereto Sugar of Lead and Sal Prunella, of each one
scruple, sweeten it with the Syrup of Mulberries, and gargle your Mouth etc.
therewith, for it heals to admiration.

You may apply to the forepart of the Throat outwardly the Plaster made as
follows:

Take the Powder of Album Graecum and Wheat Flower, of each alike, Oil of
Camomil half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of the best Honey make them
up into a Plaster.

Or take the Roots of Marshmallows, White Lillies, of each one ounce, the
Powder of a Swallows Nest and Album Graecum, of each half an ounce, eight or
ten Figs; boil them in Beet or Ale, strain it, and add thereto the Flower of
Linseed, Wheat Flower, of each one ounce, the Flower of Fennugreek, and the
Flower of the Seeds of Marshmallows, of each two ounces, the Yolks of two
New-laid Eggs, Saffron two drams, Oil of Camomil two ounces, mix them, and make
Plaistrrs thereof, and apply them hot, as before directed.

Or take Oil of White Lillies, and Oil of Orris, of each one Ounce and a half,
the Juice of Onions two ounces, being boiled two or three walms, add thereto
two drams of the Powder of a Swallows Nest; and with a sufficient quantity of
Wax and Pitch, make a Plaster thereof according to Arr, and apply it to the
forepart of the Neck.

And sometimes you may anoint the Neck with Oil of Lillies, Camomil, and Dill,
etc. And let the Patient drink no Brandy, neither any other stronger Liquors,
for they inflame the part, and oftentimes prove mortal.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Kings Evil.
THe Kings Evil is a Distemper that possesses the Throat etc. with
preternatural Tumors.

The Cause of this Disease is Phlegm, oftentimes mixed with Melancholy; also the
eating of gross and raw Diet, drinking filthy waters, etc. may be the Cause
thereof.

Of those Tumors, in some there are but few, in others many. Such as have but
few, moveable, slight, shallow and thin, may be resolved, or be taken out by
incision, or be broke without danger, by Causticks, etc. but such as are hard,
malignant, and fixed, or being near the Weasand or Windpipe, large and joined
with the Veins, are perilous. This Disease commonly possesses the Elbows,
Hands, and Feet, and many other parts of the Body besides the Throat.

For the Cure of this Disease:

In the first place let the matter offending be evacuated, and a Diet of light
Digestion directed for the Patient.

If the Body abound with fullness, it may be necessary to open a Vein, and purge
very well with the Medicines made as follows:

Take of the Pills called Arthriticae, and Extractum Rudii, of each one dram,
Rosin of Jallap and Mercurius Dulcis six times sublimed, of each one scruple,
with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Fumatory, make them up into twenty
Pills, whereof take two at Night and three in the Morning, (more or less
according to the Age and Strength of the Patient) repeating the same as need
requires.

Or take Hermodactils, Turbinth, of each two ounces, the Roots of Sope-wort one
ounce and a half; the Roots of Angelica one dram, the best Senne one ounce,
fine Scamony four scruples. Being made all inno fine Powder, and mixed well
together, take thereof in the Syrup of Roses, from one dram to two drams,
adding to every dose four or five grains of Mercurius Dulcis. Give this every
second or third morning for fifteen or twenty days together.

Or take of Hiera with Agarick one dram, Pills of Cothia two drams, Troches
Alhandal and Myrrh of each one scruple, the Chemical Oil of Fennal two drops,
with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Stechados, make them up into twenty
Pills, and take them as afore-directed.

Or take of my Cathartique and Diuretic Pills twice or thrice a week: for they
absolutely help this Disease, because they purge Phlegm, etc. to admiration.

During the Cure, let the Patient drink of the following Liquor as of Ordinary
Drink,

Take Elder-Bark, Smallage, Clivers, Herb Robert, Sope-wort, Fumatory, the
Leaves and Roots of Pilewort, of each three good handfuls, Polipody half a
pound; being cut and bruised in a thin Cloth, hang them in some convenient
Vessel, and pour thereto a sufficient quantity of New Beer or Ale (you cannot
well make it too strong of the Herbs) and let it work together; when fit to
drink make use thereof as occasion serves, and you will have no cause to find
fault with me.

Or take the Roots of Filipendula and Pilewort, of each two drams, Tansie,
Mouse-Ear, Pimpernel, of each one dram, Round Birthwort, the Roots of Radishes
and Sopewort, of each half a dram: Cut and bruise them, and boil them in three
Pints of white Wine to the consumption of the third part; strain it, and add
thereto of Oxymel simple three Ounces.

Of which let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint at a time, three times a
day.

Plasters and Oils proper to dissolve the Swellings, hard Knots and Kernels,
are as follows:

Take the Plaster of Frogs with Mercury, spread it upon Linen Cloth, and
apply it to the parts affected. But be sure to purge now and then in the use
thereof.

Or make use of the Plaster of Diachylom with Gum, or the Plaster of
Galbanum, for they are all very good to dissolve the Tumors. But the first
neglect not.

To anoint the Tumors, take the Oil of Elder; for with that alone (with the
use of the internal Remedies) I have known many perfectly cured.

Or take the Oil or Ointment made of Briony-Roots, and use it as before directed.

If those Sores chance to break, as oftentimes they do, foment the Sores with a
Sponge dipped in Limewater.

Or take the Roots of Briony, Marsh-Mallow-Roots, and the Roots of Figwort and
Dwarf-Elder, of each one ounce, Flowers of Dwarf-Elder, Camomil, Melilot, and
Common Elder, of each one handful, Seeds of Annis and Fennugreek, of each half
an ounce. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of
half or more, and apply it hot to the part for the space of half an hour.

After which, anoint it with the Ointment made as follows:

Take the Fat of a Man, or the Fat of a Bear, Goose and Cock's Fat, of each
half an Ounce; the Ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, Oil of Lillies and
Aqua-Vitae, of each one ounce. Mix them well, and make an Ointment thereof.

Or when it breaks, wash the Sores with Crab-Verjuice and Butter, and sometimes
touch the Ulcers with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur.

And to heal the Sores after the Body is well purged,

Take Letharge of Gold what quantity you please, make it into very fine Powder,
and with a sufficient quantity of Sallet Oil and strong Vinegar, being beaten
well together, apply it to the Sores Plaister-ways, repeating the same as need
require.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Asthma, or Difficulty of Breathing.
DIfficulty of Breathing is commonly caused of a Phlegmatic Humor which falls
from the Head to the Lungs, and stops the Winde-pipe, etc. And often times by
watery Humors conveyed into the Lungs, (as in hydropical persons) causes an
Asthma, or difficulty of Breathing.

As touching the Cure of this Disease, (Especially in Hydropical and
Scorbutical Constitutions)

In the first place make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they
do not only make thin and cleanse, but perfectly expel all tough and gross
humors which (for the most part) engender this Disease.

Or take of the choicest Agarick two drams, Ginger one scruple, Salt Gem three
grains; being grossly beaten, infuse them all night in two ounces of sweet
White Wind, and the distilled Water of Fennel and Wormwood, of each one ounce,
strain it, and add thereto Oxymel of Squills half an ounce, and the Electuary
called Indi Majoris two drams; make it into a Potion, and drink it off all at
once in the morning fasting.

Pills of Cochia and Agarick, and Pills of Hiera Picra made up with Honey, are
also very profitable in such cases. Sometimes strong Glisters will be of
excellent use.

And notwithstanding making use of the aforesaid Medicines, (especially upon
the intermitting days) take of the following Julip, for to my knowledge it is
of excellent use.

Take the Distilled Water of Scabios, small Cinamon-Water, of each three
ounces, Syrup of Liquorish, Syrup of Hoarhound, Oxymel of Squills, and Lohoch
Sanum, of each one ounce, Spirit or Oil of Vitriol twenty drops; mix them well
together, and make a Julip thereof, which take one or two Spoonfuls first and
last, two hours before Dinner, and two hours after.

Or take Blew Currants one pound, the Tops of Nettles two handfuls, boil them in
two quarts of Water to the consumption of half, strain it, and let the Patient
drink often thereof.

Or take off the Syrup of Coltsfoot, Liquorish, Hoarbound, of each one ounce,
Oxymel simple half an ounce; mix them, and let the Patient take thereof often.

Or take the Roots of Elicampane, Juniper Berries, and Bay Berries husked, of
each half an ounce, Sugar Candy one ounce, being made into fine Powder with a
sufficient quantity of Honey or Syrup of Hysop, make them up into an Electuary,
of which take as much as a Nutmeg first and last, etc.

Or take White Sugar Candy one ounce, Oil of sweet Almonds three ounces, mix
them, and give it as afore-directed.

Or take Flower of Sulphur half an ounce, Cinnamon in fine Powder one dram, with
a sufficient quantity of Hogs Fat, make them up into Pills as big as gray
Pease, and take thereof three at a time, first and last.

A Sea-Onion roasted, and beaten well with a sufficient quantity of Honey, and
given to the Patient so much as a Nutmeg at a time, is of excellent use.

Or take the tops of Rosemary, Hysop, of each one handful, Figs, Liquorish, of
each two ounces. Being cut and bruised, boil them in one quart of Spring Water
to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto of the best Honey
eight ounces; let it just boil up again, scum it, and keep it for use, of which
take two or three spoonfuls first and last, and at any other time.

This Method is not only proper in the Asthma, or difficulty in Breathing, but
for the Cough.

Bleeding is very necessary in this Distemper, therefore open a Vein in the Fit
(especially) if the Blood seem to abound. But if the Disease be of long
continuance, bleed not without good Advice, lest the Natural Heat should
thereby be diminished, and Phlegm increased, etc.

The Ointment made as follows will also be very profitable.

Take Duck's and Hen's Fat, of each one dram, Oil of Rue and Dill, of each two
drams, Oil of Orris half an ounce; mix them together, and anoint the Breast
therewith, first tubbing the same with a hot course Linen Cloth.

Or take Oil of Orris, Camomil and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce, Hens Fat,
one dram, the Powder of Orris and Marsh-Mallow-Roots of each one dram and a
half, the Meal of Fennugreek and Linseed, of each two drams, Gum Ammoniacum
dissolved in Wine, one dram; with a sufficient quantity of Wax, make it into an
Ointment, and anoint the Breast therewith as afore-directed: for it does not
only molifie but discuss the matter offending.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Pleuresie.
THe Pleuresie is an inward Inflammation or a Postumation of the upper Skin
girding the Ribs, etc.

This Disease is often times caused through abundance of hot Blood, flowing
preternaturally to the forementioned upper Skin.

The principal Signs are, Difficulty of Breathing, a very troublesome Cough, a
continual Fever, and a violent Pricking pain, a sharp and hard Pulse.

As touching the Cure,

In short, if the Body do abound with filthy Humors, or be full of Blood,
forthwith open the Liver-Vein on the same side, for with so doing, Blood is not
only drawn, but the part grieved quickly purged.

After Blood-letting (especially the Body being Costive) make use of the
following Glister; or if the Disease be not violent, make use of the Glister
before Bleeding.

Take the Leaves of Spinach, Mallows, Mercury, both sorts of Endives, and the
Leaves of purple Violets, of each one handful, Barley not bruised one ounce;
boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of the third
part, strain it, and to one pint thereof add of Cassia newly drawn one ounce
and a half, fresh Butter half an ounce, Oil of Violets and Camomil, of each two
drams, Common Salt one dram; being well mixed together make a Glister, and put
it up according to Art.

Or take of the Lenitive Electuary six drams, Syrup of Violets and Roses, of
each half an ounce, Cream of Tartar two scruples, the Distilled Water of
Cichory or Fumatory four ounces; being mixed together, take it in the morning
all at once.

And if the Patient have still a Fever,

Take fresh Pruuns one pound, Blew Currants half a pound, Wood Sorrel one good
handful; boil them in three quarts of Spring Water to the consumption of the
third part, and strain it, and let the Patient drink often thereof.

Take one Pippin the Core being taken out, and fill the hole with the Gum
called Olibanum; after which toast it till it become soft, then take off the
skin from the Apple, and mix them well together, and take it all at once, for
to admiration it removes the pain, I having made trial thereof one hundred
times.

The Powder of Olibanum taken from one scruple to one dram, in the Pap of a
roasted Apple at night, does the same, and with less trouble.

Some to ease the violent pain in this Discase, give Laudanum and Syrup of
Poppies, etc. but they must be taken in small quantities, lest they stop
spitting, and bind the breasts, from which sometimes death follows, so attempt
them not without good advice.

Take Horse-dung, and infuse the same in the distilled water of Carduus for a
small time, then strain it, and give thereof to the Patient, for it also
powerfully disperses and abates the pain.

Or take the powder of Hens-dung (which is white) one dram, Carduus water four
ounces, Syrup of Violets half an ounce, and give it to the Patient warm, for it
has the aforementioned virtue.

Or take Hempseed bruised one ounce, white Hens-dung and Stone-Horse-dung, of
each half an ounce, infuse them for twelve hours in six ounces of
Carduus-water, strain it and drink it off warm all at once.

Or take from one scruple to a dram of prepared Goats Blood in the aforesaid
water, for it does effect the same.

Or you may take the Spirit of Soot, from five drops to ten, in Carduus-water,
and the bright flakes of Soot made of wood fire, beaten into fine powder, and
given from two scruples to one dram, is of excellent use, and very safe.

You may apply outwardly the following Fomentation, etc.

Take the Flowers of Dill, Melilot, and Camomil, of each two or three handfuls,
Bran, the Powder of Fennugreek, Linseed and Melons, of each an ounce and a
half, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and bath the part grieved
therewith; or put some of the Decoction with the Herbs into Bladders, or dip
therein a large sponge, and apply it to the part affected hot.

Or make use of the Plaster made as follows:

Take the Flowers of Tapsus Barbatus, Camomil and Dill, of each half a handful,
Fennugreek, Anniseed, and Linseed, of each a quarter of an ounce, Barly-flower
two ounces; being all bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water,
till they become somewhat thick, after which add thereto the Oil of Camomil and
Dill, of each one ounce, boil them again, and then add the Yolks of two
new-laid Eggs, and Saffron beat into Powder one scruple and a half, and make a
Plaster thereof, which apply warm to the part affected.

Some use Cupping-glasses with Scarification, which I shall leave to the
discretion of the Ingenious Physician.

CHAP. XX. Of the Ptisick or Consumption.
THough the Ptisick signifies a Consumption, yet it may be most properly taken
for that Leanness of Body which follows an Ulcer in the Lungs.

This Disease is commonly caused through sharp fretting and gnawing Humors,
which falls from the Head upon the Lungs.

It is also caused through Blood and matter, which continue after the breaking
out of the same in such that have the Pleuresie, and sometimes the Dropsy and
French Disease, etc. are the very principal Causes of the Consumption.

The chief Signs of this Distemper are known by flowing of phlegm from the Head
upon the Lungs, which causes a Tickling and small Cough, the Spittle somewhat
hot and bitter, the whole Body wastes, and the flesh becomes exceeding loose,
the Hair falls off, the Nostrils very thin and sharp, the Temples fallen down,
the Eyes hollow, the Balls of the Cheeks swarthy or Leaden colored, the
Shoulder-Bones stick out, the Patient often vexed with a Hectic or burning
Fever, and breathes with much difficulty, the Nails become pale and crooked,
the Stomach and Belly often tormented with violent pain, and much troubled with
thirst, and if the Lungs are ulcerated, what the Patient spits will be of a
strong foetid or stinking Smell.

And the Cure often proves very difficult.

However in the first place, let the Patient (if possible) be removed into some
wholesome place where the Air is clear and temperate, neither too hot nor too
cold.

And if you perceive the Lungs to be ulcerated, purge once a week with the
following Medicines, especially where the Body is not become very lean.

Take Cassia newly drawn one ounce, the fine Powder of Liquorish two scruples,
and make a Bolus thereof, which give to the Patient in the morning.

Or take of the choicest Manna from one ounce to two ounces, and dissolve it in
Chicken-Broth, etc. and drink it off as afore-directed.

Or take Liquorish, Raisins of the Sun stoned, Flowers of Bugloss and Violets,
of each three drams, Barley one ounce and a half, Jujubes four in number; being
cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to three or four
ounces, to which add two ounces of the distilled water of Scabios, wherein have
been first infused Yellow Sanders and the best Rubarb, of each four scruples,
Manna one ounce, Syrup of Roses three drams, (add the two latter last) being
mixed together, make a potion thereof, which take in the morning.

But in the beginning of this Disease you may give stronger Purges, nothing
more proper than my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they above all
purging Medicines carry off the salt and sharp Catarrh which is the principal
Cause of such Ulcers.

After which make use of the following Medicine, with which I have done wonders
in such cases.

Take White-Rose-water, one ounce, white Sugar Candy six drams, the Yolk of one
new-laid Egg, new Milk warm from the Cow, or made so, a quarter of a pint;
being beaten well together, let the Patient drink it all at once, repeating the
same morning and evening for some time together.

You may believe me, this very Medicine is worth an hundred times the price of
the Book, which I freely communicate.

To young Children you may make use of a wholesome Woman's Milk; and being mixed
as aforesaid will serve three or four times; but the best way is still to make
it up fresh, so take but the third or fourth part of each.

Goats Milk is also of wonderful use, more especially if taken as
afore-directed. And be assured that Milk is one of the best Medicines against
the Ptisick or Consumption.

Another Excellent Remedy against the Consumption.
Take all the Blood that will be had forth of a Pig or Swine in his full
strength, and stir it as it is drawn forth that it may not congeal; to which
add the Powder of Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace and Ginger, of each one ounce, Saffron,
and the Flowers of Rosemary, of each two drams; and forthwith distill it in a
Glass with a very gentle fire: The Dose is from three Spoonfuls to six or
eight, in so much Tent or Sack, three times a day.

Or take the Powder called Pulvis Haley one ounce, Conserve of Red Roses two
ounces, Conserve of Cowslips one ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Violets, make them up into an Electuary, and make it somewhat sharp by mixing
therewith some few drops of Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur.

And take thereof first and last as much as a Walnut, for it is of wonderful
profit to such that are Hectic.

Or take Flower of Brimston, and the powder of the best Frankincense, of each
one scruple, Saffron three grains, put them into an Apple, the Core being cut
forth, and roast it, after which let the Patient eat it with White Sugar Candy
for ten or twelve days together.

New strong Ale wherein is boiled Burdock-Roots, Liquorish and Honey, is of
Excellent Use, as I have often proved; and the Poor may with much ease attain
to this Drink.

The Herb Burnet made into fine Powder, and White Sugar Candy, of each one
dram, taken often in Broth, is also very good.

Or take White Wind three pints, Sugar Candy four ounces, the Roots of
Elicampane one ounce, Green Coltsfoot two ounces, Violet Flowers one ounce and
a half, the Roots of Angelica ten drams, being cut and bruised very small, boil
them in a Stone Bottle close stopped, (the Cork tied down with a piece of
strong Linen Cloth) for three hours in a pot of water, and open it not till it
be cold; after which strain it, and take three or four spoonfuls first and
last, and at any time of the day. With this very Medicine after I had gently
purged a Painter, I perfectly cured him in few days, though he was by all his
friends left for a dead man, he was so much consumed, and did stink that none
could endure to come near him.

I know an eminent Physician and several other persons that have for these many
years been preserved by the foresaid Medicine, taking it according to my
Directions, and by taking the old Conserve of Red Roses when he took not the
former.

Sugar of Roses drunk in New Milk, made as follows, is also of most admirable
Use.

Take of the best Red-Rose-Buds, the whites being cut off, and dried suddenly
in the Sun, two ounces, Double-Refined-Sugar two pounds, being melted in the
Juice of Roses and Rose Water, of each four ounces. Being by degrees consumed,
put in the powder of the Rose-Leaves, and mix them well together, and put it
upon a Marble Stone, and make it up into Lozenges according to Art.

Natural Balsom is of excellent use for such that have Ulcers in the Lungs, if
you make White-Sugar-Candy up into Pills as big as Gray Pease therewith, and
take one fasting every Morning, for some Time together.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Pain in the Stomach.
PAin in the Stomach is commonly caused through corrupt and poisonous fretting
Humors contained therein; and oftentimes by Worms gnawing the Tunicles
thereof. Sometimes through sharp and salt phlegm, and through putrid matter sent
into the Stomach, from some imposthume broke either in the Breast or Liver.
Sharp Vapors from close corrupt Humors sometimes cause pain, sometimes wind
contained in the hollow part of the Stomach, does not only cause pain therein,
but swelling, etc.

If the pain of the Stomach be caused through flatulent or windy matter, make
use of the Glister made as follows.

Take Calamint, Penniroyal, Rue, Origan, the lesser Centaury, of each one
handful, Comin-seeds, Annis, Fennel and Carrot-seeds, of each two drams; being
cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the
consumption of half, then strain it, and add to one Pint thereof Benedicta
Laxativa one ounce, Diacatholicon half an ounce, Oil of Rue and Dill, of each
one ounce, the Chemical Oil of Juniper and Bay Berries, of each seven drops;
being well mixed together, make a Glister thereof, and put it up according to
Art.

Or take Hyppocrass and Sack, of each half a pint, Oil of Rue and Aqua-vitae,
of each one ounce, Oil of Cinnamon and Juniper, of each six drop; being mixed
well together, put it up Glister-ways.

Or take of the best White Wind twelve ounces, Oil of Amber, Cloves, Juniper
and Cinnamon, of each five drops; mix them together, and put it up warm, for it
gives present ease.

After which, Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agarick two drams, Oil of Nutmegs
and Janiper-berries, of each five drops: mix them together, and make thereof
fifteen Pills, of which let the Patient take two at night, and three in the
morning, until they are all taken.

But if the pain comes from sharp and Choleric Humors, or Phlegm, Imposthumes
or Ulcerations, there is no better Medicine than my Cathartique and Diuretique
Pills.

The more to ease the pain,

Take Diaphaenicon three or four drams, Phylonium Romanum two scruples, the
distilled Water of Camomil four ounces, Syrup of Mints half an ounce; being
mixed together give it to the Patient going to Bed, for this very Medicine has
done much good.

Or take Diasatyrion one ounce, Sal Prunella half an ounce, Oil of Cinnamon
three drops, mix them well together, and take as much as a Nutmeg every morning
in Wormwood-wine or Beer, repeating the same, as need require.

If the Stomach be cold, or full of viscous and tough phlegm, drink sometimes
(notwithstanding taking the Pills) the Liquor made as follows:

Take Pellitory of Spain two drams, Gallingal one dram, bruise them grossly, and
boil it in a pint and a half of the best White Wind, to the consumption of the
third part, after which strain it, and drink a quarter of a pint at a time, for
four mornings together, fasting after it each time two hours; and with so doing
you will have cause to give me thanks.

Or take Cinnamon half an ounce, Cardamomseeds, Cloves and Gallangal, Saffron,
White-Pepper, Bay Berries, of each one dram, Double-Refined-Sugar three ounces,
beat all these into fine Powder, mix therewith a small quantity of the best
Sack, stirring it well together, and eat thereof with a little Bread first and
last, etc.

Or take Carduus, Centaury and Balm, Wormwood and Agrimony, of each a like
quantity, boil them in new Milk, after which turn it with White Wind or Ale;
then strain it, and drink a good dranght thereof hot, as aforedirected; for it
takes away the pain of the Stomach to admiration.

Or take Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Ginger, of each two drams, Gallingal one
dram, Mace three drams, Sugar one pound, being all beat to very fine powder,
take thereof a small quantity at any time, for it is very profitable.

Or to take away the pain of the Stomach, make use of the Medicines following.

Take Oil of Nutmegs, Cloves, and Oil of Mace, of each a like; being mixed
together, anoint the pit of the Stomach therewith.

Or you may take red Mints, being cut small, mix them with Rye Paste, and warm
it in a Drying Pan, and apply it to the Stomach, and when it is cold make it
hot again, and do as afore-directed.

Or take white Frankincense, being spread upon Sheeps Leather apply it hot to
the Stomach, and let it there remain four or five days.

Or apply to the Stomach the following Plaster:

Take Bread four ounces, and boil it in a sufficient quantity of Milk, with
half a handful of Spermint cut small; and toward the latter end of the
boiling, add thereto the yolks of two or three Eggs, Saffron in powder one
dram, and apply thereof hot to the pit of the Stomach. These and suchlike I
have often known to take away the violent pain in the Stomach. And after the
pain is gone, take now and then a dose of the foresaid Pills, lest it return
again.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Weakness of the Liver.
THe weakness of the Liver is caused by Distempers which are either hot, cold,
moist, or dry.

The hot Distemper does not only burn up the humors which were before in the
Liver, but the Humors conveyed thereunto by the Mesentery-Veins.

The cold Distemper does cause the crude and phlegmatic humor that already is
contained in the Liver, to be gross and very tough, and exceeding hard to be
removed; and the Humors conveyed to the Liver are left many times but half
digested.

The dry Distemper does cause the Humors to be the more dry and thick.

And the moist Distemper of the Liver does cause the Humors to become more
thin and watery, etc.

The Signs of this Disease are many, which I shall here omit. And so come to
show the way to cure the hot Distemper of the Liver, etc.

In the first place let the Patient make use of such Diet as will by degrees
cool, as Wood Sorrel, Endive, Lettuce, Sow-thistles, and Succory; being boiled
in equal parts of whitewine and water, strain it, and sweeten it with the Syrup
of Violets, whereof let the Patient take as often as he pleases.

Or take Liverwort, Endive and Succory, of each two or three handfuls, Barley
husked one pound; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
water, to the consumption of the third part; after which strain it, and keep it
for the foresaid use.

You may add there to some Syrup of Pomgranates, or Syrup of Vinegar-Simple.

Let the Patient eat Raisins of the Sun, Oranges, Lemons, and sweet Almonds,
and let his meat be of light digestion, as Chickens, Larks, and Veal, etc. And
abstain from all Meats or Drinks wherein is Honey mixed. And let him make use
of the Lozenges made as follows.

Take Raisins of the Sun one ounce, Powder of Diatrion Santalon, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, of each one dram and a half, the Flowers of Endive and Red Roses, of
each two scruples, White Sanders, Flowers of Squinant, of each one scruple,
White Sugar Double-Refined, five or six ounces, and make them up into Lozenges
with the distilled Water of Cichory and Endive, for they much strengthen and
cool the Liver.

Or make Pulvis Haly into an Electuary with Syrup of Violets, and take as much
as a Nutmeg first and last.

Or let the Patient take once a week one scruple or half a dram of Phylonium
Romanum at night going to Bed.

Or take the Distilled Water of Strawberry-Leaves three Pints, Liverwort one
good handful bruised; being boiled to the consumption of the third part, strain
it and sweeten it with the Syrup of Spermint, and take thereof first and last,
and at any time, for it wonderfully cools the hot Distemper of the Liver.

Or take the Distilled Water of Woodbind-Flowers, Cichory, and Sorrel-Water, of
each a like, and sweeten it with Syrup of Quinces, and drink often thereof.

Or take the Liver of a Calf, and one peck of Sage, being cut small distill them
in a Glass Limbeck, and drink thereof every night last going to Bed.

Or take Hearts Tongue, and Bramble-leaves, of each alike; being boiled in water
to the consumption of half, strain it, and drink thereof.

You may also anoint the Region of the Liver with Oil of Lillies and Roses
mixed together, or bath with the decoction of Roses, Camomil and Quinces.

Or take Oil of Quinces, Water Lillies and Roses, of each alike; or boil Dates
and a small quantity of Wormwood in the aforesaid Oils, and make a Sponge or
Wool moist therein, and apply it to the part abovementioned.

In the Cold Distemper of the Liver:
Take the Confection called Diacinamomi, Diasatyrion, of each one ounce, Syrup
of Mints half an ounce; being mixed well together, take as much as a Nutmeg
first and last.

Or take of the Conserve of Sage two ounces, Powder of Gallingal half an ounce,
make them up into an Electuary with Syrup of Wormwood, and take thereof as
afore-directed.

Or take the Roots of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, of each two drams, Asarum,
Calamint, Wormwood, Succory, Origan, Agrimony, Hysop, Spermint, of each one
handful, Seeds of Caraway, Fennel, Annis, Daucus and Comin, of each half an
ounce, Cinnamon and Squinant, of each three drams, Flowers of Camomil and Roses,
of each one handful, Mastick one dram; boil these in three pints of the best
White Wind, mixing therewith one quart of Spring Water, to the consumption of
the third part. After which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Wormwood one
ounce and a half, Syrup of Agrimony six ounces.

Being well mixed together, let the Patient drink four ounces at a time twice a
day, first in the morning, and two hours after Dinner.

Or let him take often of the Conserve of Wormwood, mixing therewith each time
a drop or two of the Chemical Oil.

Or drink some drops of the Spirit in Wine first and last, two hours before
Dinner, and two hours after.

Outwardly you may use the Oil of Wormwood, Nard, and Oil of Camomil mixed
together, making it hot.

Or take Nard Oil, Oil of Wormwood and Rue, of each one ounce and a half,
Spicknard, Squinant, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mastick, Wood of Aloes (all made into
fine Powder) of each two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the best Wax,
make them up into an Ointment.

And let the Patient make use of such meats as are of light Digestion, which
are with all somewhat heating, and let him drink Wine at Meals that is thin,
and hot broth wherein is boiled Sage, Savory, Sauthernwood, Hysop, Fennel, and
Parsley, and such like.

In the moist Distemper of the Liver,
Let the Patient make use of drying Medicines, as the Decoction of Sasaphras,
Sa^saperilla, Lignum vita, and China, etc. and let him eat flesh well roasted,
and let him make use of dry Baths, or hot Houses.

Or take Venice Treacle one dram, Diaphoretick Antimony ten grains, Chemical
Oil of Wormwood five drops, mix them together, and drink it off in a Glass of
Sack, and sweat moderately. Thus do once or twice a week.

Or take Dialacca, Diacurcuma, and Syrup of Wormwood, of each one ounce, mix
them together, and take as much as a Nutmeg at a time morning and evening, for
it is not only good against the over-moistness of the Liver, but very good
against the Dropsy, because it strengthens the Liver, etc.

In the dry Distemper of the Liver,
The Patient ought to make use of moist Medicines; therefore if the Body be
costive, take at night going to Bed one ounce of the Lenitive Electuary, or of
Cassia newly drawn; with either of which mix two or three drops of the Chemical
Oil of Wormwood, for that will strengthen the Liver.

You may take the powder of a VVolfs Liver well prepared, one dram; the
distilled Water of Strawberries four ounces, Syrup of Violets half an ounce;
being mixed together drink it all at once in the morning, repeating the same as
need require.

The Livers of young Rooks washed in White Wind, and after dried, and made into
fine powder, as aforesaid, is very profitable in such cases.

Or take half a dram every morning of Diamargaritum frigidum, or Diatragacanti
frigidi, or Pulvis Haly, as afore-directed, for I will assure you it is also
very profitable.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Stoppage of the Liver.
THe Stoppage of the Liver is a continual straightness of the Branches of the
Gate and hollow Vein, etc.

The cause of which stoppage is oftentimes viscous, gross and clammy
Excrements; sometimes the over-plenty of Humors causes stoppage, more
especially when they are tough and clammy, and cannot find a free passage.

The Signs are known by Grief and Heaviness about the right side, and
stretching forth. If this stoppage come of gross and tough humors, then
follows heaviness with sense of pain; but sometime ease, and then pain again.
Sometimes the Patient has a Fever, and sometimes no Fever. Oftentimes the
breath is short and very difficult, especially when the Patient goes up a
hill, or up a pair of stairs, or walks fast; because the parts stopped do
draw the Midriff downwards, and so hinders its free motion.

The Cure of this Distemper ought to be begun with Medicines that will cause
plentiful Evacuation of the whole Body by a potion or Pills agreeable to the
nature of the Distemper.

Therefore make use of the following Potion.

Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses six drams, Syrup of Cichory with
Rhubarb three drams, Salt of Tartar ten grains, Salt of Wormwood twelve grains,
with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Cichory, make a potion
thereof, which take in the morning fasting.

Or take Rosin of Scamony, and Rosin of Jallap, of each ten grains, Extract of
Rhubarb fifteen grains, Tartarum Vitriolatum twelve grains, Salt of Wormwood
five grains; with a sufficient quantity of the foresaid water, or the distilled
Water of Fumatory, make a Potion thereof, which drink as afore-directed.

Note either of these potions may serve the weaker sort twice, being equally
divided.

Or if you please take of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they very
powerfully open all manner of Obstructions, and strengthens the Liver besides.

And after the Patient has taken of either of the Potions, or the Pills
afore-directed, if the Body abound with fullness, open the Liver-Vein in the
right Arm, and draw forth such a quantity of Blood as may be thought requisite.

After which, make use of the following Broth:

Take Roots of Sparagus, Smallage, and Parsley, of each half an ounce, Agrimony,
Maidenhair and Hysop, of each one handful, Crystal of Tartar that is rightly
prepared one dram; boil them with a Neck of Mutton, or with a Chicken, and make
broth therewith every morning, for a week or nine days together.

Every second or third day you may infuse into this broth one dram of Anniseed,
which will keep the Body very soluble.

Or make use of the following Pills, for they also are good to remove
Obstructions.

Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agarick one ounce, the Troches of Agarick one
dram, the Powder of the lesser compound of Senne half an ounce, Aloes Rosate
two drams, the Powder of Steel one ounce and a half, the faecula of Briony,
Aron and Piony, round Birth-wort, Madder, Borax, Cloves, of each half a dram,
Salt of Mugwort one scruple, Spirit of Wormwood fifteen drops, the Powder of
Turpentine one dram; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Cichory, with
Rhubarb, make them up into a mass for Pills.

The Dose is from two scruples to one dram.

Or take Filings of Steel one ounce, Elicampane and Eringo-Roots, of each half
an ounce, Senne one ounce and a half, the inward Rind of Tamarisk two drams,
Epithimum half an ounce, Cinnamon and faecula of Briony, of each one dram, the
Powder of white, yellow and red Sanders, of each twenty grains, VVhite-wine,
and the distilled water of Agrimony, of each half a pint; being infused three
days in Balneo Maria, strain it, and take thereof three ounces every day, two
or three hours before Dinner.

Or make use of the following Syrup.

Take of the Filings of Steel infused in Vinegar two ounces, the middle Rind of
Tamarisk half an ounce, Cinnamon three drams, Ceterach half a handful, the
distilled Water of Agrimony and Wormwood, of each half a pint, White Wind
sixteen ounces, infuse them in some warm place for six or seven days; then
strain it, and add to the strained Liquor of the best double refined-Sugar one
pound and a half, and make a Syrup thereof according to Art, of which let the
Patient take two or three spoonfuls every morning fasting.

The following Pills are also of excellent use.

Take Rhubarb, Senne, Aloes, Succatrina, Agarick, Jallap, of each one dram,
Steel prepared with Sulphur half an ounce, Diarrhodon Abbatis half a dram,
Saffron ten grains, Mercurius Dulcis one dram; with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Roses solutive, make them up in a mass, and of every dram make six
Pills; of which take two at night, and three in the morning for fifteen or
twenty days together, if need require.

The more to strengthen the Liver, and take away the obstructions of the same,

Take the Roots of Ground Pine and Orris, the Seeds of Smallage and Annis, of
each two drams, Asarum two drams and a half, Camomile Flowers, Ginger, Cinnamon,
and Carraway Seed, of each one dram, Red-Nettle-seed, Gentian, Hoarhound and
Stacados, of each two drams; being all made into fine Powder, make them up into
an Electuary with a sufficient quantity of Oxymel of Squills.

This Medicine purges by Urine powerfully, and has done strange Cures.

You may take the quantity of a large Nutmeg at a time, first in the morning
and last at night; the stronger sort may take more.

You may apply outwardly the Ointments directed in the Cold Distemper of the
Liver, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the DROPSY.
THe Dropsy is a preternatural Collection of a thinnish Water, etc.

There are in general three sorts of Dropsies:

The first is called Ascites.

The second Tympanites.

The third Anasarca.

Ascites is a swelling of the Belly, and sometimes the Legs and Feet, caused by
a serous Humor, and being of the Nature of Water it is cold, but as it is salt
it has in it heat, caused by the nearness of the Bowels, and the more by the
putrefaction which is gathered by long continuance, from whence comes a fever
and thirst, namely from the stinking salt vapors which do infect the Orifice
or mouth of the Stomach.

The Dropsy called Tympanites has its Name from a Drum, because the Abdomen
is extended or stretched forth like to a Drum; and being struck with your hand
it sounds like it. This extention is from Wind shut up in the hollowness of the
Abdomen, and sometimes in the hollowness of the Guts. The wind which causes a
Tympany is seldom contained in the Belly alone, but most commonly mixed with
water; as in Ascites not only water, but wind also is contained. Both which
Dropsies have their Name of that which predominateth; if more wind than water,
it is a Tympany; if more water than wind, an Ascites; but if equal, between
both; they cannot always be discerned one from the other.

The chief cause of wind is a raw Humor and thick, whether Phlegm or
Melancholy, which being stirred and made thin by heat, sends forth thick
vapors, which are called flatus, and are hard to be dissolved. This thick raw
Humor is partly in the Stomach and Guts, but more especially between the
Membranes of the Midriff and Guts. So the more hard to be removed, than from
the hollowness of the parts aforesaid; Hippocrates says, They who have pains
and gripings about the Navel and Loins which cannot be removed, have a dry
Dropsy, etc.

The Dropsy called Anasarca comes of a phlegmatic Humor dispersed through the
whole Body, and therefore the Body is swelled and puffed up, and seems white,
from whence the Disease is called Leucophlegmatia. This Phlegm comes from a cold
Liver, which instead of good Blood produces raw and phlegmatic, and when it
cannot be turned into the substance of the parts, leaves the raw part thereof
unfit for nourishment upon them, and so makes them swell, from whence comes
Anasarca, or Leucophlegmatia: this Disease in the beginning is called Cachexia,
etc.

Most Dropsies are caused through great coldness of the Liver, or through other
parts overmuch cooled, which does bring the Liver oftentimes into the same
affect. The Liver is affected by the Spleen being cold, and by the Stomach and
Bowels; likewise by the Lungs, the Reins, and Diaphragma, and sometimes by the
immoderate flux of the Hemorthoids, or through the superfluity of Women's
monthly Sickness, but commonly through the obstruction or stoppage of the same:
and often through some other great affection of the Womb. And in all these the
Liver is found without unnatural swelling, and yet the Body affected with the
Dropsy, caused through the over-coldness of the Liver affected in the first
place; but afterward it grows hard, which may be seen in them which by
drinking overmuch small Beer and cold water have their Liver cooled, so that
the Dropsy forthwith follows, before the Liver is puffed up with knotty
swelling; some fall into this Distemper through the loss of much Blood, others
after long-continued Agues, etc.

But thousands in these days through the excessive drinking of Brandy, which
beyond all other Liquors commonly drunk, Burns and dries up the Radical
Moisture, hinders the circulation of the Blood, and turns it into a serous
matter, etc. from which follows sudden death: for I have not yet hardly seen an
old Brandy-Drinker to receive a perfect Cure.

Some fall into the Dropsy after the Gout, or through the violent pain of the
Huckle-Bones, commonly such whose Stomachs are dejected, and have no good
Digestion, and have an evil habit of Body, and troubled with the Jaundice,
forthwith follows the Dropsy. Sometimes those who have a Dysenteria and the
French Pox, the Dropsy also follows.

The Symptoms or Signs of the Dropsy are in brief as follows:
In that Dropsy called Ascites, the whole Belly is swelled up; and if it be
but stricken, there is heard such a kind of sound as a Bottle makes that is
not full of water; but the other parts, especially the upper parts of the Body,
are not swelled not puffed up.

In that Dropsy called Tympanites, the Belly is puffed up, and extended forth;
and being stricken, it makes a noise much like to a Tabor or Trimbrel: but the
other parts of the Body becomes lean.

In that Dropsy called Anasarca, etc. all the whole Body waxes loose, and as
it were like to a Sponge, so that it swells up, and is like to a dead Body.

In most Dropsies, the Feet, Ankles, and Legs, especially upon the Shin-Bones,
commonly swell first; sometimes the Belly and Privy Members, etc. so that if
you thrust your fingers thereon, the part will pit, and leave an impression;
the color of the Skin, especially the Face, is pale and swarthy, the Urine
little and thick, and oftentimes very red, the Breath short, the Appetite
dejected or altogether lost, a troublesome thirst, by reason of the sharpness
and saltness of the humor in which the Stomach swimmeth, (and if not in time
prevented) then follows a lingering Fever, etc. from the corruption of the
water, which at length does corrupt all the Bowels swimming therein.

As touching the most infallible Cure of Men in Dropsies ever yet found out,
observe truly the following Method, and take my word for it you will never
have cause to repent, neither have need to fool your selves with Medicines that
are not in the least profitable.

So in the first place know that one Diet may properly be made use of in all
sorts of Dropsies, provided it be of light digestion, and dry; for that meat
that is loose and moist, is apt to turn into water: therefore make use of
Partridges, Black-birds, Thrushes, Larks and Chickens, especially the extreme
parts; also of Rabbets, Hares, Goats and Mutton well roasted.

And let the Patient abstain from Milk, Buttermilk, Cheese and Whey, etc. and
from all sorts of Fish except Crabs, and from Eggs if not well roasted; and
from all kinds of broths, except such that have Parsley, Smallage, Penniroyal,
Garden-Cresses, Elder-Buds, Leeks, Onions and Garlic boiled therein; and from
all manner of Fruits except sweet Almonds, Nuts, Pomgranates, dry Figs, Pippins
roasted, and Pears baked, especially Wardens, and these to be taken moderately.

Let the Patient forbear drinking of Brandy, and all other hot Spirits,
sophisticated VVines, small Beer and Water of all sorts, for that destroys
many laboring under the Dropsy, witness the Wells.

Let your Drink the VVhite-VVine and Rhenish Wine, or Wormwood-Ale and
White Wind mixed together: Beer not too strong, nor too small, but for the most
part make use of the Drink directed hereafter; but be very sparing in all, and
endure thirst as much as possible; in order to it, mix Vinegar and steeled
Water together, and wash your mouth therewith, and often chew Mastick
therein, and eat of Sea-Biskets or hard Crusts of Bread, for it draws water
forth of the Stomach to the Mouth, so quenches thirst.

And when you perceive any of the Signs made mention of in page 147, etc.

Forthwith make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills; for they are the
Only Famous and Safe Medicine (ever yet known in the world, to combat the
Dropsy) whose Composition is without Mercury or any other poisonous
Ingredients, as many other Medicines are (to the great damage of the Patient)
too frequently given in this deplorable and pernicious Distemper.

The Patient newly taken with the Dropsy may take of those Pills every second
or third day.

But where the Disease is stubborn and of long continuance, begin with two
Pills, more or less, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient, and take
them every day, if strength will permit, and so continue for a month or six
weeks, if need require. And be not persuaded by any means to the contrary; for
I never yet knew them fail, where the Distemper was really accounted curable.

You may take them in the Spring and Summer at night going to bed, or after
your first Sleep, or take one at night and two in the morning.

But in the Winter-season take them always about five or six of the Clock in
the morning, lest by rising in the night you take cold. If you have any
Inclination to rest, you may lie in your Bed two or three hours after the
taking thereof, and they will work the better.

You may swallow them in the Pap of a roasted Apple, or in the Skin of a Raisin
or Prune, or in a preserved Cherry, or with Beer or Ale, or any other way.

Such that cannot take them whole as they are, may cut them very small, and
make them up into an Electuary, or into a Bolus, with a small quantity of
Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, or Diascordium, or with any Cordial Syrup,
especially if the Stomach be cold.

Such whose Bodies abound with heat, and notwithstanding the Dropsy are
Hectic, may take them with a small quantity of the Lenitive Electuary, Cassia
newly drawn, or with Syrup of Roses or Violets. And if the Stomach be very hot,
they will operate the better. You need not drink Posset or Broth, as with other
Physic, but if dry what you please, as VVhite-wine, Beer, or Ale, etc. warm;
but, as afore-directed, be moderate.

Such that take my Pills against that Dropsy called Ascites, who through
weakness of Body, by reason of long Sickness, cannot make use thereof so often
as need require, the Belly being subject to Costiveness, let them sometimes
make use of the following Glister.

Take the Flowers of Camomile and wild Laurel, of each two drams, Agarick and
Pollipody of the Oak, of each one dram and a half, Doder half an ounce; being
bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water or VVhite-wine to the
consumption of the third part; then strain it, and add to one pint thereof
Honey of Roses one ounce and a half, the Electuaries of Nidum, and Benedicta
Laxitiva, of each three drams, Oil of Camomile, Rue and Orris, of each one
ounce; being mixed together, make a Glister thereof.

In that Dropsy called Tympanites, notwithstanding taking my Pills, the
Patient may also make use of the Glister made as follows: for it is of
excellent use to dissolve and discuss wind, etc.

Take the Roots of Fennel and Smallage, of each one ounce and a half, Seeds of
Comin, Lovage, Parsley, Annis, Fennal, and Daucus, of each two ounces,
Caraway-seeds half an ounce, Deanwort, Rue, Asarum, and Melilot, of each one
handful, being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to
the consumption of half, then strain it, and take thereof three quarters of a
pint: to which add the Electuary of Bay Berries, Benedicta Laxativa, and Hiera
Picra, of each half an ounce, Oil of Dill and Rue, of each one ounce, Sal
Prunella four scruples; mix them well together, and make thereof a Glister,
which put up according to Art.

And not only in the Dropsy Ascites and Tympanites, but in that Dropsy called
Anasarca, the more to provoke Urine, and to expel VVind, with the use of my
Pills make trial of the following Powder.

Take the Seeds of Cithory, Ash-Keys, Burdock and Red Nettles, Parsley, Fennel,
Alexander, of each half an ounce, Pellitory of Spain three drams, Sal Prunella,
and Juniper Berries of each one ounce, being beaten into Powder, take one dram
in four ounces of VVhite-wine first and last, except the days you take the
Pills.

You may apply outwardly the following Plaster, etc.

Take the Flowers of Melilot and Camomile, of each two drams, Savory, Mints,
and Asarum, of each half a dram; Seeds of Fennel, Rue, Annis, Comin, Daucus, of
each one dram and a half, Cardamoms one scruple, Mirrh and Castor, of each one
scruple and a half; being made into fine powder, add thereto Oil of Dill two
ounces, Oil of Rue three ounces, with as much Wax and Rosin as is sufficient,
make them up into a Plaster, according to Art, which apply to the Belly,
repeating the same, as need require.

Or take the Plaster of Bay Berries, and the great Plaster of Diachylon with
Gumm, of each a sufficient quantity, adding thereto the Chemical Oil of
Bayberries and Juniper, of each one scruple, being mixed together spread it
upon Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the Belly, as afore-directed.

You may anoint the Belly often with the following Ointment.

Take the Flower of Linseed, Fenugreek, Beans and Barley, of each two ounces,
the Ointment called Vnguentum Agrippae one ounce and a half, the seeds of
Negella, Daucus and Marshmallows, of each one dram, Euphorbium, Roch-Allum,
Frankincense, of each one dram and a half, fine Bole and quick Brimstone, of
each two drams, Orris Roots three drams, Oil of Rue, white Lillies, Orris,
Elder and Camomile, of each one ounce, Oil of Turpentine ten drams, with a
sufficient quantity of Bees Wax make thereof an Ointment, and anoint the Parts
swelled therewith before a good Fire.

Or take the Ointment of Sowbread, Marshmallows, the Ointment called Vnguentum
Martiatum, of each one ounce and a half; Oil of Roses, Rue, Sage, Elder and
White Lillies, of each half an ounce. Mix them together, and anoint the Parts
therewith, as afore-directed.

For they are not only beneficial in the Tympany, being the worst of Dropsies,
but in Ascites.

And in that Dropsy called Anasarca, etc.

But assure your selves where my Pills are made use of in time, there will be
little or no need of outward applications.

For they alone have in them a Specifique or Particular Virtue totally to root
out the Dropsy of all kinds, and to strengthen the Liver, and the rest of the
Principal Bowels (through the Coldness and Weakness of which, most Dropsies
proceed.)

Yet notwithstanding (instead of ordinary Drink) make use of either of the
Drinks made as follows; seeing that oftentimes they conduce much to the Cure.

Take the Bark of Elder, Red Sage, Ground Ivy, or the Herb called Alchoof,
Smallage, the Roots of Fennel, Aron, and Pollipody of the Oak, Scurvygrass and
Brook-lime, of each half a pound, the best Juniper Berries one pound, Ginger
one ounce, being cut and bruised, tie them up into a thin Cloth, and hang it in
an Earthen Stein, and pour thereto a sufficient quantity of New Ale or Beer,
(such that are abse may add some Rhenish or VVhite-wine) so let it work
together; when fit to drink, make use thereof.

Or take Clivers and Elder-Bark, of each three or four good handfuls, Galsingal
one ounce, being cut and bruifed, boil them in six Quarts of small Ale, to the
consumption of half, then add thereto three Quarts of the best White Wind, and
let it just boil up the second time; strain it, and drink thereof when dry, as
of ordinary Drink.

Or take the Bark of the Roots of Elder two handfuls, Sasaphrass, Sarsaperilla,
of each two ounces, Winter Cinnamon, and Winter Cherries, of each one ounce and
a half, the Seeds of Alexander one ounce; being cut and bruised very small,
boil them in six quarts of Whitewine, to the consumption of the third part;
strain it, and sweeten it with Syrup of Marshmallows, and drink thereof a
quarter of a pint hot first and last.

Or take White Wind four quarts, the best Nutmegs and Winter-Cherries, of each
twenty in number; being cut and bruised, boil them to the consumption of the
fourth part, then strain it, and keep it for use: of which Liquor let the
Patient drink a small quantity at a time, when he pleases; for it will not
only comfort the Spirits, and strengthen the Liver, but with My Pills cause
much Urine.

Or take Diacurcuma, Dialacca, of each two drams, Troches of Rhubarb one dram;
with a sufficient quantity of the Conserve and Syrup of Wormwood, make them up
into an Electury, and let the Patient take the quantity of a Nutmeg at
pleasure, for it strengthens the Liver to admiration.

To eat often of the Conserve of Sea-Wormwood, is also very profitable.

Sweating is of wonderful profit in this Disease: So if it cannot be gained
through exercise, as by walking in the Summer time in the Sun, or in a warm
room in the Winter-season; make use once a week, upon a day you take no Pills,
of the Medicine made as follows.

Take Venice-Treacle one dram and a half, Diaphoretique Antimony ten grains,
Salt of Wormwood and Salt of Tartar, of each five grains; being mixed together,
take it upon the point of a Knife, or in a Glass of hot Sack, and sweat as
strength will permit.

Or take Carduus-Water three ounces, the Spirit of Saffron and Treacle-Water,
of each one ounce, Syrup of Balm and Clove-Gilliflowers, of each six drams, the
Chimical Oil of Sulphur ten drops; mix them, and make a Potion thereof, which
take in the morning, and sweat as directed.

CHAP. XXV. Of the SCURVY.
SCORBVTI, as Authors say, is a barbarous word, and formerly unknown to most of
the Ancient Physicians, (especially those of the Southern Parts) and derived
from the Danes: Which Disease was supposed to be that which Pliny makes
mention of in his Natural History.

The Principal Causes of the Scurvy comes from a thick and saltish Constitution
of the Air, being corrupt, as the Air near the Sea, fenny, foggy, or moist
places, which infect by the unwholesome Vapors coming from the same.

Also the eating of salt Meat, and Bread twice baked, Fish overmuch dried in
the Smoke, rusty Bacon, and many other sorts of Diet which are of corrupt
nourishment: decayed Beer and stinking Water do cause this Disease.

Likewise it comes through the Obstruction of the Spleen; the course of
Melancholy being hindered, and mixed with the rest of the Blood, infecteth the
whole Body with Corruption and violent wasting: The grosser part falling down,
staineth the Legs with spots of diverse colors; the thinner part being carried
up, does defile the Gums with sharp, salt, and fretting humors, and filthy
growing of flesh between the Teeth.

The Symptoms or Signs of the Scurvy are in chief as follows:
A pricking and grievous pain in the Head, a stinking Breath or evil savor of
the Mouth, Jaws and Teeth, the Gums bleed, and are often red, and itch, and
soon corrupt, the Teeth loose, black, and rotten.

Spots in the Face, Body, Thighs and Legs, at first commonly Red, but
afterward Blew, Purple-colour, or Black, sometimes Yellow, etc. which proceeds
from the serous, corrupt and filthy part of the Blood, which being unfit to
nourish the Body, is sent forth.

The Patient is often troubled with a suffocation, and as it were choked up;
the Heart pants, the Stomach is puffed up, the Left Side is commonly swelled;
there are perceived frequent Sighings, Belchings, Cramps, and Windiness,
motions to Vomit; sometimes the Patient is feverish, at other times tremble and
shiver with cold, and upon a sudden hot again; sometimes heavy, dull, and
melancholy, disability to walk; upon a sudden their Breath fail, and it is with
very much difficulty, if they use but the least motion; when they offer to
rise, or sit but upright, they are almost ready to die, their Spirits so much
fail them; but when they lie down, they seem to be much refreshed, and breathe
not with so much difficulty; and for the most part their Appetites are sharp,
and greedy of Meat, and desire to eat often; the Stomach seldom failing; but
the Belly often costive or bound; and yet I have known many subject to a
continual Flux.

And sometimes the Spots in the Legs are broad, and are very black,
leaden-colour or blew, and they often swell; and sometimes the Legs become so
much ulcerated, that the Shin-bones lie bare: which Disease, if not timely
prevented, in some Constitutions will turn into a kind of Leprosy, etc.

In this Disease there are also pains in the Shoulders, Arms, Back, Sides,
Hips, Thighs, and Legs, especially upon the Shin-bones, which are much like
those of the Pox, and may perhaps deceive the Physician, where the Scurvy is
Rare, and the Pox common.

But they may with ease be distinguished: For the pains of the Pox are between
the Joints; and if they continue long, there follows Nodes or Knots; and there
are or have been other signs, as the Running of the Reins, Ulcers in the Privy
Parts, sometimes in the Throat, Pallat, Mouth and Nostrils; Buboes in the
Groin, all which come most commonly from Unclean Women.

But the pains in the Scurvy seiz upon all parts indifferently, and there are
many other Symptoms of it, as aforesaid, at least a melancholy Constitution:
and the matter is truly known, if the Patient will in truth affirm that he has
not had Carnal Copulation with Unclean Women.

There are many other Symptoms of the Scurvy, which for Brevity-sake I shall
here omit. And so Demonstrate a Certain, Safe, and Alsolute Way of Cure, which
is as follows:

If the Body be Plethorick or full, Let Blood if strength will permit, but in
small quantity, and that chiefly in the Hemorrhoid-Veins, by Leeches; but if
you perceive the Spleen affected in particular, then open the Middle-Vein in
the Left Arm; but if the Liver be more affected, open the Liver-Vein in the
right Arm, or the Basilica, or Middle-Vein.

But be sure not to attempt Phlebotomy, if it be not in the beginning of the
Disease. For when the Distemper is deep rooted, and has spread it self over
the whole Body, Bleeding may then prove destructive.

So begin with the Medicine following, which doubtless will prove to be very
profitable.

Take the Bark of Ash Tree, the Bark of Cappers, of each two drams, Pollipody
two drams and a half, the Roots of Black Hellebore, first boiled in the
distilled Water of Balm, and dried, three drams, Fennel-seeds, Annis-seeds, of
each half a dram, the Roots of China two drams, of the Four Great Cold Seeds,
of each one dram, the Leaves of Wormwood, Betony, and the lesser Centaury,
Germander, Cetarach, of each half a handful, Thyme, Epithimum, of each one
Pugil, the Leaves of Senna, and the best Rhubarb, of each two drams, Conserve
of Burrage, Balm, and Fumatory, of each one ounce; being cut and bruised, boil
them in three pints of Water to the consumption of the third part, strain it,
and let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint two hours before Supper,
repeating the same as need require.

Or take of the best Senna two drams, the choicest Rhubarb one dram; being
bruised, infuse them in five or six ounces of the Distilled Water of Wormwood,
for the space of one night; after which strain it, and add thereto
Diacatholicon two drams, the Electuary of Roses one dram, Syrup of Epithimum
half an ounce; mix them together, and take it warm in the morning, fasting
after it six hours.

But the most infalliblest way that I can in truth direct you to for the Cure
of this now Common Disease, is to make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique
Pills, for they so highly Purify and Sweeten the Blood, that no other Medicine
can be compared to them in the Cure of the Dropsy and Scurvy, with all other
sharp, salt and watery Humors.

And with them make use of the Diet-Drink directed first in the Chapter of the
Dropsy, page 156.

Or sometimes make use of the following Medicines:

Take Brook-lime, Watercresses, the lesser Celandine, Wormwood, and Fumatory,
of each one handful, Red-Dock-Roots one pound, Horseradish four ounces; being
cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of small Ale, with a quart
or more of VVhite-wine, to the consumption of the third part; being strained,
keep it for use: of which let the Patient take a quarter of a pint first and
last.

Or take Hysop, Germander, Betony, Cetarach, Carduus, Asarum, Agrimony,
Burrage, and Bugloss, of each one handful, the Flowers of Tamarisk, and Doder
of Time, of each one ounce, the Bark of Cappers, Tamarisk, and Ash, of each two
ounces, Pollipody of the Oak, and Red-Dock-Roots, of each two ounces and a
half; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of small Ale
mixed with VVhite-wine, to the Consumption of the third part, and drink
thereof, as afore-directed.

Or take the Juice of Watercresses and Brooklime, of each one ounce, the Juice
of Fumatory two ounces; mix them, and make a Potion thereof; which drink every
morning fasting.

Or take the Juice of both sorts of Scurvy Grass, White Wind and the Juice of
Oranges, of each one pint; being mixed together, drink thereof first and last
three or four spoonfuls at a time.

Or take the Juice of Lemons, Sorrel, Brooklime and Watercresses, Fumatory and
White Wind, of each an equal quantity; being mixed together, take thereof as
afore-directed.

Always observe to drink it warm, so you may take thereof, notwithstanding the
taking my Pills, which with them will prove certainly effectual in this
Distemper.

After you have purged sufficiently with my Pill, if much broke out, make use
of the following Ointment:

Take Ointment of Roses three ounces, the white Ointment with Camphire two
ounces, Sal Prunella one ounce, Mercurius Dulcis, Ginger, Burnt Alum, of each
half an ounce; make them into an Ointment with Oil of Roses and Juice of
Lemons, according to Art.

Or take Red-Dock-Roots and Elicampane, of each one pound, the Buds or Leaves
of Elder two handfuls, Rosemary and Bay Leaves, of each one handful, Cloves one
dram; being cut and bruised, boil them in May-Butter or Hogs-fat to an
Ointment; and if you please, to every pound thereof add two ounces of the
Flower of Brimstone, and anoint the Pustules or Scabs therewith, for it will
heal the greatest Scab or Itch, with the use of my Pills.

Such that have the Scurvy in the Gums, notwithstanding taking of my Pills, let
them take Vinegar of Squills, and Plantane Water, and gargle therewith.

Or take Crab-Verjuice and Scurvygrass-Water, of each alike, and add thereto a
small quantity of Honey and Allom, and gargle therewith as afore-directed.

Or make use of some of the Medicines directed, p. 91, 92, etc.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the JAUNDICE.
THe Jaundice (according to most Authors) is nothing but a Yellow Color of the
whole Body, proceeding of Choler spread all over the Skin; and yet the Liver
safe; as in the Crisis of Diseases oftentimes the Jaundice is caused, and does
happen when the Blood is corrupted without a Fever, or some external Cause, and
is made Choleric; as it falls out by the biting of Venomous Beasts. It also
may be caused through inflammation or change of the temperament of the Liver.
Sometimes it is caused through Embecillity or Weakness of the Bladder that
receives the Choler, which does not attract or draw, as it formerly did, the
Choleric Humor from the Liver unto him, and so leaves the Blood impure.
Sometimes it is caused through Obstruction and Weakness of the Vessels whose
Mouths are derived from the Gall to the Liver, and therefore attracteth not the
Choleric Humor. And oftentimes through obstruction or stoppage of the
Passages that do go to the Bowels.

The manifest Signs of the Jaundice are in short as follows:
A Yellow Color throughout the whole Body, more especially in the White of
the Eyes; the Balls of the Cheeks and near the Temples are of a pale color;
the Tongue seems bitter, and oftentimes Hiccoughs, and Choleric, Vomits, also
Laziness, and Itching about the Body, etc.

The Jaundice is various, according to the variety of the Causes.
That which comes from the stoppage of the bag containing the Gall, because its
passages are nearer the Guts, the matter cleaving thereunto is with much ease
sent into them; if the stoppage proceed not from a Stone, for that sometimes
renders the Disease uncurable, because it cannot be dissolved.

If the Jaundice come from an inflammation and hardness of the Liver, it is
most dangerous, for oftentimes one ends in an Imposthume, the other in a
Dropsy: If in the latter, if taken in time, it is certainly cured.

The Cure of the Jaundice may be performed as follows:

Take the best Rhubarb fifteen grains, Saffron twelve grains, Diaprunis
solutive, the Electuary of the Juice of Roses, of each three drams; make them
up into a Bolus with fine Sugar, and take it two or three times one after the
other, especially if the Body be of a very ill Habit.

Or take my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, according to Directions: for
therewith I have cured several past all hopes, with the use of the following
Drink.

Take Celandine one handful, the Tops of Sea-Wormwood, Centaury, of each half a
handful, the Roots of the best Madder half an ounce, Cinnamon half a dram,
Saffron twelve grains, infuse them for the space of twelve hours in eight
ounces of the best White Wind; strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and drink
it every morning three or four hours before Dinner.

Or take the Leaves and Flowers of St. Johnswort, the Leaves and Roots of
Celandine, of each half a handful, the Bark of the Barbary Tree, Goose-Dung,
Ivory, of each three drams, Saffron one scruple and a half; tie the Saffron and
Goose-dung up into a Cloth, and boil them all together in equal parts of the
distilled Water of Wormwood and VVhite-wine, to the Consumption of half; then
strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar. Being divided into three parts, drink one
part thereof every morning fasting, and repeat the same Decoction, if need
require.

Or take Castile-Sope, scraped very small, half an ounce, the best English
Saffron one dram, dried and rubbed to Powder; mix them together, and put it
into three or four Pippins, the Cores being first taken forth; then roast the
Pippins by degrees; after which take off the Skins, and mix them well together,
and take thereof as much as a large Walnut first and last, until it be all
taken: and if need require repeat the same: For I will assure you that it is a
very Excellent Medicine.

Egg-shells dried before the fire till they are almost black, beaten to Powder,
and the quantity of a dram given in VVhite-wine first and last, with ten grains
of Saffron, is also very good.

Or dry the Livers of Rooks, and make thereof Powder, which give to the
Patient, the quantity of a dram at a time in VVhitewine.

Or take the fresh dung of a Goose that eats Grass in the Spring time, and dry
it, and make it into fine powder; or the Dung of a Hen, the white part thereof
being reduced to powder, and a dram at a time taken as aforesaid, have given
help in few days.

Or take Sheeps-Dung one handful, the Bark of the Barbary-Tree half a handful,
and infuse them for one night in one quart of Ale and Whitewine mixed together;
strain it, and drink it off in the morning fasting. This do for six or seven
days together, if occasion require. The same virtue has Stone-Horse Dung
infused as aforesaid; and to my knowledge have both done great Cures. So has
Hogs Lice bruised, and about forty or fifty infused all Night in VVhite-wine,
and strained and taken in the morning fasting, for some time together.

Or take Album Graecum and Akorns, of each two drams, being in fine powder,
give it at at three times to the Patient in VVhitewine.

A Live Trout or Tench cut open and applied to the pit of the Stomach for some
time, is an infallible Remedy against the Jaundice.

The Jaundice being as it were cured, and yet the Eyes remain Yellow, give to
the Patient two drams of Venice-Treacle, and let him sweat as strength will
permit. After which let his Face and Eyes be washed with the Distilled Water
of Bean-Flowers and Rose Water in equal parts mixed together, and it will cause
the Yellowness to depart.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Stone in the Kidneys.
THe Stone in the Kidneys is caused through a perpetual crudity or rawness of
the Stomach, whereby abundance of tough, gross and earthy Humors are heaped
together; and being of a fiery heat about the Reins, parcheth the Humors, and
baketh them together into a Stone.

They differ much both in figure, color, and sharpness, for they are often
found to be black, sometimes pale, or of a whitish color.

The Sign of this Disease is violent pain in the Reins, insomuch that the
Patient can hardly turn his Backbone; there is also abhorring of Meat, and
motion to Vomit, the Urine is made but in very little quantity, and many times
wholly stopped; sometimes there is voided Blood; the bottom of the Urine
gravelly, which shows some motion of the Stone from the Reins. The Stones that
are light, smooth, and round, pass forth with some ease; but those that are
long, sharp, and jagged, are sent forth with violent pain.

To help this most violent Distemper, if the Body be full of Excrements, make
use of the following Glister.

Take Pellitory of the Wall, Maidenhair, Mercury, Mallows, and Marshmallows,
of each one good handful, Watercresses, one handful and a half, Smallage,
Fennel, Parsley and Linseed, of each two or three drams, Bran and the Roots of
Flower-de-luce, of each one ounce; being cut and bruised, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of the third part; then strain
it, and take thereof one pint: to which add Honey of Roses, and Cassia newly
drawn, of each one ounce, Hiera Picra half an ounce, Oil of Rue, Camomile, and
Dill, of each one ounce, Sal Prunella one dram and a half; mix them together,
and make a Glister thereof, which minister to the Patient as need require.

Or take Mercury, Mallows, Marsh-Mallow-Roots, Camomile, of each one handful;
being cut and bruised, boil them in one quart of new Milk, to the consumption
of half; after which, turn the Milk with Ale; then strain it, and take one pint
of the strained Liquor, to which add the Lenitive Electuary and Diacatholicon,
of each six drams, Venice-Turpentine half an ounce, Syrup of Marshmallows one
ounce and a half, Oil of Lillies, Dill, Rue and Camomile, of each half an
ounce, Chemical Oil of Juniper twenty drops; being mixed well together, give it
Glister-ways; for it gives ease, and causes the Patient to void small stones,
as I have often seen.

Instead of the Glister, if the Belly be not costive, administer to the Patient
the following Potion, for it is of Excellent use.

Take of the Lenitive Electuary one ounce, Syrup of Marshmallows two ounces,
Cream of Tartar and Holland Powder, of each one scruple, Salt of Tartar ten
grains, with four ounces of the Distilled Water of Oaken Leaves; make a potion
thereof, which let the Patient take all at once in the morning warm.

Or you may take of Cassia newly drawn, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each half
an ounce, Diaphaenicon two drams, Powder of Rhubarb fifteen or twenty grains,
Liquorice in Powder half a dram, Syrup of Violets one ounce; with a sufficient
quantity of the Distilled Water of Mallows make a potion thereof, which take as
afore-directed.

Or take of my Pills once or twice a week; in which course drink small
White Wind sweetened with Syrup of Marshmallows.

Or some of the Liquors made as follows taken with them, they do much good;
for they cause the Stone and Gravel to be voided with much ease, and also
preventeth the Generation of the same.

Take the Distilled Water of green Walnuts and Saxifrage, of each one pint, the
best White Wind one quart; sweeten it with Syrup of Marshmallows, and drink
thereof a quarter of a pint first and last hot, repeating the same if need
require.

In every drought take ten drops, or more, of the Spirit of Vitriol, and it
will prove the more effectual.

Or you may take the Distilled Water of Pellitory and Saxifrage, of each alike,
and sweeten it with Syrup of Violets and Marshmallows, adding thereto Spirit
of Vitriol, and take it as afore-directed.

The meaner sort of People may boil a good quantity of Saxifrage, Couch-grass,
and Pellitory of the Wall, in running Water, and sweeten it with Honey, and
drink thereof: for it is very effectual, for it mollifieth the passages, and
causes the Stone to come away the more freely.

Holly-Berries bruised and boiled in Wine or Ale, does the same to admiration.

Or being dried and beat to power, and a dram thereof drunk in White Wind, is
also very good; but such that cannot get VVhitewine, must be content with Ale.

Or take Pigeons-Dung, and fill a large Glass therewith half full; after which
fill it up with the best VVhite-VVine, then cover it very close, and let it
stand for seven days; after which, distill in Sand. Of which let the Patient
drink two ounces at a time, repeating the same as need require: for it is a
very Excellent Remedy to Break and Bring away the Stone and Gravel.

Or take Goats Blood prepared, one dram, White Amber one scruple, VVhitewine,
and the Juice of Radishes, of each two ounces; being mixed together, drink it
off, often repeating the same.

The Juice of Radishes and Mouse-Ear being drunk, two or three ounces every day
first and last, is also very good.

Or take one dram of the Salt of Camomile in Radish-VVater, as afore-directed.

Outward Medicines proper to ease the pain in the Fits of the Stone, are made
as follows:
Take Oil of Camomile, Elder and Violets, of each six drams, Seeds of Dill and
Camomile bruised, of each half an ounce, fresh Butter, and Ducks grease, of
each two drams; being boiled two or three walms, strain it, and add thereto the
yolks of two New-laid-Eggs, and beat them well together, and anoint the Reins
of the Back therewith.

Or take the Oil of sweet Almonds and Dill, of each three drams, Oil of
Camomile one ounce, Goose, Duck's and Hen's fat, of each one dram, fresh Butter
one dram and a half: with a little Bees Wax make thereof an Ointment, and
anoint the Reins and Loins therewith.

Or take fresh Butter, Oil of Lillies, and Hens Fat, of each one ounce, the Oil
of Scorpions compound, two ounces, Oil of Sweet Almonds one ounce and an half;
being mixed well together, anoint therewith, as afore-directed.

Or,

Take Diachylon Simple three ounces, Oil of Scorpions one ounce; melt them
together, being spread upon Sheeps Leather, apply it to the Reins
Plaister-ways; and there let it remain for fourteen days.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Ulcers of the Reins.
ULcers of the Reins are caused oftentimes through breaking of the Veins of the
same; also it is caused through putrid or rotten Inflammations, and through
sharp, gnawing or fretting Humors carried into the Reins.

The Signs of Ulcers in the Reins are heaviness and pains in the Loins. In the
Urine there is perceived little pieces of flesh, and sometimes hairs or little
rags swiming therein; blood, and matter, etc.

The Cure of Ulcers in the Reins caused through sharp gnawing Humors, ought to
be begun with such Medicines as will purge the same.

None more proper than my Pills: for a large dose thereof will cause the
Patient to vomit, which will not only be beneficial to carry off viscous
Humors, but withal be a means the sooner to heal the Ulcers of the Reins. And
with the Pills, the more to stop the sharp Humors,

Take Purslain, Endive, Sorrel, and Mallows; being cut and bruised, boil them
in a sufficient quantity of water, and strain it, after which sweeten it with
the Syrup of Violets, Roses, and Water Lillies, and drink thereof as of
ordinary Drink.

Or take the Seeds of Cucumbers, Melons, and Gourds; being beat into Powder,
mix them with the aforesaid Syrups. The Conserve of them are also very good,
which the Patient may take at any time, after the viscous Humors are well
purged.

Or take the Seeds of Fenugreek four ounces, and boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Spring Water, strain it, and sweeten it with honey, whereof take a
good draught first and last.

Or take one ounce of the best Honey, new Milk hot from the Cow, one pint;
being mixed together, drink it off hot first and last, for some time together.

Or take Raisins, Barley and Liquorice, of each a like quantity; being cut and
bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of
half; then strain it, and sweeten it with Honey, and drink thereof, for it is
of very excellent use.

And when the Ulcers are well purged and cleansed, (which may be known by the
Urine being without Dregs, Moats, and filthy matter, etc.)

Give to the Patient of the Medicines made as follows:

Take the best Venice-Turpentine washed in Plantane-Water, four ounces, the
Powder of Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; being well boiled
together, make Pills thereof, which let the Patient take at his pleasure.

Or take fine Bole, White Starch, sealed Earth, and make them up into Pills
with Gum-Dragon, first dissolved in Plantane-Water: which take as the former.

Or take the Roots of Tormental, being dried and beat to fine Powder, the
quantity of one dram, in four ounces of Plantane-Water, every morning fasting.

Or take Terra Lemnia, fine Bole, Dragons Blood, Spodium burnt, Gum Dragon, of
each one dram and a half, Linseed, Cucumbers and Melons, of each two drams, the
Seeds of Smallage, Starch, and Pine Nuts roasted, of each one dram; being beat
all well together, and a very fine Powder made thereof; give to the Patient two
drams at a time in new Milk.

These and such like do not only dry, but Conglutinate.
You may take one dram of the Troches called Cordonii in fine Powder, first and
last, in four ounces of Plantane-VVater, sweetened with Syrup of Marshmallows:
for it is of excellent use in such cases, as I have often proved.

Or,

Take Sanicle and VVound-wort, of each three or four handfuls, Plantane-Roots
and Leaves two large handfuls: Being cut and bruised, boil them in Two Gallons
of Water, to the Consumption of half, and sweeten it with Syrup of
Marshmallows or Honey. And let the Patient drink thereof, as of Ordinary
Drink, for one whole month: And doubt not the Cure, if you purge well first.

The Reins may be strengthened, and made more dry, with the Ointment or
Plaster made as follows:

Take Oil of Quinces, Myrtles, and Roses, of each a like quantity; being mixed
together, anoint the Reins therewith every night going to bed.

Or,

Take Frankincense, Mastick, and of the forementioned Oils, of each one ounce,
the Powder of Red-Rose-Leaves and Barley meal, of each a sufficient quantity;
and make a Plaster thereof, which apply to the Reins.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Stone in the Blader.
THe Stone in the Blader does not only engender in Children, but in Persons of
middle Age, and in old People: And that is when gross and very thick Urine is
carried into the large space of the Blader, and there retained, like to the
dregs of Wine, or filthy muddy Water, and at length through heat compact
together breeds a Stone.

The principal Cause of the Stone in the Bladder is thickness of Urine, and
many times violent heat.

The Signs of this Disease is a continual itching in the Privy Members, and
sometimes swelling of the same; and the Patient is always making of water,
though but by drops, as in the Strangury, etc.

The Cure of this Distemper does not much differ from that of the Reins, but
that it must be performed with stronger Medicines, and their application, for
the most part, to other places.

To help the Stone in the Bladder,
Take of the Distilled Water of Winter-Cherries two ounces, Salt of Camomile
one dram, Syrup of Marshmallows half an ounce, Salt of Amber ten grains; mix
them, and make a potion thereof, which let the Patient take in the morning
lasting, repeating the same, if need require; for it is a very good Remedy.

Or take the Stones of the wild Hips, being well dried beat them to fine
Powder, and take thereof a quarter of an ounce at a time in four ounces of
White Wind, which will provoke Urine much, and bring away the Stone and Gravel.

Or take the Powder of Ivy-Berries, Red-Nettle-Roots, of each one ounce, Sal
Prunella half an ounce; being mixed together, take three or four scruples every
morning in four ounces of White Wind.

Or take the Seeds of Camomile, Smallage, Parsley, Black Piony, Fennel, Lovage,
Marshmallows, Burdoch, and the Seeds of Ash-Keys, of each two drams; being
dried and beat to Powder, take thereof one dram and a half, or two drams, every
morning in Rhenish or VVhite-wine.

Or take the Distilled Water of Onions two ounces, Spirit of Juniper one ounce,
the Powder of Wood-Lice prepared one dram, Syrup of Marshmallows one ounce;
mix them, and make a potion thereof, which drink every morning fasting for some
time together.

Or take one dram and a half of the Powder of the aforesaid Lice in the
distilled Water of Onions and VVhite-wine in equal parts.

Or make use of the Liquor made with Vinegar and Pigeons Dung, directed in the
Chapter of the Stone in the Reins.

Or take Cantharides well prepared one scruple, the Powder called Diatrag.
frigidi one dram, the distilled Water of Winter-Cherries two ounces; being
mixed together, drink it in the morning, repeating in the same, if need require.

The ignorant ought not to meddle with Cantharides, for it must be calcined
according to Art, before it be made use of, lest the Patient suffer damage
thereby; for not being rightly prepared, it excoriates the parts, and causes a
bloody Urine.

Goats Blood is not only good to break the Stone in the Reins, but in the
Bladder also; which you may take in VVhite-wine, or in the the Distilled Water
of Radishes or Winter-Cherries, as afore-directed.

Outwardly to give ease when in extreme pain, caused by the Stone in the
Bladder:
Take common Mallows, Marshmallows, and Mellilot-Flowers, of each alike; being
bruised and boiled in Water, bath the part therewith hot.

Or take Wild Time, Broom, Rue, of each two handfuls, Figs half a pound, Bran
one handful; being boiled in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the
consumption of the third part, strain it, and add thereto Honey, Oil of Dill,
Camomile, and Oil of Lillies, of each one ounce, and bath the Privy Members
therewith, as afore-directed.

Or take Camomile, Red-Nettles, Roots and all together, the Tops of the Juniper
Tree, the Leaves of an Oak, of each a like quantity; being boiled in water to
the consumption of half, strain it, and bath often therewith.

After which, anoint the bottom of the Belly and Privy Parts with the following
Ointment.

Take the Gum called Opopanax, and Bdellium, of each one ounce and a half,
Ducks Greafe half an ounce, Oil of Lillies, Dill, Turpentine, and Oil of
Scorpions, of each three drams, with Bees Wax make them up into an Ointment,
and after bathing anoint therewith, or make use of the Ointments directed in
the Chapter of the Stone in the Reins.

And if the Patient have a suppression of Utine, syringe up into his Yard the
Urine of a wholesome person; which will not only cause him to make Water
freely, but ease the violent pain.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Ulcers in the Bladder.
THe Ulcers of the Bladder are oftentimes caused through Boils or Botches,
sometimes swelling by reason of some kind of Rupture, and sharp gnawing Fluxes
does many times cause this Distemper.

The Signs are violent sharp and pricking pains in the Bladder for the most
part; the Patient with his Urine voideth dregs and slimy matter, and in the
bottom appears a sediment like to Bran, or small Pieces of thin Skin; and if
the Ulcers are deep, the Urine is bloody, and full of stinking Pus or matter;
and then the more difficult to be cured.

But if they are not deep, nor of too long standing, the pains may be eased and
the Ulcers cured by the Medicines made as follows:

Take Turpentine washed in Plantain-Water one ounce, the choicest Rhubarb in
fine Powder one ounce and a half; Mercurius Dulcis two drams; being mixed well
together by beating them in a Mortar, make Pills thereof as big as gray Pease,
of which let the Patient take two at night, and three in the morning.

Or take Cassia newly drawn, Syrup of Roses and Manna, of each one ounce, the
best Agarick, Rhubarb, and Jallap, (all in fine powder) of each two drams, mix
them together, and take as much as a VValnut every morning fasting.

Or take Venice-Turpentine washed in Rosewater two ounces, Powder of Liquorice
half an ounce; mix them well together, and divide it into four parts, of which
let the Patient take every morning one part at a time fasting.

If these and suchlike purge not sufficient, make use of the Directions in the
Chapter of the Ulcers in the Reins, with which purge till you perceive the
Urine to be clear from dregs, pus, or matter.

After which, to heal and strengthen the parts,

Take Dragons-Blood, Sealed Earth, of each half an ounce, Camphire one dram:
being made in fine Powder, make it up into Pills with Venice-Turpentine washed
in Plantane-Water, whereof take three first and last.

Or take Powder of Juniper Berries, and Liquorice, of each a like, and make it
up into Pill with Venice-Turpentine washed in Plantane-VVater, for they are of
excellent use.

Or take the forementioned Pills made up with Turpentine, Cinnamon and Nutmegs,
for they strengthen very much.

You may boil the Roots of Plantane and the Leaves of the same with the like
quantity of the inward Bark of Elm in Spring-VVater, and in this course drink
often thereof.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins.
OF this Distemper there are three sorts.

The first is, When the Sperm or Seed is shed against the Patients consent,
and for the most part is caused through weakness of the Retentive Virtue in the
Vessels containing the same, and sometimes through a Flux of the Spermatick
Vessels, which is many times watery, and very thin, and without any Appetite to
Carnal Copulation; yet sometimes it does come forth with a kind of pleasure.

The second is a Nocturnal Polution through Dreams, etc. which men are most
subject to, whose Liver, Reins, and Seminary Vessels do abound with heat.

The third is a virulent Gonorrhea, and oftentimes a Symptom that does follow
the French Disease. Which Distemper is known by an issue from the secret
parts, not of Sperm, but of corrupt and poisonous matter of diverse colors,
which excoriates and ulcerates the Urinary passages, from whence follows a very
sharp and scalding heat and violent pain in making water, the Patient not able
to endure the erection of the Yard; between the Glans and Prepuce, etc. often
grows several pieces of Flesh much resembling Warts or Strawberries; all being
of evil consequence, if not timely prevented, or perfectly cured.

In order to which, in the first place make use of the cooling Bolus made as
follows.

Take of the best Rhubarb one scruple, Sal Prunella, Mercurius Dulcis, and
Tartarum Vitriolatum, of each ten grains, Cassia newly extracted, or the
Lenitive Electuary, from six to eight drams; being mixed well together, let the
Patient take one part at night going to bed, and the rest in the morning
fasting. Thus do every day, or every second, for ten days together.

Or take Extract of Rudii two drams, Mercurius Dulcis well prepared two
scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Fumatory, make them up
into twenty Pills, which take two at night and three in the morning.

Or take Rosin of Jallap and Scamony prepared with Sulphur, of each two drams,
Mercurius Dulcis one dram; make them up into Pills with Venice-Turpentine
washed in Plantane-VVater, and let the Patient take thereof from one scruple to
half a dram every day, if strength permit.

Or take Rosin of Scamony, Jallap, Liquorice, and Salt of Tartar, of each two
drams, Mercurius Dulcis one dram, make them up into a mass for Pills with
Turpentine, as aforedirected; and take thereof from one scruple to half a dram,
or two scruples.

There are several Medicines that are compounded of crude Mercury, etc. which I
know to be of excellent use, if administered with discretion.

But those that are not willing to take Mercurial Medicines, may in this
Distemper also make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, not doubting of
good success; for therewith I have cured hundreds, and very commonly without
Astringent Medicines.

In the use of either of the Medicines above directed, the more to ease the
pains, and to abate the violent sharpness and heat of Urine, make use of the
following Liquor.

Take Plantane, Nightshade, Mallows and Wood Sorrel, of each one handful, the
inward Bark of Elm half a handful; boil them in one gallon of Running Water,
to the consumption of half; strain it, and sweeten it with Honey, and drink
thereof three or four times a day.

Or take the Distilled Water of Red Roses, Purstain, Lettuce, Mallows, and
Water Lillies of each two ounces, Syrup of Violets and Poppies, of each one
ounce and an half, Sal Prunella one dram and a half; being mixed together, take
thereof three or four spoonfuls at a time, often repeating the same.

Or take the distilled Water of Winter-Cherries four ounces, the distilled
Water of the Sperm of Frogs two ounces; mix them together, and sweeten it with
Syrup of VVater-Lillies, and drink thereof as afore-directed.

Or give to the Patient one dram of the powder of the Troches of
VVinter-Cherries, in half a pint of the Decoction of the Leaves and Flowers of
Common Mallows.

The Distilled Water of the Sperm of Frogs and thin Milk, of each alike,
sweetened with Syrup of Poppies or with Diacodium, gives ease in a short time.
The Patient may drink Milk and Water mixed together, sweetened with Syrup of
Marshmallows, or the Decoction of Mallows alone, is of great profit, drunk as
ordinary drink.

Or take the four Cold Seeds, and the Seeds of Quinces and White Poppies, of
each alike, being boiled in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water, sweetened and
took as afore-directed, is also very beneficial.

After you have purged sufficiently, (...) the pains abated, if need require,
make use of the astringent Medicines made as follows.

Take old Conserve of Red-Roses, Venice-Turpentine washed in Plantane-Water, of
each half an ounce, the Powder of the Bark of Black Thorn one ounce, sealed
Earth half an ounce; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Pomgranates, make
an Electuary thereof, which take as much as a Nutmeg at a time, every third or
fourth hour.

Or take of the Seeds of Hemp, Lettuce, and Agnus Castus, of each half an
ounce, the Powder of the best Sarsaperilla one ounce and a half; with a
sufficient quantity of the Syrup of VVater-Lillies make an Electuary thereof,
which take as afore-directed.

The astringent Medicines directed in the Chapter of Ulcers in the Reins, are
also very profitable in this Disease.

Or take Mastick, Red Corral, Dragons-Blood, White Amber, Camphir, of each two
drams, Agnus Castus three drams, two Nutmegs, Cinnamon one dram; being made into
fine Powder, mix them together, and make it up into Pills with one ounce of
Cypress-Turpentine, whereof let the Patient take five at a time first and last.

Or take Gum Guaicum, and Turpentine washed in Plantane-water, of each one
ounce, the Powder of Galls, so much as is sufficient to make the rest up into
Pills, which you may take as before directed.

But attempt none of these or suchlike Medicines, until such time the Body be
very well purged, lest the Remedy prove worse than the Disease. And to avoid
trouble, purge with my Pills, for they will effect your desire.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the FRENCH POX.
THe POX is a Contagious or Infectious Disease, and undoubtedly for the most
part gotten by Carnal Copulation with corrupt and unclean Women, and may well
be called, The very Plague of Venus.

Some years past, there was but little knowledge of it among us, but now it is
become frequent, and daily brings with it many horrid and detestable Evils,
and very sad and troublesome accidents, which in the beginning is but small,
yet in process of time (the Patient wanting an honest and able Physician)
grows to such a height, that it does not only corrupt the Humors and
Spirits, but exceedingly offend the Nerves, Membranes, Tendons, Flesh and
Bones, and at length destroys all other parts of the Body, perverting the
Temperature and whole substance thereof; from whence proceeds diverse sorts of
Excrements.

This most sinful and cursed Disease is very occult, and does lie hid in the
Body many months before it is perfectly discovered.

And the principal Part affected is the Liver, as may appear by the natural
Actions: for in the Stomach there is an evil Concoction, from whence arises a
vast alteration of Color, a great indisposition of Body, the Appetite to the
sports of Venus as it were altogether dejected or lost; it has relation to the
whole substance of the Liver, rather than to the Heart or Brain; and it does
assault the natural spirits (rather than the vital and animal) which being
corrupt, must needs infect the Liver; from whence follows shedding of hair,
itching about the privy parts, filthy stinking Ulcers and virulent Gonorrhea's,
etc.

The Cause of this most silthy Disease
Is a sordid and malignant quality containing in it self a very profound
Contagion, communicated from one person infected to another, by Carnal
Copulation with foul Women (as aforementioned) and the parts serving for
Generation are for the most part infected first, by reason of their tender and
pure substance, and in the like manner this malignant quality is communicated
to the Mouth and Throat, and to the Skin: and the more weak the natural
Faculties and Virtues of the Liver are, the sooner does it infect; from whence
it often falls out, that many using one filthy Woman, are as it were all
infected; but such men who have their natural Faculties vigorous or strong, are
not so soon infected.

The Signs of this most horrible Disease
Are Buboes in the Groin, Pustules and Ulcers in the Yard and Urinary Passages;
after which does follow a light poisonous matter, with a kind of Distillation,
and burning or scalding heat in the Urine, sometimes accompanied with a
Gonnorrhea; the Patient most commonly is sorely tormented with violent pain in
the Head, Neck, Shoulders, Arms, Back, Knees, Legs and Shin-Bones; spots not
only in the Head, and about the Temples, but in several other parts of the
Body do often arise, which are sometimes red, and sometimes yellow, which will
for a short time be gone, and then return again, and then become more virulent,
which does at last corrode or eat the Skin, from whence arises many other
filthy Ulcers, not only in the Throat, but in the Mouth, Tongue, Jaws and
Nostrils, etc. Commonly the Hair of the Head and Beard falls off, and there
does frequently appear in the Forehead, and other parts of the Head, Joints,
and upon the Shin-Bones, Nodes, Knots, or hard Tumors, not easily to be
dissolved nor cured, which does in time corrupt the very Bones and Marrow
contained therein, the Patient takes little rest because the pains are more
violent in the night than in the day.

These and such like are in brief the true Symptoms or Signs of the Pox, which
does not appear in all alike, but in some Constitutions after one manner, and
in others after another.

Which Disease, if newly taken, admits of an easy Cure.

In order to which, observe the following method.

Take Cassia newly extracted, Syrup of Roses solutive, of each half an ounce,
the Electuary of the Juice of Roses two drams, Mercurius Dulcis ten grains;
with a sufficient quantity of the Distilled Water of Fumatory, make a Potion
thereof, which take in the morning fasting.

Or take Confectio Hamech six drams, Venice-Turpentine well washed in
Rose Water two drams, Mercurius Dulcis well prepared ten grains; mix them and
take it as afore-directed.

Or take the Lenitive Electuary, and Benedicta Laxativa, of each three drams,
Mercurius Dulcis ten grains, Salt of Tartar five grains, being mixed together,
take it as aforesaid; repeating the same (or either of the former) two or three
times.

After which, open the Liver Vein in the Right Arm, the Patient not having
Buboes in the Groin; if so, Bleeding will do much harm, in drawing back the
Contagion to the Liver, causing the Disease to be more dangerous and painful,
etc.

Whether Bleeding may be safely attempted or not, the matter is not great.
However let the Patient be purged sufficiently with either of the
forementioned Electuaries.

Or with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, which by large Experience are
well known to be most powerful (with the Use of my Arcanum Vitae) to expel this
contagious Disease; not only at the beginning thereof, but in such that have
been tainted therewith some years.

Many make use of the Pills made as follows:

Take Pills of Exduobus, and Extract of Rudii, of each one dram, Mercurius
Dulcis two scruples; with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Cloves, make them up
into twenty Pills; whereof take two at night and three in the morning,
repeating the same as need require.

Or take the Powder of Colocinthis, Jallap, Diagredium, and Crude Antimony, of
each half an ounce, Crude Mercury run through Sheeps Leather, six drams; being
mortified with a sufficient quantity of Venice-Turpentine, by beating them in a
Mortar for three or four hours, with a small quantity of the Oil of Cloves,
make thereof a mass for Pills.

Or take Crude Mercury run through Leather, as afore-directed, one ounce and a
half, the best Aloes, Diagredium, Colocinthis, and Jallap, of each half an
ounce, Saffron three drams, the sweet Oil of Lavender-Flowers one dram; with a
sufficient quantity of Venice-Turpentine washed in Rose-VVater, make them up
into a mass for Pills, according to Art.

There are several other Pills made use of in this Disease, not much differing
from the former, as those Pills called Barbarossae, etc.

The Dose of either are from twenty grains to thirty, more or less, according
to the age and strength of the Patient: Which have been often made trial of,
not without good success.

But My Pills, having not one grain of Mercury in the whole Composition, does
more sweeten and purify the Blood, than any other Medicine yet found out; by
which means they are no less effectual in this Distemper than in the Dropsy
and Scurvy, etc. But in that let the Patient use his own discretion.

And after he has purged very well for a week or ten days together, if
strength will permit:

Let him sweat three days gently with my Arcanum Vitae, or with the following
Liquor; the third day purge again, and then sweat: Thus do for twenty days
together, if need require.

Take Sarsaperilla and Lignum Vitae, of each four ounces, the Bark of Lignum
Vitae and the Roots of China, of each one ounce, Burdock-Roots and Liquorice,
of each two ounces; being cut and bruised, boil them in six quarts of Running
Water, in a Vessel close stopped, to the consumption of the third part, after
which strain it, and take thereof one pint hot in the morning, and lie three or
four hours in a breathing sweat. To every dose of this Liquor, you may add ten
or twelve drops of the Chemical Oil of Sulphur.

The second Decoction of the foresaid Ingredients will serve to drink, as of
ordinary Drink.

Another Excellent Medicine to provoke Sweat in this Case.
Take the best Sarsaperilla cut in small pieces, what you please; which put in
a Glass, and add thereto Spirit of Sack, that it may lie above it the breadth
of two singers. Let it so stand, being covered close till the Spirit become
Yellow; then strain it, and put it into another Glass, and to half a pint of
this Spirit add two ounces of Gum Guaicum in fine Powder; that being dissolved,
add thereto one spoonful of Natural Balsom; then keep it for use. Whereof take
two spoonfuls in Rosemary Posset, and sweat as afore-directed. And purge with
my Pills every third or fourth day. And doubt not the Cure, if the Disease be
not of too long continuance.

There are several other ways made use of in the Cure of this desperate
Disease, as Mercurial Ointments, and Fumigations with Ciniber, etc. to cause
Salivation.

Medicines inwardly given to cause the same, are Turbith Minerale, Arcanum
Corallinum, Red Precipitate, Mercurius Vita, and Mercurius Dulcis, which is the
most safest of all, being well prepared, and given at the beginning fifteen
grains, and increasing every day five grains, till the Flux is sufficiently
raised: in which course the Patient ought not to eat or drink any thing except
Posset Drink, or Mutton-Broth, and suchlike. And after the Flux is raised, he
may drink of the Decoction of Sarsa, China, etc. keeping himself therewith
sometimes in a breathing sweat: for Purging and Sweating is the best Cure for
this Disease, and most safe.

And to heal the Sores in the Mouth, make use of some of the Waters directed in
the Chapter of the Ulcers of the Mouth and and Throat.

For the Ulcers in the Secret Parts, make use of the Waters directed page 84.
especially the two last.

And apply the Powder of Album Graecum with Vinegar thereto, for it does not
only kill the Ulcers, but heal.

You may anoint the part with the White Ointment with Camphir, mixing therewith
a small quantity of Mercurius Dulcis, or White Precipitate in fine Powder.

To take away the Warts that often grow within the Foreskin of the Yard and
Glans, etc.
Take Orpment, Quick Brimstone, and Lime, of each two drams, the Powder of
Savin half a dram; mix them together, and touch the Warts therewith, or anoint
them with Balsom of Sulphur.

Oil of Antimony, and Oil of Quicksilver, are of wonderful use in such Cases.

So is the Oil drawn from Man's Excrements.

In this Distemper,
You must remember to eat Meats of Light Digestion, as Chickens, Rabbets,
Mutton and Partridges, well roasted.

For supper you may eat Raisins of the Sun stoned, or blew Currants, with Bread
only, and drink very sparingly.

But use as much exercise as possible, for thereby many young men that have
been able to endure sweating through the same, as dancing, playing at Tennis,
etc. have been with the least Physic imaginable, in the beginning of the
Disease, perfectly cured.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the PLAGUE.
THe Plague is a Disease that falls upon many, which we have had too large
experience of, and has its original or beginning from a deadly putrefaction,
which in a very high measure does exceed the Common.

Many times this deadly quality has its beginning in our selves, for it often
times comes to pass that the humors of our Bodies do so much degenerate from
the natural temperature, that at last it takes unto it self a deadly venomous
quality, and so is forced to strive with pernicious poison: Sometimes it
arises from external means, as malignant and putrid Exhalations which are
communicated to the Air; and sometimes from dead Bodies not buried, and from
the Roots of Cabbages stinking above the Earth; from standing corrupt Waters,
Fens, and foggy places, the stinking smells from slaughter-houses and Butchers
Shambles does cause (...)

Or take the Essence of Venice-Treacle, and Tincture of Saffron, of each a like
quantity; being mixed together, give to the Patient one or two spoonfuls in the
distilled Water of Scabios or Bugloss, every morning, as afore-directed.

Or take Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, of each one ounce, the Confection of
Alkermes two drams, the Conserve of Wood Sorrel two ounces; mix them together,
and take the quantity of a Walnut every morning.

Or take the Spirit of Sack one pint, Venice-Treacle one ounce and a half,
Saffron two drams, mix them together, and let them stand close stopped for
three days; then filter it, and keep the clear Spirit for use: of which let the
Patient take one spoonful every morning in the distilled Water of Rue or
Carduus.

Or take one dram of Venice-Treacle every morning in the distilled Water of
Wood Sorrel, or alone if you find it not too hot.

Or take the Seeds and Bark of Citrons, Zeduary, Angelica, Gentian, Tormental,
Pimpernal, and the Roots of Dittany, of each a like; being made all into fine
powder, take the quantity of one dram thereof in the distilled Water of
Carduus or Borrage, every morning fasting.

Or take Juniper Berries, the Leaves of green Rue, of each one ounce, the
Kernels of Walnuts two ounces, Venice-Treacle, Saffron, of each two drams, ten
or twelve Figs; beat them all well together, then mix therewith a sufficient
quantity of the best Vinegar, and make an Electuary thereof, of which take the
quantity of a large Nutmeg every morning.

Outwardly to prevent this Disease,
Take Venice-Treacle one ounce, Conserve of Cowslips two ounces; being mixed
together, make Plasters thereof, which apply to the Region of the Heart,
repeating the same as need require.

Let the Patient always be smelling to Tar, Oil of Galbanum, or Amber, Camphir:
It profits much also to smell to Roses, Wormwood, Rue, etc.

Or make use of the following Pomanders.
Take Storax, Labdanum, Camphir, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs, of each two drams, Wood of Aloes, Spikenard, Myrrh, Mastick,
Frankincense, of each one scruple and a half, Musk and Amber, of each three or
four grains; being made into fine Powder, with a sufficient quantity of
distilled Water of Marjoram and Liquid Storax, make them up into Pomanders.

Or hang about the Neck the Amulets made as follows, and believe me, for they
are of excellent use.
Take a Hasel-Nut, the Kernel being taken forth, and fill it with Quicksilver;
after which, close up the hole with Wax, then cover it with Silk, and hang it
about your Neck, that it may touch the Pit of the Stomach.

Or take the Head of a Toad well dried, and covered with Silk, and hang it
about your Neck as afore-directed.

Or take Venice-Treacle one ounce, Toads dried and grossly beaten two ounces,
Virginy Snake-Weed, and Contra Yerva, of each half an ounce; with a sufficient
quantity of Gum-Dragon dissolved in Rose-VVater, make Amulets thereof, mixing
them with a little Cotton to keep them from breaking; and gild them with Gold,
and wear them about your Necks.

Those and suchlike Medicines may with Gods blessing be sufficient to prevent
the Pest.

The Cure may be performed as follows.
If this Disease does invade the Patient at Dinner or Supper, when the Stomach
is full of meat, it will be necessary to make use of the following Vomit.

Take the infusion of Crocus Metallorum half an ounce, Oxymel of Squills one
ounce, Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers six drams, being mixed together, drink it
off warm.

The stronger sort may take of the foresaid infusion from half an ounce to six
drams, etc.

Or take from three grains to six or seven of the salt of Vitriol.

Or from two grains to five of the red powder of Antimony.

Or take the Emetique powder made as follows.

Take the distilled water of Rosemary one pint, wherein dissolve one ounce of
Cream of Tartar, to which add the powder of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, and
let it stand altogether for the space of one night, after which filter it
through paper, and Evaporate the humidity, and keep the powder which remains in
the bottom for use, for it is not only good to Vomit in the Pest, but in many
other distempers. The Dose is from two grains to six, in white wine or Posset.

And after the Patient have made empty his Stomach with either of the foresaid
Vomits, administer to him the following Diaphoretique Potion.

Take of the Electuary of Eggs one dram, the powder of a Toad truly prepared
six grains, Treaclewater two drams, with four ounces of Carduus-water; make
thereof a Potion, which let the Patient take, and sweat as his strength will
permit; repeating the same as need shall require.

If the Electuary of Eggs cannot be obtained, take instead thereof two drams of
Venice Treacle, and mix therewith the powder above directed.

Or take Dr. Starkies Pill, and Diaphoretique Antimony prepared from the
Regules thereof, of each ten grains, Tincture of Saffron two drams; mix these
together, which give to the Patient in any Convenient Vehicle.

With these and such like Medicines, I cured many in the year 65. not only in
the City of London, but in the City of Bristol in the year 66. not one person
dying under my hands that would be persuaded to make use of those Medicines as
soon as possible after they were infected, as many worthy persons of that City
can testify, they not being ignorant of the good success I had in the Cure of
most other diseases during my abode with them.

The Patient in the time of sweating, or at any other time in this sickness (to
comfort his spirits) may make use of the Cordial Julip made as follows.

Take the distilled water of Marigolds and Cowslips of each three ounces, the
water called Aqua Cordialis frigida Saxoniae, Tincture of Saffron and Treacle
water, of each one ounce, Syrup of Clove-gilli-flowers two ounces, Oil of
Vitriol 20 or 30. drops, being mixed well together, take one or two spoonfuls
at any time when more then ordinary ill or faint.

And take sometimes the quantity of a Nutmeg of the following Electuary.

Take Conserve of Violets Cowslips, Marygolds, Bugloss, and Roses, of each one
ounce and a half, Bole Armonick well prepared two drams, red Coral two
scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the juice of sharp
Citrons, make them up into an Electuary according to Art.

If the Patient be Extreme Thirsty,
Take the distilled water of Wood Sorrel, Syrup of Violets, and Syrup of the
Juice of Citrons, and the distilled water of Buglos of each two ounces, mix
them together, and take a spoonful thereof now and then.

Or take the Decoction made with Woodsorrel, Scabios, and flowers of Buglos,
and sweeten it with Syrup of Citrons and Violets.

Or take Barly-water, sweeten the same with the Syrup of Lemmons, and add
thereto the Juice of Wood Sorrel, or unripe Grapes, and let the Patient take
moderately thereof.

The Manner how to break and heal the Carbuncle or Plague Botch.
Take Pidgeons-dung, Elder-leaves, and Mustard Seed, of each one handful; beat
them all very small, then add thereto Venice-Treacle one ounce, and two ounces
of the Urine of a young Child, miring them all well together; after which
spread it upon a Cloth, and apply it to the Botch.

Or make a Linen Cloth moist in the distilled water of Ale-hoof, and apply it
to the Botch hot.

Or take a Live Cock, and pull off the Feathers off his Breast, and apply him to
the Botch, keeping him there till he die; afterward bury him, for he will have
drawn the poison to himself.

Or take a large Toad, thrust him through with some sharp Stick, after which
dry him in the Sun, and apply him to the part; for this will in a short time
break the Sore.

Or take the best Venice-Turpentine one ounce, the Yolks of two new-laid Eggs,
mix them together, and apply it to the Botch, for it causes any hard Tumor to
open.

Or take a green Frog, and tie him alive upon the Botch, till such time he
dies; by which means all the poison will be drawn forth.

Or take six or seven Figs, large Raisins one ounce, Sal Gem two drams, Honey
ten drams; with a little Oil of Camomile make them into a Plaster, and apply
it hot to the Botch.

Or take the Plaster of Diachylon Simple two ounces, Gum Ammoniack and
Galbanum, of each one ounce; mix them together, and apply it to the Part.

Goose-Dung dissolved in Oil of Camomile, or Common Oil, and applied to a
Plague Sore, does to admiration break the same.

To heal the Sores,
Take Juniper Berries, VVall-Pepper, and Sarasens VVound-wort; cut and bruise
them very small, and add thereto one pint of Wine, and another of Water, and
boil them to the consumption of the third part, and wash the Sore therewith
twice or thrice a day; after which, apply thereto Oaken Leaves every time
fresh; and if the Oaken Leaves chance to be dry, make them moist in the
aforesaid Water.

Or boil the Inward Bark of Oak and Elm in water, with a little Salt, and wash
your Sores therewith often, for it does not only dry, but heal.

Or you may apply thereto the Plaster of Red or White Lead, fresh twice a day.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the GOUT.
THis Disease is frequently engendered through perpetual Crudities and
Drunkenness, and through the immoderate use of Venery, by vehement riding and
walking, and sometimes by standing long still; also through obstruction or
stopping of accustomed Purgations, Fluxes, etc. and through intermitting of
common Exercise. Grief, or Sorrow, Care, Watchings, or sitting up all night,
and several other Perturbations of the Mind, does not only breed this miserable
Distemper, but does engender other violent and corrupt Humors. And many times
the Cholick is turned into the Gout, being not well cured.

But for the most part a disposition to this Distemper is hereditary, or from
the Parents to the Children, and to their Posterity; and in especial manner
from such Parents that have been tainted with the Pox, whose Children, at
least, must be troubled with the Gout, being (in my opinion) somewhat related
thereunto.

The Signs of the Gout are many, which here I must omit; but only when it is
near at hand the Patient has a more than ordinary sense and quickness in his
Joints, in so much that the smallest matter will hurt him. And at the very
beginning of it there will be found in the Joints a sense as it were like to
crawling Pismires, with a kind of unusual heat, etc.

This Disease is known to be present by a violent pain in the Joints, which for
the most part is attended with swelling and redness; if not at first, it
appears presently after, and the pain commonly seizes upon the great Toe upon
the left Foot, and often times it spreads it self to the other Joints.

The Gout that is Hereditary, or very long contracted, the Patient having hard
and stony knots about the Joints, and more than ordinary subject to be costive
and bound, is seldom or never perfectly cured.

But those that have the Gout, and not overmuch stricken in years, and are
inclinable to exercises, and are without the forementioned stony knots, may be
cured.

In order to which Cure,
Let the Patient make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, and of the
sweating Bolus made as follows.

Take Venice-Treacle one dram, the Powder of Virginia-Snakeweed,
Gascoign-Powder, Diaphoretique Antimony, of each ten grains, Saffron, Salt of
Scurvygrass, Wormwood, and Salt of Ash, of each five grains: make them up into
a Bolus with the Syrup of Groundpine, which take every third or fourth day in
Rosemary Posset or burnt Sack, and sweat as strength will permit, rubbing the
Patient with clean hot Cloths.

Or take Venice-Treacle one dram and a half, Diaphoretick Antimony ten grains,
Salt of Tartar seven grains; mix them together, and take it as afore-directed,
and sweat.

Or take the Roots of Asarum four ounces, Carduus and Centaury, of each two
good handfuls, the Roots of Groundpine two ounces; boil these in six quarts of
Running Water to the consumtion of half, strain it, and let the Patient take
half a pint at a time hot, and sweat as above-directed, for some days together.

But first let the Body be sufficiently purged with my Pills; and once or twice
a week, upon a day that you sweat not, purge therewith also, for they will not
only keep the Body soluble, but expel all acrimonious sharp and fretting
humors from the Joints; by which means, with the use of the sweating
Medicines, the Gout I have often known cured.

And after you have purged and sweat, so that you have found Ease or Cure
thereby, make use of the following Pills, for they much strengthen the parts
made weak, and prevents the return of the same.

Take Venice-Turpentine made into Powder, two ounces, Turmarick, and the Roots
of Groundpine, of each one dram and a half, the Powder of Ash-Keys one dram,
the Salt of Ash and Scurvygrass, of each twenty grains, Salt and Spirit of
Wormwood, of each ten grains; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Groundpine
make them up into Pills as big as White Peace, and take thereof five at a time
every morning fasting.

There are several Remedies to ease the violent Pain of the Gout; some of which
are made as follows:
Take a new white penny Loaf, Powder of Saffron, and Opium, of each one dram,
make it moist with the Oil of Scorpions, and apply it to the part pained
plaister-ways.

Or take the Leaves and Flowers of Marigolds; being bruised apply them warm, as
afore-directed.

Or boil the Crumbs of white Bread in new Milk, and add thereto some Yolks of
new-laid Eggs, and apply it to the part grieved.

Some bath the part with warm Goat or Cows Milk, not without good success.

Or take Red Poppies and beat them small, and mix therewith a little Vinegar,
and apply it to the part plaister-ways.

Or take VVheat-Bran what you please, and Elder-Leaves two or three handfuls,
if you can get them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of a wholesome
Child's Urine; after which, add thereto the fat of a Loin of Mutton, or some
Hogs fat, and apply it warm as afore-directed, changing the same twice a day.

Or take the Distilled Water of the Sperm of Frogs, or the Water of
Earthworms, or the Distilled Water of Ox Blood, and bath the part pained
therewith before the fire.

Or take dry Salt, and powder the same very small, to which add Sallet Oil,
with a small quantity of the Oil of Juniper Berries, and anoint the part
affected therewith.

Or take the Chemical Oil of Wax and Myrrh, of each a like; being mixed
together, and the parts anointed therewith, have done wonders, especially in
the cold Pains of the Gout.

Or take the Oil of Camomile, St. John's Wort, and Turpentine, of each one
ounce, the Ointment of Marshmallows, one ounce and a half; mix them together,
and anoint therewith.

Or take the sine Powder of Bay Berries and Ginger, Sallet Oil and White Wind
Vinegar, of each half a pint; boil them together to the consumption of the
Vinegar; after which, add thereto a sufficient quantity of White Wax and Hearts
Fat, and make thereof an Ointment; which use as afore-directed, for it eases
the pain in any part.

The following Plaster is also of wonderful use.

Take Diapalma, Paracelsus, Oxycrocium, of each one ounce, the best Opium six
drams; and make a Plaster thereof, which apply to the part grieved.

Or take the Plaster of Paracelsus and Diapalma, of each half an ounce,
Camphir two drams; being mixed together, apply it as afore-directed.

Or take Frankincense, White Wax, Burgundy Pitch, and Hearts Fat, of each one
ounce; melt them together, adding thereto one spoonful of Linseed Oil, after
which strain it into a Basin of cold water, and with your hands rubbed with
Sallet Oil, make it up into a Roll, and keep it for use; for it gives ease in
most pains of the Joints, being applied thereto.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout.
THe Sciatica is a violent pain in the Huckle-Bone, which is caused for the
most part through a gross phlegmatic humor, and being congealed, is retained
in the foresaid Bone.

Sometimes violent Exercise, the stoppage of the Hemorrhoids, and other
accustomed Evacuations, as the Mensis, etc. may also be the Cause of this
Disease.

As touching the Cure,
In the first place let the Patient forbear drinking Brandy, and sophisticated
Wines, and the unmeasurable use of Venery.

And make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they with much ease
purge all phlegmatic humors from the Joints, if not of long standing, there
congealed.

Or take Oxymel of Squills, from half an ounce to six drams, at night going to
Bed.

The next morning take the following potion.

Take the Electuary called Caryocostinum half an ounce, Troches Alhandal five
grains; mix them with two or three ounces of White Wind, and drink it off
fasting, repeating it as need shall require.

Or take the Powder of a Man's Skull that was never buried, Hermodactils, Senna,
and Turbith, of each two drams, Scamony prepared with Sulphur one dram; being
made into very fine Powder, give to the Patient one dram at a time in the
Distilled Water of Fumatory, or in Broth or Posset Drink.

Or take Scamony prepared with Sulphur two scruples, Mercurius Dulcis one
scruple; mix them, and make it up for three doses: The stronger may take it at
twice, as afore-directed; which will eradicate or root out the Humor causing
this Distemper; but nothing near so powerfully as my Pills: However, let the
Patient use his own pleasure.

Outward Medicines of Excellent Use in this Disease, are made as follows:
Take a Bull's, or an Oxe's Gall, and clarify the same; after which add
thereto the like quantity of Aqua Vitae, and gently boil the same till it come
to Ointment, with which anoint the part pained well before the fire.

Or take the Chemical Oil of Wax one dram and a half, Oil of Myrrh, and the
Chemical Oil of Salt, of each half a dram, Oil of Scorpions two drams; being
mixed together, anoint therewith, for it is of wonderful efficacy, and to my
knowledge has helped many.

Castle-Sope is also of Excellent Virtue, if it be first dissolved in the true
Spirit of Sack, and the Hip anointed therewith well before the fire.

You may also take the Oil of Foxes half an ounce, Oil of Tiles, and
Earthworms, of each one ounce, Oil of Turpentine, and Saint John's wort, of
each one ounce and a half; with a sufficient quantity of Virgins Wax, make an
Ointment thereof, and use it as aforedirected.

Or take the Oil called Petrolei, Oil of Tiles, Juice of Dane-wort, Turpentine,
of each one ounce, Oil of Earthworms, one ounce and a half, Spirit of Sack
half an ounce; melt all these together, and anoint the grieved part hot
therewith.

Or apply to the part the Plaster made of Frankincense, White Wax, etc. in the
Chapter of the Gout, page 229.

Or take Rosin, Burgundy Pitch, the Plaster of Paracelsus, and Bees Wax, of
each one ounce, Verdigrease in fine Powder half an ounce; being melted
altogether, spread it upon Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the part.

Some apply with excellent success Blistering Plasters to the Huckle-Bone,
which does attract or draw forth the matter to admiration, keeping it running
two or three days, by the applying thereto a little Butter and Wax melted
together, and spread upon a Linen Cloth.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Invention and most Remarkable Cures effected by those most
Famous CATHARTIQUE and DIURETIQUE PILLS.
ABout March in the Year 1661. many Persons sorely tormented with the Dropsy,
etc. coming to me for Advice, and then being ignorant of any Medicine (though I
had made trial of many) that would combat the same, put me upon a severe Study;
and soon after, by searching the Great Volume of Nature, observing the Property
and occult Quality of Metals, Minerals, and Vegetables, I arrived to the
Knowledge and true Preparation of this most Incomparable Medicine.

And the first Pill that ever I gave thereof, was to a very worthy Person, a
Good Friend of mine, at which instant of time I took another my self, which
wrought upon us both very strange effects, expelling not only viscous or tough
phlegmatic Humors, that lay furring the Tunicles of the Stomach, but all sharp
salt and watery Humors that were found offending.

And I will assure thee, Reader, that this Gentleman and many others, with my
self, ever since the year 1662. upon the least indisposition of Body, have made
use of those Pills, and thereby preserved our Bodies in Pristine Health.

Which may be a sufficient Argument to convince the People that this is a very
Safe Medicine, leaving no evil Qualities behind it, as some of the same Faculty
(falsely to defraud the Patient) do report.

In the year 1663. I effected many strange Cures upon persons very dangerously
afflicted with the Dropsy and Scurvy, etc.

Amongst which, Captain Matthew Hall, now belonging to Her Majesty's
Lifeguard, being much troubled with the Dropsy and Scurvy; for which he drunk
plentifully of Tunbridge-Waters, being there to wait upon Her Majesty; but
finding it rather destructive, than to do him the least good against the
Dropsy, he forthwith made use of my Pills, by which he had present help, and
will upon request testify the same.

About September the same year, I was called to a Gentleman then living in
Black Friars, sorely tormented with the Dropsy, and from some other cause had
Buboes in his Groins, which were newly broke, putting him to very great misery;
which with the Dropsy, were soon cured with my Pills: Only he kept the Sores
clean with White Wind wherein was dissolved a small quantity of Egyptiacum, and
applied thereto the Plaster of white Lead.

One Mr. John Powel a Tailor, living then near to the aforesaid place, troubled
with a Tertian Ague, his Legs much swelled, who had a great Pain in his Back,
was in a very short time cured with my Pills.

The following Winter I was called to a Gentlewoman then living in
Newgate-Market, who had been for some years troubled with a violent pain in her
Stomach, and had made trial of many Medicines for help, but found none, till
she made use of my Pills; and drinking with them the Decoction of Pellitory of
Spain and Gallingal, as you have directed page 127. was perfectly cured, and in
a short time conceived with Child, though she had had none before, though
married seven years.

About August or September 1664. Mr. Quallet, then living in Field-Lane near
Holburn, sorely afflicted with the Dropsy, Scurvy, and Gout, was in three
weeks time perfectly cured with my Pills, and Sweating Bolus, directed in the
Chapter of the Gout, page 225. who lived till the year 1669. though well
stricken in years, and at last supposed to shorten his days by drinking of
Brandy.

In the Easter-week 1665. I was called to a person of Quality, who had been
married five or six years at least, which by reason of the overmuch moistness
and slipperiness of the Womb, could not conceive with Child, and by taking four
and twenty of my Pills, with the use of a Cordial Liquor I directed her to take
upon the intermitting days, she conceived before Whitsunday next following, and
she was brought to Bed of a Girl about Christmas; which is very well known to
Persons of Quality living now in this Honorable City, who will be ready to
declare the truth hereof, if demanded. Many other Great Cures I could inform
you of, but must here omit.

About April 1666. my Occasions called me to Bristol, and the Physicians there
leaving the City, I was by the desire of John Willoughby Esquire, then Mayor of
the City, shut up at the Mermaid-Tavern upon the Back, and after that, at Mr.
Richard Winstone's house in the County of Gloucester near the City aforesaid,
in which infected Houses I continued the space of three months, and cured all
of the Pest that took my Directions. And after I had my Liberty, the first news
I heard was of the unhappy Fire in London, which was the absolute Cause of my
Settlement in that Honorable City, where it is still known that I had a
sufficient practice upon the worst of Diseases, attended with a wonderful and
good success.

The first Patient of the Dropsy in that City, was Mr. James Perry, who lived
then at the White Lion in Broad-street, who was most horribly afflicted with
that pernicious Distemper: His Belly, Thighs, and Legs extremely swelled, and
very hard; insomuch that he could not go: He had a great Cough and Suffocation
of the Lungs, loathed his Meat, who for the space of seventeen Weeks used all
means imaginable, and had the Advice of Fifteen Physicians; some caused him to
be Cupt, others used Scarification, etc. but took no effect; so they all left
him for a dead man: Yet by Gods Blessing with my Pills, which caused him to
evacuate by Stool at several times about sixteen Gallons of discolored Water;
besides, forced Urine freely, all his Swellings forthwith abated, his Ulcers
(unskilfully procured) healed, and he was perfectly cured in thirty six days.

About February 1666. I was called to one Richard Bush near St. Nicholas Gate,
being intolerably afflicted with the Yellow Jaundice, Dropsy, and Scurvy, and
left by all void of help, was through Gods mercy, and the use of my Pills, in a
very short time perfectly cured, though he was near seventy years of age: and
lived two or three years after.

About which time I cured one Mr. Hodges, who lived then in Broad-Mead, that
was very far gone in the Dropsy, etc.

Also Mr. Chandler near the Pity-Gate, long troubled with the Dropsy, was
perfectly cured in a short time, with my Pills.

About Easter 1666. I was called to one Mr. Robert Lancaster then living at the
Bell in St. Nicholas-street, who was afflicted very much with a Dropsy, being
much swelled in his Belly and Legs, also hectique; under Cure for six months,
but to no purpose, who had been at great expense in Doctors Fees, etc. whom I
cured under thirty days, with about 20 s. worth of my Pills.

Mr. Robert Lisson of Bristol, far gone in the Dropsy, and had a Cough that
sorely vexed him, was Cured with one 12 s. Box of my Pills.

Upon Whitsunday 1667. I was called to Mr. William Kinton Copper-Smith,
formerly living at the Red Lion in Castle-street, who was troubled with the
Dropsy, and extraordinarily swelled, especially in his Belly, and had a great
Cough; was at last Cured by two 8 s. Boxes of my Pills.

In January 1667. I was called to one Mr. Richard Davies, belonging then to the
Sugarhouse in Temple-street, very far gone in the Dropsy; his Belly and
Members much swelled, which I cured in a short time. And not Many weeks since,
coming to London from Ireland, came to my House, to return me a second thanks,
continuing very well ever since the date hereof.

Also Anne Estridge aged near 22. in St. Peter's street in the City aforesaid,
for want of her monthly Sickness fell into a Dropsy, and so extremely swelled,
that her Belly, Thighs, and Legs were ready to split, who for some time lay
speechless: Yet by Gods blessing and my Pills, was perfectly cured.

One Phillis in Wind-street, in the same City, aged near Fifty, her monthly
Courses had left her, and being full of Excrementitious Humors, fell into a
violent Dropsy, etc. very much swelled, and in great pain, whom I cured in few
weeks.

And for the future, to prevent such Accidents, I counsel the female Sex about
the time that those are leaving them, to take some of my Pills, (as directed in
this Book) for certainly it has been found, and still will be, the best
Medicine under the Heavens in such cases, not only to prevent the Dropsy, but
several Distempers that beget Mortality before the appointed time; which none
shall pass, neither can Physic then take the least effect.

The Wife of Mr. Arthur Baker in the Parish of Cromwell in the County of
Gloucester, afflicted much with the Dropsy, and sorely tormented with a
Spasmas, a Disease in which the Sinews are drawn or plucked up against the
Patients will, was cured by my Pills, though in the Wintertime, and very much
Frost and Snow.

Mr. William Vnderhill's Son in the Parish of Bitton five miles from Bristol,
afflicted much with the Dropsy, was cured with two or three Boxes of My Pills.

Mr. James Russel of Bath was cured of the Dropsy with a small quantity of my
Pills.

About August 1668. I was called to a person of the Female Sex, sorely
afflicted with sharp Humors falling upon her Eyes, Pallet, and Throat, several
Ulcers near the Uvula, and the Privy not free; who was salivated, but to no
purpose; and at last perfectly cured with two 12 s. Boxes of my Pills, with the
use of the Gargarisms directed page 95.

Another young person of the same Society having for ten or twelve months a
violent burning pain in her Head, was cured by taking eight or 12 s. worth of
my Pills, with the use of the Poppy Seed, and the Ointment made with Housleek,
Oil of Roses, and Woman's Milk, directed page 4.

About the latter end of March 1669. I was called to Mr. Peter Grant, now
living at the Sign of the Blew Bores Head in the Shambles in Bristol; being
brought exceeding low with the Dropsy, who also had a violent pain in his
Stomach, his breath very short; his Relations and Friends gave him over, having
no hopes of Life, aged near Sixty. He at last making use of about 16 s. worth
of my Pills, was in a short time perfectly Cured.

The Daughter of J. P. in the County of Gloucester near Bath, aged 37. for
seven years troubled with an ill Distemper, which she called the Whites; also a
great weakness and pain in her Back, sharpness of Urine, etc. and broke forth
over all her Body much like to a Leprosy; the Humor salt and sharp; by taking
my Pills one Spring and Fall, was perfectly cured. The days she took no Pills,
I advised her to drink the Decoction of Plantane, Yarrow, Knotgrass, and the
middle Bark of Elm. And sometimes she anointed the Sores with the Ointment
directed p. 166.

A good old Woman, formerly a Soldier in the Wars of Venus, not living many
miles from the place aforesaid, sorely afflicted with the Scurvy, etc. with a
kind of Pocky Humor in her Eyes, and a filthy stinking Ulcer in her Throat, by
reason of which she could not speak, and when she went to drink, it would run
out at her Nostrils; was at last perfectly Cured by taking four 4 s. Boxes of
my Pills, with the use of the Gargarism page 95.

Another woman, aged about Sixty, living very near the City of Bristol,
troubled long with an Ulcer in her Throat, and had violent pain in her Legs in
the night season; was in a short time cured by the foresaid means, only she
sweat three or four times, with the Bolus directed page 225.

One Deborah Jones living in Kings Wood near the City aforesaid, having the
Wind-Gout, Dropsy and Scurvy, was by my Pills, with the use of the Bolus
afore-directed, beyond expectation restored to her former health; the Pills
once bringing from her by vomit a filmous substance the length of a man's hand.

Mr. Theophilus Mascal, formerly of the Gilders-Inn-Tavern in the City
aforesaid, much troubled with the Dropsy and Scurvy, was in a very short time
cured with my Pills.

UPon the Eighth day of June in the year of our Lord 1669. I took my Journey
forth of Bristol toward New Hall in the County of Essex, to Cure his Grace
GEORGE MONCK, late Duke of Albemarle; who through the wonderful Goodness and
Mercy of God, by taking nineteen or twenty Doses of my Pills, in twenty eight
days evacuated by Stool twelve gallons of water; upon which his Swellings all
abated, and he became perfectly cured of the Dropsy, as you may understand by
what follows, being a true Copy of the Certificate under his own Hand and Seal.

These are to Certify all whom it may concern, That Mr. WILLIAM SERMON,
Professor of Physic, was the Person, by Gods Blessing, who did Perfectly Cure
me, with much ease, and in a short time.

Given under my Hand and Seal at New Hall this 12th day of July 1669. ALBEMARLE.

And to prove that at last his Grace died not of the Dropsy, as some of the
most rude still maliciously report, be pleased to read the Book entitled, The
Life and Actions of General Monck, page 246, 454, 476. written by that Reverend
Divine, Doctor Thomas Gumble, Chaplain to his late Grace.

The first that made use of my Pills in the time I had his Grace in Cure, those
of his Honorable Family excepted,

Was that worthy Person, Captain Wodlow, of the Sun Tavern in
Thredneedle-street London; who found wonderful good thereby, and at certain
seasons have made use thereof ever since.

I was my self for the space of two years and upwards sorely troubled with a
flatulent or windy Humor, which did arise from the Mesenteries to the Stomach,
and there gnaw me very violently; and falling down again would dravv my Head
to my Knees, and could not have the least ease till I vomited. Being persuaded
against purging Medicines, I forbore taking my own Pills, until such time the
fits seized upon me with such violence, that none thought it possible for me to
recover, they continuing for ten or fifteen days together without intermission;
upon which came the Yellow Jaundice. And at last, by taking often of my own
Pills, (especially when I was at New Hall in the presence of many Noble men, to
show that in them was no danger) I was restored to my perfect Health: And to
continue the same, upon the least indisposition ever since, have made use
thereof.

About September 1669. Mr. John Ford a Member of the Honorable House of
Commons, then Secretary to my Lord Roberts, having a great Indisposition of
Body, no Purging Physic agreed with his Constitution, until such time he took
of my Pills, by which he found present help.

Near the fame month Captain Anthony Langstone, much troubled with the Dropsy,
and very much swelled, had present help by taking of my Pills.

In the like manner that worthy person Mr. Edmond Saunders Barrester of the
Middle Temple, much inclinable then to the Dropsy and Scurvy, had help thereby.

Soon after, being in the City of Gloucester, sent for one 12 s. Box of my
Pills, and gave them freely to the wife of one Watkins in Wotton, near the City
aforesaid, by which means she was forthwith perfectly cured, though in an
extraordinary manner swelled, and very far gone in the Dropsy.

About the same time Mr. John Pit living then at the Dun Cow in Dunchurch,
horribly afflicted with the Dropsy, was perfectly cured with 20 s. worth of my
Pills; who in a year and half after, destroyed himself with drinking Brandy.

Mr. George Child near Cople in Bedfordshire, aged near Sixty, very far gone in
the Dropsy, was soon cured with three or four Boxes of my Pills.

Mr. John How near Ridge-hill between Barnet and St. Albans, aged Seventy
Three, very sorely afflicted with the Dropsy, his Belly and Members much
swelled, was cured with my Pills, in six or seven weeks time.

Mr. Richard Mills his Son, John Mills, of Entfield, then aged about Fourteen,
his Head, Belly, and Members, etc. very much swelled; his Father sought all
means imaginable, but found none, till he took of my Pills, with which he
received a perfect Cure.

Near the same time were Cured of the Dropsy the Persons following, with a
small quantity of my Pills.

Sergeant Granger, living in Bishops-Head-Court in Grayes-Inn-Lane.

Mr. Thomas Harrison, then living at the Mermaid in Red-Lion-Fields near
Holbourn.

Corporal Davies, then quartering at the Six Bells in Grays-Inn-Lane.

Mr. Robert Shipton at the Sign of the Horsshoe over against Clarendon-House.

Mris. Dobson, at the Jacob and Twelve Sons in Red-Cross-street.

Mr. Thomas Refould and Mris. Anne his Wife, at the Prince of Orange in
Cannon-Row Westminster.

Mr. Baggot, Yeoman-Porter to the Gate and Park-Stairs at Whitehall.

Mris. Anne Buckridge, etc.

Mr. Lewis Reme, Painter to his Grace Christopher Lord Duke of Albemarle, much
troubled with the Dropsy, had help by my Pills.

Captain John Wharton, in George-Yard in King Street Westminster, sore troubled
with the Dropsy and Scurvy, became very weak, was perfectly cured with two or
three Boxes of my Pills.

Mr. Joseph Haylock, Servant to Mr. Alderman Gray of Enfield in the County of
Middlesex, was most violently afflicted with the Dropsy, and had a great Cough
and Suffocation of the Lungs.

He spet abundance of corrupt and foetid matter, and was left off by all for a
dead man: and at last I Cured him for three and twenty shillings, though in the
midst of his Cure (as many have been to their utter ruin) was persuaded
against me and my Pills, so that in plain terms he left me off for six weeks,
but at length begged me to take him again, being very unwilling (when he had
got a pair of Spectacles) to be persuaded to his Grave.

About the same time a Gentlewoman aged near Forty One, not far from the Town
aforesaid, sorely tormented with violent pain in her head, and great stoppage
in her Stomach, full of wind, and exceedingly troubled with the Scurvy and
Dropsy, by taking three or four small Boxes of my Pills, was very strangely
Cured, by voiding a monstrous Worm by stool, very large, and seven foot in
length; by which means she was altogether freed of that long-continued misery,
and withal perfectly Cured of the Dropsy. Since which time she has cured
several with my Pills, and many of them out of Charity.

The latter end of April, I was called to a Person of good Quality, who for the
space of seven years, notwithstanding making use of several courses of Physic,
as Salivation, etc. was still troubled with some violent Symptoms of the French
Pox, as sharp pains in the Head, pus, and watery matter of a stinking smell,
perpetually running forth of his Eyes and Nostrils, who by taking of my Pills
once or twice a week, and by sweating with my Arcanum Vitae, was perfectly
cured in twelve months time, since which he remains free from all Symptoms, and
has since married, and by his Wife has very lovely Children, though no person
thought ever to see the same.

Mr. John Walker Attorney, living near the Royal Exchange, being troubled with
a violent straining, and every morning subject to vomit, also had Vapors
arising from his Stomach, which did very much offend his Head; but could
receive no benefit by any Medicine whatsoever, until he took my Pills, with
which he was perfectly cured in a short time.

Mr. Day, formerly living in Chappel-street in the City of Westminster,
violently afflicted with the Dropsy, and full of sharp humors, his Belly and
Members extremely swelled, was with seven 4 s. Boxes of my Pills cured.

Mr. Christopher Brenam, then living at the Christopher in Duffins Alley, near
the Mitre Tavern in Kings-street Westminster, being very far gone in the
Dropsy, his Belly, Thighs and Legs very much swelled, his appetite as it were
altogether dejected or lost; by taking of my Pills, had help in a short time:
But about ten or twelve months after, by reareason of taking cold, etc. fell
into a relapse, and then became so extraordinary swelled and suffocated in his
Lungs, that he could hardly breathe; so accidentally seeing him, proffered to
serve him; and that I did not doubt, but from a second use of my Pills would
result a second Cure: But by his Discourse I found he had an inclination to try
some other means; which he did accordingly, and finding all attempts of that
kind ineffectual, himself and friends then concluded it a matter impossible
ever to recover him; then were my Pills their ultimum refugium; with two or
three Boxes whereof, he was again restored to his health, to the admiration of
many, that will testify this to be a truth. Since which time, for want of a
due regard to his own health, he fell into a Consumption, and lately expired.

A young Lady having the Small Pox, and being recovered of the same; in few
months after, by reason of some Obstructions, had four Ulcers broke in her left
Leg, and could not by any means be healed, until she took my Pills, though it
had cost her before thirty odd pounds, and had drunk plentifully of the Waters
too; which by taking three or four Boxes, and keeping the Sores clean with a
Liquor I prescribed, was in thirty days perfectly cured. Therefore I counsel
such, that often drink the Waters, not to be without some small quantity of my
Pills, and take thereof once or twice in a week, though in the aforesaid
course; for I well know that those waters are destructive to many; more
especially to Hydropical Persons, and such of them that have been great
drinkers of Sack and Claret, etc. For certainly nothing can be more pernicious
to them, then to forsake rashly their wonted custom, and fall to drinking of
crude or raw Water, which over much cools the Blood (the very Balsam of life)
when by taking of my Pills it will be made sweet, and soon brought to its first
purity, by which means the Dropsy, with many other violent Diseases, are cured.

A Gentlewoman aged near 25, being married six or seven years, by reason of
overmuch humidity or moistness of the Womb, etc. could not conceive with
Child; hearing of my Pills, she took two or three Boxes thereof, which caused
her to evacuate much wind and water, and within three months conceived. I could
give an account of several others that have received the like benefit.

Mr. John Rives having an indisposition of Body, at last fell into a Dropsy,
and Scurvy, etc. But taking it in time, was cured with one Box of my Pills.

Mris. Seawel, in Well-Yard in Little Saint Bartholowmews, very dangerously
afflicted with that Dropsy called Tympanites, her Belly extremely swelled; she
had lost her Appetite, and was very weak; but through Gods mercy by taking of
my Pills was perfectly restored to her former health.

Mr. John Brice Shoo-maker at the Half Moon in Shear-Lane near Temple Bar, long
troubled with an indisposition of Body, and a violent pain and weakness in one
of his shoulders, had help by taking a Box or two of my Pills.

Mr. John Key, now living at the Sign of the Peacock in Portugal-street, much
troubled with the Dropsy, was cured with my Pills.

Mris. Anne Brinley, the Wife of Mr. Alderman Brinley, in the City of
Worcester, most horribly afflicted with the Dropsy and Scurvy; her Belly,
Thighs, and Legs, extremely swelled, and almost deprived of Breath; she had
made use of many eminent and able Physicians, (who questionless used their best
endeavors) yet to no purpose; and so left by all her nearest Relations for a
dead woman; But accidentally hearing of my Pills, and making use thereof
according to Directions, forthwith evacuated abundance of Water by Stool, etc.
her Swellings all abated in a short time, and she became perfectly well to
admiration. This Great Cure was effected about Midsummer 1670. Since which time
many more of Good Quality, in and adjacent to that City, have found wonderful
good thereby.

Mris. Mary Jones, the wife of Mr. John Jones, now living in East Bargholt in
Suffolk, very far spent in the Dropsy and Scurvy, and extremely swelled all
over her Head, Face, Arms, Body, Thighs, and Legs, and the swellings very hard;
her Legs were swelled above half a yard about, and sometimes her Eyes would be
puffed up that she could not see; she was also troubled with a violent Cough, and
a rising in her Throat, insomuch that she was as it were suffocated or choked
up; many times she was deprived of her Speech: She had a violent pain in her
head, and oftentimes almost distracted therewith: Her condition was so
dangerous, that she had made use of all the ablest Physicians that she could
hear of, but found not the least benefit by them; and at length they all left
her off, and said that she could not live many days; And then it pleased God
that she was directed to my Pills, which perfectly cured her in two months;
which wonderful Cure was effected in June and July, in the year 1670.

Mr. Isaac Key of Neyland in the County of Suffolk, aged Sixty Nine, sorely
afflicted three or four years with a violent Ague and Fever, first shaking him
for an hour or two, and then followed an extreme burning, which continued each
Fit 24 hours, and at length he fell into the Dropsy, and was very much swelled
and troubled with sharp humors, which broke out, and put him to much pain; he
made use of all means he could hear of, but found nothing that took the least
effect: So hearing of my Pills, and the great Cures effected thereby in the
same County, he forthwith made use thereof, which brought abundance of water
from him, and also abated his Fits in so great a measure, he scarce knew when
they came, which before he took of my Pills, wholly deprived him of his
strength, so that he was not able to turn himself in his Bed; but in this
course he lost no strength, and in a short time those intolerable fits quite
left him, and his Dropsy also perfectly cured.

A notable Cure effected upon Mris. Key with nine of my Pills; her Distemper at
first was supposed to be a Pleurisy; for which she had been let Blood
sufficiently (though ancient) but found no benefit thereby; she was so
exceeding weak, that the Physicians and all her Relations gave her over for a
dead Woman. Her complaint was of Burnt Choler in her Stomach; and said to her
Husband, If it could not be removed, she must forthwith die: so he gave her
three of my Pills, which for the present caused her to be very sick; but when
she had had two or three Stools, she perceived the aforesaid Choler to be
carried off, and wholly to be expelled; after which she perceived more than
ordinary hollowness in the part beforementioned; so she took three Pills more,
which caused a good Appetite to eat; and in few days after took the other
three, and so became perfectly well, to the admiration of all that saw her.

A Kinswoman of Mris. Keys, aged about Eighteen, was intollerably afflicted
with the Dropsy, and had made use of all means she could hear of, but to no
purpose; and at the last by taking of my Pills, was strangely recovered. First
she took two, and then three, which caused her to vomit; afterward she took
four, and then five, which operated somewhat stronger, and so broke a congealed
substance that lay in her Body, much in form like to a Cake, which in pieces
came forth by Stool, and so she became perfectly well, and free from the
Dropsy. Not many weeks after, by reason of a Surfeit, she broke out all over
her Face, Body, Thighs, Legs, etc. and was so lame she could not go; she had
also a rising in her Throat, which every hour was like to choke her, and a
violent Fever every night, insomuch that all her Relations and Friends gave her
over for dead. But through Gods blessing, by taking some more of my Pills, was
again perfectly cured in the latter end of the year 1670. of all those
pernicious infirmities, and now as well or better than ever in health.

About the latter end of April 1671. Mr. William Burt at the Red Lion in the
Butcher-Row near Temple Bar, most dangerously tormented with the Dropsy, his
Face, Belly, Thighs, and Legs, etc. horribly swelled and puffed up; he was also
Asthmatical, or troubled with shortness of Breath, insomuch that it was thought
he could not live 48 hours; yet through Gods goodness, by taking my Pills
according to directions, was as it were changed from death to life, and
perfectly cured in a short time, though before he had made use of all means
possible, and was purged sufficiently: But not with Medicines of the Nature of
my Pills, (for I challenge the whole World to produce the like) which are not
only Cathartique or Purging, but withal fortifies or strengthens the Principal
Bowels, etc. and that is one Reason they so perfectly cure the Dropsy.

A Persons Daughter of Quality about eight years of Age, never having the
perfect use of her Limbs; by taking twenty five 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, in the
space of two years received perfect help thereby, and remains to this day
free from the least Symptoms of Ach or Pain, and grows fat and very comely;
who before the making use thereof was supposed never to have perfect help.

The wonderful Cures effected upon Mr. James Major, Mr. William Hobs, and Mr.
John Wear, you may read in their following Letters under their several hands,
which upon request I am ready to produce, with many more.

Mr. James Major 's Letter.
Honored Doctor,
WHen the Microcosm my Body was over-flowed with a vast Deluge of the Dropsy,
in so extraordinary a manner, as that I despaired of all hopes (as to Life)
expecting nothing but that I should be drowned in so great a Flood: It pleased
God then to direct me to You, (whom I would the World Knew Better) who under
Him was an Ark to preserve me safe, to keep me from sinking; And now Mankind is
Restored, not as the Poets feigned, by throwing Stones over my Head, but by
swallowing your Pills down my Throat, which produced strange effects; I had
almost said, as that Stones should become Men. A strange Metamorphosis, that
from such a Chaos of Confusion, from such a Mass of disordered Matter, from
such a Heap of Indigested Humors, I should by your Art, as if Nature had been
new moulding me, be wrought into so goodly a Fabric, and reduced to my wonted
Feature; that whereas I was Monstrum horrendum, I am now Corpus Humanum. It
seems to me even a Paradox, that whereas I was Dead, (for so I was counted to
be) I should by your Pills alone be Revived: Nay, which is the most wonderful,
I was buried alive; for so small were my Relations hopes concerning me, that
they looked upon me really as dead, waiting daily for my Dissolution: Even then
with Gods Blessing accompanying your Pills, I was rescued from the Jaws of
Death, I was raised as it were out of my Grave; and am yet alive, and shall
ever bless God on your behalf. That you may live long, and do much good, is the
desire of him who is,

Yours, because you have Ransomed me, JAMES MAJOR.
From Ipswich, September. 27. 1671.

About October 1671. one John Far, then living at Mr. Langhleys house at the
two Rabbets and Pigeon in Greens Lane near Charing Cross, extremely troubled
with the Dropsy, very much swelled, left off by all for a dead man. His Wife
related his sad Condition to me: I abhorring to take money where I judge no
good to be done, was very unwilling to let her have a Box of my Pills, but
she would not go without them: So it pleased God that one Box thereof perfectly
cured him of the Dropsy.

Mr. Michael Hobbs 's Letter.
Noble Doctor,
BEing not known unto you in the least, more than by the Description of the
Book you have set forth for the taking of your Pills, which are for the Curing
of the Dropsy and the Scurvy; Yet Sir, I am bound in Honesty and Civility to
give you many hearty and humble Thanks for the great Cure (by Gods assistance)
that your Pills have made upon my Son William Hobbs, who was most sadly
afflicted with the Scurvy, which had been growing upon him almost three years,
and brought him so weak, that he could hardly go or stand, neither could he lie
in his Bed, but sit therein, being boulster'd up with Pillows to keep him
bending forward, otherwise his breath would so much fail him, that he could not
live, if he lay in his Bed as others do, and as now he does; his Gums were
almost eaten away, and he became so cold that it was a great deal of care and
diligence taken to keep heat within him for almost a quarter of a year; and
then it was my fortune to light upon one of your Books; and after my self and
Son had perused it, my Son had a very great desire that I should buy one of
your 4 s. Boxes of Pills, and prepare him the Diet-Drink according to your
Directions: So every thing being made ready, he began to take the Pills, and in
twice or thrice taking, he found a little amendment, which made my Self and
Wife much to rejoice: For none that saw him in his weakness did think he could
have lived, but all concluded he was a dead man. He followed taking the Pills,
until he had almost taken the first Box; and still by degrees he mended: and
then he desired another 4 s. Box, and by that time he had taken them, he was
able to lie in his Bed, and to walk down out of his Chamber; then being so much
taken with the Pills, he desired another Box of 8 s. and before that was taken,
he was so well and lively, that now I do think he is near as strong as ever he
was, and I judge there is hardly a stronger man in the Parish.

If any should question the Truth of this my Letter, you may be pleased to show
it to Richard Dowdeswel Esquire one of the Members of the House of Commons, who
knows the same to be true, so does his Son Mr. Charles Dowdeswel. Sir, I am but
a plain Countryman, and not able to express my self in such Language as you
deserve, but my Self, Wife, and Son, do all pray to God to bless you in your
Practice; and so humbly desiring that you would be pleased to write two words
to me of the Receipt of this, for I shall not be satisfied till I know that you
have received our thanks for your brave Cure; some few of the 8 s. Box of Pills
are yet remaining: Besides, two or three other Persons have taken thereof, and
much good they have sound by them. So I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your most humble Servant, to serve you, MICHAEL HOBBS.
Longdon, near Vpton upon Severn in the County of Worcester, October. 18. 1671.

Mr. Parkeson at the upper end of Chick-lane, near West-Smithfield, extremely
troubled with shortness of breath, his Appetite lost, his Legs swelled, and
very little hopes of Recovery, was in, a short time cured by taking a Box or
two of my Pills.

Mr. Nicholas Weight in St. John's Court in Cow-Lane, by reason of a great
Surfeit caused by overmuch drinking, was reduced to a very weak condition, a
violent Cough, and stopping in his Stomach, his Appetite dejected; insomuch
that all his Friends judged it impossible for him to live; who had Remedy by
taking ten of my Pills, with a Medicine of small value that I directed for his
Cough.

Mr. John Scarvil Distiller, at the Sign of the Green Man near Holbourn-Bridge,
sorely troubled with the Dropsy and Scurvy; his Stomach, Belly, Thighs, and
Legs, much swelled; He was also suffocated or choked up, that he could hardly
breath; yet through Gods blessing he had help by two or three 4 s. Boxes of my
Pills, though near 60 years of age.

Mr. Allen not far from the sign aforesaid, sorely troubled with the Dropsy
and Scurvy, so weak that he could hardly go, was also cured with two or three
Boxes thereof.

Richard Jenkins a Waterman, living in Lambeth-Marsh, troubled with a violent
pain and stoppage in his Stomach, loathed his meat; by taking two or three
times of my Pills, which caused several Worms to be voided upward, and much
watery and slimy matter by Stool, forthwith became perfectly well.

Mr. John Wear 's Letter.
William Sermon,
THese are to certify thee and any other to whose view these Lines may come,
that about the 8th Month, 1671. my body was afflicted with such a pain in my
stomach, and through the tediousness thereof so bowed me down, that I could
hardly bear my body up, at which time it came into my mind to make use of thy
Pills, and took for the first dose sive, about the 5th hour in the morning
being in my bed; and about one hour after drunk one Pint of very warm Ale;
whereupon they began to work (procuring diverse Stools, consisting of a slimy
waterish stuff, and my pain being much mitigated thereby, encouraged me to take
the like dose next morning in like manner, which operated no less then the
former, and expelled out of my body by Stool abundance of Worms, in form like
unto the Prickles of an Hedgehog shaven off: So I forbore taking any more for
a full month: and then taking the like dose, which operating like unto the
former, expelled in Operation no less number of Worms, of like form those the
second dose produced; and since that time through the mercy and goodness of the
Lord to me, I have been as well as ever I was in my life. And have given this
testimony for the encouragement of all persons that may be troubled with the
like distemper, to make use of the same Pills; giving those to understand, that
in the time of their working, I took but little food besides broth: And so with
my true love to thee, I rest and remain,

Thy loving Friend, JOHN WEAR.
Bristol 22. of the 1st month 1672.

Captain John Pim of Hackthorn in the County of Lincoln, most horribly
afflicted with the Dropsy and Scurvy; his Body from the Stomach downwards,
Belly, Thighs, Legs and Feet, most infinitely swelled, so that he could not in
any measure help himself; but lay on his back in bed, not able to turn therein,
with a weight upon his Stomach to hold down the swelling, and to abate the
violence of the pain: expecting every hour that his Body would have broke
asunder, the course of Nature being almost stopped, insomuch that he could not
make water, to give the least ease. He had given himself over for death, and
was supposed by all that that saw him to be a dead man, all thinking it useless
for him to make trial of my Pills, though he had by the Post sent for them; but
living in such great misery till they came, he took two; and in few hours after
had much ease, and received thereby the benefit of Nature; he continued taking
them every night two at a time for ten days, then took three at a time for six
weeks together, after which, he could go about his house, and did increase in
strength, to help himself in all necessary occasions. He took eight or nine 4
s. Boxes before his swellings were taken away, by reason his Liver, and the
rest of his principal Bowels had received much damage before he had made use of
my Pills.

He had at first a very violent Fever; and after that, a Quotidian Ague; then
followed a Tertian Ague, attended with a suppression of Urine, which was
conceived (notwithout good reason) to be the Cause of the Dropsy. He was also
girt about with Stitches, and almost choked up with tough phlegm, his Spleen
much swelled and very sore; with many other infirmities too tedious now to
insert. By taking fourteen 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, in few months was restored
to his former Health.

September 24. 1672. I had news brought of a woman near Ipswich, about Forty
years of age, that had not been out of her Chamber in six years, by reason of
great weakness and pain in her Limbs, etc. and by taking two 4 s. Boxes of my
Pills could walk seven miles; and since by taking a few Boxes more, she is
restored to her perfect health.

A Gentleman of good worth being terribly tormented with the Scurvy, and withal
a virrulent Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins, who had for a considerable time
made use of Physic, especially Pills cried up for such Distempers; but all
proving useless, he grew worse, and began to swell both in his Stomach, Belly,
and Privy Parts, so that he concluded himself to be poisoned, and imagined
nothing but death to follovv; but being persuaded to make use of my Pills,
forthwith sent for an 8 s. Box, and found thereby present ease, and afterward
for two 4 s. Boxes, by which he received a perfect Cure in a short time, with
the use of a small quantity of the Astringent Pills, directed page 199.

A Gentlewoman sorely troubled with the White Flux, great pain and weakness in
her Back, Ulcers in her Throat and Privy Parts, by taking my Pills every second
or third day for one month together, was perfectly cured. To the Ulcers she
made use of the Water directed page 96. and the days she took no Purging Pills,
she took of the Strengthening Pills beforementioned, page 199.

Mr. Christopher Pound, next door to the Maidenhead in St. Johns-street, very
much swelled, who had a great pain and stoppage in his Stomach, given over for
a dead man, was perfectly cured by my Pills.

Mr. William Virgin of the Half Moon in Bartholomew-street in Newbury,
violently tormented with the Dropsy, etc. had help by my Pills.

Mris. Elizabeth Rodes, sorely afflicted with the Green Sickness and Dropsy,
received perfect Cure by the foresaid means.

Mris. Elizabeth Ward in Tenter-Ally in St. Tooly Street Southwark, sore
troubled with the Dropsy and Scurvy, much broken out in several parts, great
pain in her Knees and Legs, etc. she lay exceeding weak for many months,
notwithstanding she had very often made use of many able Physicians, but to no
purpose, and at last Cured in a short time, with two or three Boxes of my Pills.

About the latter end of March 1673. Mr. Brogden, at the sign of the Horse-shoe
in Sheer-Lane near Temple Bar, was cured of the Dropsy with one Box of Pills.

Mr. John Overton living at the Cross-Keys in Grace Church Street, sorely
tormented with the Dropsy and Black Jaundice, was perfectly Cured with two or
three Boxes of my Pills, and with a small quantity of the Powder directed page
171.

Mris. Brewster of Billericay in the County of Essex, by reason of taking cold
in lying in, etc. fell into a violent Dropsy extremely swelled, and withal
deprived of the use of her Limbs, insomuch that she was not in the least able
to help her self; her Physicians and all her Friends leaving her off for a dead
woman; but accidentally being directed by a worthy Person, a Minister of the
same County, not long before cured by my Pills, to take thereof, was also with
four or five Boxes restored to the use of her Limbs, and the Dropsy cured, to
the admiration of all her Friends.

A Merchants Wife of this City being for a long time troubled with a grievous
pain and stoppage in her Stomach, and had made use of several Medicines, but
found no ease thereby; by making use of my Pills, especially three that she
took upon the 17th of May 1673. which then by vomit caused her to void a
strange Worm, the Body thereof square, and of a grass-green color, the neck
round and very white, and the head bloodred, who so swiftly run about the
Basin, that it could hardly be taken, which put the Lady into a great fright;
and the next day she sent it to me: My Counsel was, that she should take more
of my Pills; by which she became well, and free from her former pain.

About the same time Mr. John Phelps, a Butcher, living near Redriss Church,
being for a long time troubled with a violent pain and stoppage in his Stomach,
loathed his meat, and was grown so weak that he could hardly stand, having a
reluxation and trembling in his Joints, attended with grievous pain, himself
and friends not having the least hopes of his Life. Complaining to my Brother
at the Golden Fleece near to the foresaid place, who presently gave to him five
of my Pill, that had lain up and down his house in a Box musty for three or
four years, which brought from him by Vomit and Stool abundance of filthy
corrupt and stinking slimy matter; by which means he became perfectly well in
few days, and as strong as ever.

A Person of good worth, a Merchant, whose Name I must here conceal, through
overmuch drinking, especially that destructive Liquor called Brandy (which,
were the truth known, kills more Englishmen than the Sword) was most terribly
afflicted this Summer 1673. with the Dropsy* Scurvy, Gout and Palsy, having
such a Reluxation and Trembling in all his Joints, that he was not able to go
without help, had help by taking four 4 s. Boxes of my Pills; and since with
much joy came to my house, and gave me Thanks.

Another person near the Strand, very far gone in the Dropsy, came to my house
for one Box of Pills, by which he was perfectly cured. Not long after he fell
to drink his part of Two or Three Quarts of Brandy, and in few days died.

Therefore in kindness to all Persons that have not an utter disregard to their
own safety, by this Example, I do caution, that they do (as much as in them
lies) forbear the overmuch drinking of Brandy, and other strong Liquors. For
be assured upon my long Experience, that under their Conduct marches the
Dropsy, Scurvy, Consumption, and other mortal Diseases.

And were it necessary, I could mention hundreds more (some of which falling to
their old course of drinking Brandy and sophisticated Wine, have destroyed
themselves, that in all probability might have lived many years) being
perfectly cured of the Dropsy, etc. with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills.
The wonderful Virtues and miraculous Cures effected thereby, is very well known
to many Noble and Honorable Persons throughout the whole Kingdom, etc.

So let me counsel all Hydropical and Scorbutical Persons, and such that are
inclinable thereunto, (not for my own Interest, but for their Welfare) to make
use of my Pills in time; and not to be fooled out of their Lives by mere
Pretenders that rail against them; nor by such that (the more to deceive the
Patient) do falsely pretend to know the Composition thereof, through the
wonderful goodness of God of my own Invention, wholly locked up in my own
Breast, as yet, not communicated to any, my Wife excepted.

And that the World may know that this Great ARCANVM shall not die with me, the
whole Secret, and true Preparation thereof, is faithfully demonstrated in a
large Piece of Parchment under my own Hand and Seal, and safely reserved to be
delivered to some honest Person or Persons, that the Ages to ^^me may through
the Assistance of the Almighty God receive Benefit thereby.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
THe Ladies Companion, or the Engli^^ (...) wife: Wherein is demonstrated the
M^^^er and Order how Women ought to Govern themselves during the Whole Time of
their Breeding Children. Of their Difficult Labor, Hard Travail, Lying in,
etc. By Dr. Wi^^iam Sermon, one of His Ma^esties Physician in Ordinary. Sold by
Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-Britain. Price bound 2 s.

THe Author's most Famous CATHARTIQUE and DIURETIQUE PILLS, to well known for
the absolute Cure of the Dropsy and Scurvy, with all other sharp, salt and
watery Humors, etc. are sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain, who is solely deputed by the said Doctor to make sale thereof; which
are to be had in most of the eminent Cities and Towns in England, and in the
City of Edinburgh in Scotland, and the City of Dublin in Ireland, and at his
own House in the City of London.

And that none may be deceived in buying other Pills for his, they are sealed
up in Wooden Boxes with his own Seal. The Numbers and Prices are as follows:
The least Box, containing 20 Pills, sold for 4 s. The middle Box, containing 40
Pills, sold for 8 s. The large Box, containing 60 Pills, sold for 12 s. And
with each Box is delivered a Printed Book of Directions with the Authors Name
at length in the Title Page.


