THE Ambitious Slave: OR, A Generous Revenge, A TRAGEDY, Acted at the THEATER
ROYAL.

Written by E. SETTLE.

Tantane Irae.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper, and E. Wilkinson, at the Black-Boy in
Fleetstreet, 1694.

To the Honored John Bright Esquire
SIR,
WHen this Unfortunate Play implores Your Patronage, it is an Humble Addressor
to You, even for that common English Humanity, as the Reception of a persecuted
Refugee, hunted out of the World, and now a Shelterer under Your Hospitable
Roof. And if Your Good Graces shall vouchsafe it that kind Entertainment, I
Beseech You to look upon it as a forlorn Brat, turned out abroad under the
Curse of those Sour Grapes, the Faults and Misfortunes of the unhappy Author.
And really, under that Prejudice that lours upon me; I may truly say, could I
pretend to never so great an Interest in the Muses, as that I am far from; I
Plant but at a North-Wall, rear that Fruitless Nursery, where I am certain to
be Chilled and Blasted: So miserable it is to live, where not one Beam smiles.

And indeed, a Poet, under a hard Name, groans beneath a perfect Turkish
Subjection, where Sentence and Execution are so wholly Arbitrary, that the
Black Robe, and the Bowstring are sent him, without Process or Trial.

But the happier Favorite Quils, (Lord!) What Wonders can they perform! Can
Write as the Famous Witherington Fought, upon their very Stumps. For, The Lucky
have whole Days, and those they choose.
The Unlucky have but Hours, and those they lose.
-- As a Poetic Oracle tells us.


Poetry is so much the Creature of Favor, that it is not the Oar, but the Stamp
that sets the value. A Darling Muse shall make Medals of what an Abdicated
Scribler shall hardly pass for Counters.

But to leave this Melancholy Theme, the severity of this poor Plays Fortune,
and change to a cheerfuller Cause; it is now Lodged in the hands of Mercy; for
it is Dedicated to Worth and Goodness; Titles, so properly Your own; that to a
Natural Candor, Sweetness of Temper, prideless Familiarity, and all that
Generous Disposition of Mind, that warms where You Favor, and charms where You
Converse; You have the Additional Acquisitions and Improvements of the most
Generous Education too, as no small Superstructure upon so ample a Foundation.
You challenge that bountiful Literature, a Feather not in every Gentleman's
Crest, that we may trace Your Rich Fountain up to the Banks of Cham, as
nurtured and cherished no less by the Beams of an Alma Matter, than Your own
smiling Genius; Insomuch that so truly accomplished, You are equally furnished as
well for the Courtier as the Country Gentleman.

And, faith, Sir, now I have named an English Gentleman, he that with all the
true Qualifications of Gentility, lives like Your self, above the World,
Attendance and Dependence the Cowlean Curse far from his Door, a plentiful
Estate his fair Field Argent, and a Bravery of Spirit to enrich that fair Coat,
may be truly said to be more a Prince than he that fills a Throne: whilst free
and uncontrould, within his own smaller Province of Command, he Reigns more
Absolute, than the prouder Crowned Head in all his Realms and Territories, that
larger Canton of the Globe; who besides his Cares and Fatigues (a pain You feel
not) weilds but a shackled Scepter, under a bounded Dominion, and limited
Sovereignty.

But whatever ample Theme Your Merit furnishes me, I dare not be too bold upon
that subject: for Panegyricks are only acceptable Guests where there is Pride
and Vanity to welcome and receive them. But so extraordinary a Modesty shines
in You, that instead of attempting the Panegyrist, I must rather check the
Publication of those fair Truths, though never so justly Your due, as knowing
that You can easier deserve Encomiums than hear them; under which silencing
Command upon me, I can only conclude with subscribing my self

Sir, Your most Obedient, And Most Devoted Servant E. SETTLE.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Knight.
TO Gain your favorable smile to Day,
What a hard Task has our Unhappy Play.
After so Rich a Feast of Wit before,
Our Courser Fare, we fear's a Treat too Poor.
Yet let us Consider, half our fears to Ease,
What Constitutions* it is we have to please,
You, who when some bright Celia you ave enjoyed,
How have we seen you Surfeited and Cloyed
With the possession of those fairer Charms,
Run to some Little Paltry Dowdies Arms?
Change, dear sweet Change!
There you run on so Fast, Siege, Battle, Storm:
Could you your feats of War like those of Love perform,
All so many Young headlong Alexanders,
You Would make a Swinging Nursery for Flanders,
That brisk, bold, pushing Race! Lord what a Dance
Would such a set of Heroes make in France.
Ah Sirs, so very Fickle in your Kisses,
Would you treat Poets as you do your Misses,
Let Wit and Love your Equal Graces share;
Our humble Scribler then need never Despair.
Ah no! --
A Poet may, perhaps, once in an Age,
Have the good fortune your kind hearts t'engage.
They gain your favors slow, but then they last.
Your kind Embrace they win and hold as fast.
With us, our Sex alone, to your disgrace
False Men, you're every day for a new Face.
Your Volatile Mercury is all in Love
We are the Mourning Turtles of the Grove:
You're those wild Strays, and fly so all at Rovers,
You're Beaus, Wits, Courtiers, every thing but Lovers;
Youth, Beauty, Virtue, all will do no good:
You're Constant every where, but where you should.

ACTORS Names.
KIng of Persia, Mr. Bowman. Tygranes, his Brother, Mr. Verbruggen. Orontes,
King of Scythia, Mr. Powell. Briomar, his Confident, Mr. Freeman. Mirvan a
Persian Eunuch, Mrs. Rogers. Amorin, a Persian Lord. Mr. Sybars.
WOMEN.
Herminia, an Indian Princess, afterward Queen of Persia. Mrs. Knight.
Clarismunda, the King of Persia's Sister. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Celestina, a
Beautiful Scythian of unknown Birth. Mrs. Barry. Rosalin, her Confident.
Attendants, Guards, etc. Mrs. Leigh.
SCENE the Frontiers of Persia.

THE Ambitious Slave; OR, A Generous Revenge.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Tygranes, Herminia, and Attendants etc. Ty. WELL, Madam, I have played the
faithful Advocate,
Have wooed and won the Worlds divinest Beauty;
And with the glorious Prize returned Triumumphant,
I bring her to an envyed Brothers Arms.
But (Oh) the fatal Embassy! to crown
His Joys I Have Martyrd mine.

Herm. Unkind Tygranes,
These too ungrateful sounds I must not hear.

Tygr. Not hear me! Is the Voice of Truth so frightfull!
Or start your Ears at what your Eyes have done?
Oh cruel Brother, in Fates blackest hour
With thy commissioned Love I went the unhappy
Discoverer of that beauteous Coast of Paradise.
Yes, thou Fair Treasury of Heaven, I landed
Upon the Golden shore; Surveyed that All
Celestial Fair, inestimable Brightness,
And laded back with the whole freighted Mine,
To plant this Jewel in a Brothers Crown,
I make him Lord, Lord of more Wealth, more Bliss
Then showring Heaven e're poured on kneeling Man;
And my poor self the miserablest Wretch
That Ruin tumbled, or Despair e're swallowd.

Herm. Oh generous Prince, if all my blushing shame,
My aching heart, and bleeding Soul, for Thy
Poor suffering pains can be prevailing Orators,
Recall thy banished Peace.

Tygr. My Peace!

Herm. Thy Peace.
Let my imploring Pity beg it of thee:
Be thy great self, and let surmounting Reason
Put out this hopeless Fire. Droop not, but wait
A fairer Fate: The Guardian Gods of Virtue
Bid thee look up and hope; those great Rewarders
Of ever cherisht Honor, have no doubt
Reserved some worthyer Beauty for thy Arms.

Tygr. A second Wound, where those bright Eyes have killed!
No; fair Destroyer, do not flatter Death.

Herm. Cruel Tygranes, cease this fatal Language.
I sicken at the sound: Commanding Honor
Has sealed my Ears, and I dare hear no more.

Tygr. Commanding Honor then shall be obeyed,
And you shall hear no more.
Yes, fair Commissioner of Fate, thou dear
All Angel Form, I will repine no more.
Since I was born to wear thee to my Grave,
I but perform the Work of my Creation,
And it is my Glory to fulfill my Destiny.
Trumpets. But hark, the King! Now, Madam, Love and Empire
Come suppliant to your Feet; Cyrus proud Heir,
And fair Herminia's prouder slave, comes blessed
With all the Joys of a possessing Lover,
To circle that fair Brow with Persia's Diadem.

Enter King attended. King Welcome fair Star, descending Brightness welcome.
But oh -- Thus kneeling let me meet the mighty Bliss.
Kneel! Is that all! For every common Blessing
We pay that Gratitude. But when Heaven gives Heaven,
The blessed Receiver with his bending Homage
And prostrate Soul makes but too poor Acknowledgment.

Tygr. Oh King; we Two divide the Stars; thine All aside.
The smiling, all the blasting Planets mine.

King But whilst my Ravished Soul at these dear feet,
All buisy in the Count of thousand Vows,
My Souls long hoarded sum, to Soverain Love,
Their mighty Tribute pay, endebted Honor
Demands some payment too. My dear Tygranes,
Thou Champion of my Love, thou ushering Phosphor
To all my rising Bliss, my more then Brother,
Friend, All -- oh let these grateful Arms receive thee Embraces.
But ha! what do I see! methinks I view
A Cloud hang on thy Brow.

Tygr. A Cloud, my King,
Would be a Blessing here: Indeed I want one.
For I have stood too near too near that Sun,
From the bright Beams of whose too fatal Fires
Oh for a Cloud, dark as my Grave, to shroud me.

King. How, my Tygranes! Have Herminia's Eyes
Brought me a Rival home!

Tygr. A Rival! No. Rivall's a Title for
Aspiring Gazers, Beauties bolder Homagers;
Where kindled Hope, and warm Ambition burn;
A Name too towering for the lost Tygranes.

King. In this surprising Language --

Tygr. I have profaned
Your Royal Ear; but the offending Criminal
(Pardon his First Last Fault) shall Sin no more.
Here take this dazzling Beauty to your Arms,
Take her adorned with all Loves thousand Charms;
Myriads of Blisses star your happy Nights
Thick as the Galaxy; and Angel Quires
Salute your smiling Days.

Herm. Virtue like Thine! aside

Tygr. And now if my small Services deserve it,
And this young Arm may be that bold Petitioner,
Grant me the Glory in your Royal Cause,
Against your Honors and your Kingdoms Foes
To wield a Sword. Yes send me to the Wars,
The walks of Death, and Scenes of Desolation;
Far, far from Courts; that I may live removed
From those destroying Eyes. For, oh, my King,
I would not stay within that dangerous Air
Where the least Rebel Murmur may but rise
To envy your fair Bliss.

King. I am all Confusion!

Tygr. So dear, so sacred your Divine Felicity,
I would not blot my Soul but with a Thought
My King can be too blessed.

Herm. Oh Prince
Thy generous Goodness loads me with that shame
As fires my glowing Cheeks. But if thy heart
Thy poor lost Heart has played the unhappy Fugitive
Into that barren Starving Field of Love,
By all my Hopes I Will drop a tear to Heaven
To call the wanderer home.

Tygr. A Tear!

Herm. A Tear, Tygranes,
Shed from that melting pity, till the Gods
Softened to Mercy a kind Ear incline,
And grant thee peace or else deny me mine.

King. Thou Miracle of Truth, and Life of Honor,
There Is something in this moving Tale of pity,
Breaths with so sweet an Accent, that if ought
Less then resigning the Divine Herminia
Could bless thy soft Desires, my bounding Soul
Should leap all Bars to crown thy tenderest Wishes.

Tygr. This is too kind.

King. But since a Sword, a Sword
Is all the Boon thy modest Prayers can ask,
And Love can give no more;
Thou shall have thy Desire. Yes, my Tygranes,
I have a Cause that wants an Arm like Thine.
For in thy Absence I have lost a Battle.
Persia's proud Foe, the insulting Scythian Tyrant
Wears my lost Honor on his conquering Sword.
Nor is this all, I have lost a Sister too.

Tygr. And with that Sister, Sir, the noblest Martyr
Tyrannick Sword e're butchered, poor Orsanes
That Royal Syrian, our unhappy Friend,
By Wars rough chance the barbarous Scythian's Prisoner;
By his inhumane Rival Jaylors Rage,
In his cold blood sent to his untimely Grave.
My Dear wronged Sister, thou too wretched Mourner,
The Lord of all thy Vows that bloody sacrifice,
So loud thy Ruins, and so deep thy Wounds,
That bleeding Persia groans for thy Revenge.
Thine, Thine's a Cause --

King. Reserved for brave Tygranes;
For Thee, young Worthy; thy Illustrious Arm
Shall lead my fighting Legions to the Field.
Wash thou the Persian Stains, and Scourge that Tyrant;
Whilst Clarismunda's Wrongs edge thy keen steel,
With mine and Heavens Commissioned Vengeance strike.

Tygr. Ye Gods I ask no more.

King. Yes; go my Soldier,
Go where Fame calls. But thus, far far from Courts
Whilst to rough Wars a Rival I remove,
Think how I send thee to a Laurel Grove,
To plume in Honor, whilst I blush in Love. Exeunt

SCENE, changes to a Pavilion. Enter Briomer, meeting Celestina and Rosalin.
Briom. Good morrow my Sweet enemy; the Smiles
Of a kind Morn gay as your Eyes Salute You.
I come my pretty one, to inquire the Health
Of that bright Excellence, the fair Clarismunda.
Say is your Princess waking?

Celest. Is she sleeping
Had been a properer Question to her Miseries.

Briom. Then, Madam, in my Royal Masters name
Sycthia's proud Monarch, but her humblest Suppliant --

Celest. Her Tyrant, thou would say: be honest fawning Parasite
And give thy proud Barbarian Lord his Titles.

Briom. Her Tyrant then; if that hard Name befits
Her humble Kneeling Slave.

Celest. Hard name! Can there
Be names too hard for brave Orsanes Murderer!
What though that Royal Beauty, and her dear
Illustrious Lover by the unhappy Fortune
Of a lost Battle wore the Tyrants Chains.
Could his too Barbarous Rage descend to that
Low-Spirited Murder to remove a Rival
By such a shameful Blow? unparalled Infamy --

Brim. It Is true I own, wild Rage and wilder Love
Have played the Savage. But t'atone his Crime
Has not the sense of his Detested shame
Touched his Relenting Soul so near, till killed
Even by the wounds of his own bleeding Sacrifice
He Dies where he 'has destroyed, so dies -- But she
Deaf to his Wound and blind to her own Happiness,
By what infatuating Female Folly,
Her own caprichious Frenzy best can tell,
Disdains his Love, and all his offered Diadems,
And strangly flies that only Bed of Honor
Where her dried Tears, and her hush't Wrongs may sleep
In a long Halcion Rest of endless Glory.

Celest. Well, talking Sir, if her too deep Resentments,
And tender Sense of her dead Lovers Blood
Pours down this Scorn on his unpardoned murderer;
Scythian, what then? Art. Thou, thou bold impeacher,
A Judge of Honor; Is Imperial Vengeance
A Depth for every grovelling Fool to fathom?

Briom. How Celestina, you are a Scythian Born,
And dare thou plead a Cause against thy King!
Have Clarismunda's Smiles, her darling Minion,
Bribed thee this partial Advocate for Cruelty?

Cel. Against my King! Against the World an Advocate
In Beauties Quarrel, Beauty that commands
When Kings but kneel: that more then Soveriagn power,
That holds the Scales of Crowns.

Briom. Well Celestina, thou correctst my Fault.
But to perform my Kings Commission; (that
I hope's my Province) in his name I beg
Thy powerful Intrest with thy Angry Princess
To gain him his Admission to her Feet.
Tell her it is his last Prayer: Nor dares he use
A Conquerours Right to gain him his Access.
Love has disarmed that power; and now no more
Then her Petitioning Slave, the Approach to those
Offended Eyes is only on his Knees.

Celest. Well Scythian, tell him my prevailing Eloquence
Shall gain him his Request.
Exit Briomar. So Rosalin, Thou look as thoud'st survey me.
If thou have read me round, which think thou best
My Face or Pride becomes me? Or do think
That the kind Clarismunda's Royal Smiles
Have raised me higher than my Beauty merits,
Or my Ambition covets!

Rosal. Truly neither.
If Beauty can deserve, perhaps, that Face
Has a fair Title; and for thy Ambition;
I durst defy all the once bold Aspirers
That battayl'd Heaven to match thee.

Celest. Truth, thou draw'st
So near the Life, that thou might play my Painter.

Ros. It Is not thy Beauty, (that is the gift of Chance)
Nor is it thy Towering Pride (for that is but woman)
No, Celestina, it is thy wondrous Fortune
That takes up my amazement.

Celest. That, such wonder!

Ros. With Thy course Veins, an humble low born Creature,
That hardly ownst a Mother, or a Name --
(You see I love plain-dealing)

Cel. Yes, I find so.

Ros. With nothing but a Face, all the whole Patrimony
Thy little unknown Father had to leave thee,
Perk't up the Darling Favorite of a Princess.

Cel. A Princess Favorite; Ay, and a Kings too,
If Fortune play me fair. I Am not the First
Of my soft Sex, perhaps with Birth as mean
As Celestina's and a stock of Charms
Not more then mine, has baited Hooks for Monarchs,
For Monarchs Girl, Imperial Slaves, my Rosalin;
Whilst the fair Hand of the poor Spawn of Cottages
Has struck a Royal Game, and troll'd out Princes.

Ros. It Is true, such Gamesters there have been; and, faith,
It Is pity but Thy Hooks should be so baited.
For if those Eyes were born to catch a King,
Not the fair proudest She, that carthborn Flutterer,
Rig'd up in Ermine, and trick't out with Title,
That ever betrayed Monarch, or sold Kingdom,
Could bear her upstart power with half thy Vanity.

Celest. Why Earth-born Flutterer! still thou gratest hard
On that mean Shame my Birth. -- Why must this Beauty
Be a base Cottage Brat! -- They talk of Fairies
That snatch the sleeping Infant from the Cradle,
And leave a witless Bastard of their own
For the poor Cheated Mother. -- And who knows
Instead of some course half-sould Fairy Changeling,
The kinder Hand of some diviner Genius
In my poor Cradle made a Nobler Change?
And in my Sooty Mothers Raven nest
Hatched a fair Eagles Egg!

Ros. Why, truly, some
Such wondrous Change might be. For (give thy due)
Thou have those towering hopes, would out-soar Eagles.

Cel. And I have reason for those towering Hopes.
For by a famous Reverend Scythian Sybil,
Even in my Infant Dawn, my Beauties Nonage,
Nay in my Native shade, I have been told
These Eyes the Sovereign Arbiters of Fate
Are born to Conquer Kings and Ruin Kingdoms.

Ros. A very large Prediction! But art sure
Thy Witches Oracle spoke Truth?

Cel. Truth Girl!

Ros. Art sure her Prophesying Devils are honest?

Cel. Yes, dear kind Heaven I hope so --
Oh Loves soft Fires, my Eyes, my snares, my Charms,
Lodge but some doting Monarch in these Arms,
To mount me a Court-Star, fill my fair Seat,
The Fear of Slaves, and Envy of the Great,
Round my bright Sphere my rapid Gloryes hurld,
In Powers proud Orb to drive the truckling World;
But This one Blessing let my Prayers implore,
And curse me Heaven, if ere I ask thee more.

Exeunt. Finis Actus Primi.
ACT. II. SCENE. I.
A Pavilion Royal. Discovers Clarismunda seated attended by Celestina and
Rosalin. Clar. ORsanes, Oh that ever bleeding Martyr!
Murder so black! enough to shame the World,
And blot the Blushing Skies. Yet why, oh why
Is Suffering Virtue that neglect of Heaven,
Not the least care of shielding Providence
Steps in to guard, nor one just Bolt to avenge it.
But can my Sighs or Prayers recall his Breath!
Ah no; th'irrevocable Doom's gone forth,
And posting Angels speed in vain to catch it.

Enter Orontes. Oront. If trembling Adoration may presume
T'approach so near; and these unhallowed Knees
May humbly bend to the Eternal Throne
To beg down Bessings on that sacred Brow.

Claris. Thou wish me Blessings. Fool, why do thou lose
That ineffectuall prayer, thou who have entaild
That lasting shame, and load of Curses on me;
That distant Blessings and remoter Peace
Stand those wide Worlds removed from Clarismunda
That bliss and I must never meet again.

Oront. That I have sinned against that Heav'nly-Fair,
Committed that dire deed of Execration,
That not the whole detesting World alone,
But the whole Blushing Host above the Stars
Confront my Impious Guilt; That I Have don this,
Tormenting Conscience with ten thousand Horrors
Haunts all my sleepless nights.

Clar. A sleepless night? And is that all thy punishment?
Each puny Crime
May wound as deep as that. But can thou think
Orsanes Blood, and all my wrongs demand no more.

Oront. Thy wrongs demand
All all fates Bloodiest Shafts, the heaviest Load
That ere crushed Guilt, or struck confusion dead,
This single Criminal Head deserves 'em all.
Unless a kind Reprieving Mercy dawn
From those fair Twins of Life.

Claris. Mercy to Thee,
Thy Crimes, thou dire Destroyer! Can thy baseness
Dare lodge so vile a Thought of Clarismunda!
The Sacred Blood of the immortal Cyrus,
That tame forgiving Fool.

Oront. Alas dear Madam! --

Clar. No King, I have a Lucrecian Soul within me:
With more then all her Wrongs, my Hope, Peace, Life,
All ravished by thy worse then Tarquin Cruelty.
And if perhaps I have outlived her Fall,
It Is only to outact her Vengeance. She
Poor Martyr dyed too soon. Her closing Eyes
Shut out that charming scene, the rowzing Thunder
Hung over her punished Ravishers head: she dyed
Before her dear Revenge. But I would live
For mine (if thou dare let me live,) live Tyrant
To wake the arming World for thy Destruction.

Oront. Oh hold my fair Accuser, think, oh, think
When my mad Rage and all my brutall Fires
Walked forth with that too hideous Arm of Death
It Was only Love that struck the barbarous Blow.

Claris. Love!

Oront. All commanding all resistless Love.
Alas, I saw the cruel Clarismunda
Deaf to my sighs and prayers; my happy Rival
With all the Pride of an insulting Conqueror
Even in his Chains my Tyrant, the blessed Lord
Of Clarismunda's Heart: Think how I saw
The flaming Sword, and my sealed Gates of Paradise.
And if my burning Love and boiling Envy
Swelled my Despair too high, impute the Effects
To a too powerful Cause. Alas, I cut
The excluding Bar betwixt my Heaven and Me.

Claris. Yet hold -- This Insolence outsins thy first black Guilt.
What tho the Injustice of our partial Destiny
Threw the unhappy Champion of our Cause,
By Wars rough Chance a Captive in thy Power;
Dares thy Barbarity make Love, great Love,
A Plea for Murder? Could that noble Passion
Transform thee to a Ruffian? Had thou been
That Godlike thing a Lover, thoud'st have seen
Thy happy Rival with more generous Envy:
And in thy glorious Indignation freed him
From his vile Chains; bid him dispute his Title
To Clarismunda's Heart with his drawn sword.
Had he so fallen, and his triumphant Conqueror
Staind with his warm warm Blood -- thus had thou woed me --
But in cold Murder, his poor naked Throat
Given up to Butchers Hands, thy Slaves and Hangmen!
Shame of a Throne, thou eternal Brand of Empire!

Oront. And is this all my Love must ever hope!

Claris. Hope wretched King; why does thy tiresome Folly
Force my repeated Scorn both of thy Crown and Thee
Thus often to pronounce the fatal never?

Oront. Never!

Claris. Shoud this degenerate Breast descend so low
Bu^ to Dream Kindness to Orsanes Murderer;
I Would tear my Traitor Heart up by the Roots,
But for so poor a Thought. Love thee! Yes, King,
If to owe thee Curses more then Plagues can pay thee
Thy dying Groans more Music to my soul,
Then all the Quires of Heaven, be Love, I love thee,

Oront. Well, Madam, you have sworn my sealed Destruction;
And rather then a Doom from that fair Mouth
Should want the Weight of Fate, with my own Hand,
I Will aid my Laboring Destiny. Go, Briomar,
Draw out ten Thousand Horse, and in their Head,
Bear that relentl^ss Beauty back to Persia,
A Presentt' her avenging Brothers Arms.

Claris. Ay, King, do This --

Oront. Yes, go, dear charming Death.
Bring the whole summond Force of Heaven and Earth
To hunt down this Babarian.
Too cruel Vengeance, at Thy Tyrant call,
All thy armed shafts on this doomed Head must fall;
And Humble kneeling Love shall bear them all.
But dear remorsless Fair; if all the pangs
Of my poor bleeding Heart --

Claris. All the old Hateful Theme. No more: no more.
Remember, King, I have Your sacred Promise
To send me back to my avenging Brothers.

Oront. True; I have promised, and the dread Command
Of Clarismunda, though at no less price
Then my Souls Death, shall be obeyed. Go; Briomar,
Perform your Charge; conduct that fair Inexorable
TO her Royal Brothers Arms -- But tell those Brothers --
Yes, lay my blushes and my shame before them;
And tell the injured Majesty of Persia,
My soul unmanned, and all my Reason drowned,
I did that shameful Deed. But tell them too,
The Brute offended, but the King repents.
Tell them instead of all their Armed Revenge,
Death, Fire, and Sword, sack Towns, and burning Citys
Kind Hymen's Torch presents a gentler Fire.

Claris. No more, vain talking Frenzy --

Oront. Yes, beauteous Cruelty,
Tell them that Mighty Love --

Claris. That Mightier Vengeance --

Oront. With all the Eloquence of immortal Truth --

Claris. With all the Horrors of Eternal shame --

Oront. For Mercy, Mercy, call.

Claris. For Blood, for Blood.

Oront. For Blood than, since no less then Blood must pay.
Go, Briomar, that Voice of Death obey.
Arm* Arm the World against this hated Head:
And forge the Bolts to strike this Monster dead.
Go, Fairy Treasure, Vanishing Brightness, go.
But Clarismunda,
If Thou must kill, why the poor Persian swords,
Why arming Worlds, and angry Heaven against me.
No, fairer Deity; weil'd thy own bright Vengeance:
Thy Eyes the Gods Expense of Thunder save,
And lend me from their Darts a nobler Grave.

Exuent all but Celestina and Rosalin. Celest. Now Rosalin, what think thou
of my Sybill,
My Scythian Prophetess!

Rosal. Think!

Celest. Do not see
We are moving to a fairer Field of Fortune,
The Court of Persia, Beauties bright Meridian!
How looks her kind prediction now? Does not
My Royal Conquest wear a promising Face?

Rosal. Fantom and Phrenzy.

Celest Spite and Envy! No;
Thou snarling Infidel, the Oraculous Truth
Had Heaven in it, and I must, and will believe her.

Rosal. Well, if your Faith's so strong, believe, and prosper.

Celest. Yes Rosalin, and to confirm that Faith
Sleeping this night I saw the sweetest Vision.
Methoughts, a glittring Troop danced all around me,
Clapped their gay Wings, and in one ecchoing Voice,
Stupendous Words, that lightend as they spoke,
Saluted me with
Hayle thou Beauteous Miracle,
Go on, thou Royal Conqueror; so conquer
Till Poets make thee their Eternal Song;
And wanton Painters like the bold Prometheus,
When they would give Souls to shadows, from thy Heavens
Shall Steal the immortal Fires.

Ros. By Love all Rapture!

Cel. No sooner was the gaudy Vision vanished,
But straight I dreamt of that fair Grecian Dame
That drew the Swords of the Contending Universe,
The glorious subject of a ten years War;
And the no less immortal Cleopatra,
Her bleeding Antony, and persuing Caesar,
With burning Troys, and Worlds for Beauty lost.

Ros. Well, Celestina, if no less Originals
Then Egypts Cleopatra, or Greek Helens,
Are those fair Eyes your golden Dreams must copy,
In that blessed day expect my duteous Homage
Amongst your kneeling slaves.

Cel. Yes, that blessed Day!
Now to the Court, that Lottery of Beauty,
Where all the Fair for the great Prize put in,
And boldly stake their All to lose or win.
And whilst one Hand at an unhappy Fling
Draws but a Blank, the other draws her King.
With the same Hope for the same Lot I^le go,
And try if there is a Monarch for my Throw.

Exeunt. Scene changes to a Palace. Enter Tygranes. Tygr. What art thou Love,
that thus out liv'st Despair?
Oh thou, whose too strong vital Pulses beat
When hope thy Life is dead. Too fair Herminia,
Though lost, for ever lost, thy haunting Form
Arrayed with all thy Charms glides dazzling by,
Whilst my devouring Soul leaps forth to meet thee
And grasps at fleeting Air. Too dear Herminia,
Yes, I will love thee still -- But (oh) so love thee,
Love thy bright Glory, thy unenvyed Happiness,
Thy Monarchs Arms, and all thy Nuptial Blisses,
My whole unmurmuring Souls divinest Music.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Sir, some Officers wait your Command.

Enter Officers. Tygr. Admit them. Well, my Warriors
How fare my valiant Hearts?

Offi. Tough as our Arms,
And cheerful as our Cause!

Tygr. Thou speakst my Soldier --

1. Offi. As all our Veins, and all our Lives shall speak.

2. Offi. Already, Sir, Your great Allies have joined us;
A noble Train of War. From Western Nile
To Eastern Indus Streams, united Asia,
Brings her proud Banners to your Royal Standard.
By this good Sword, and this old Arm, I think
More gallant Troops, nor more resolved Battalions,
A fairer Front of the bold Sons of Glory
Never shook the Earth beneath them.

1. Offi. And great Sir,
May I presume to add one bold Word more.
To cheer our Hearts after our last lost Battle
And edg our Swords for a new fairer Game,
Persia fought then, but Clarismunda now.

Tygr. Yes, my kind Soldier, in your last lost Game
A weaker Quarrel, and a fainter Arm,
Only Powers wanton Luxury, Ambition,
Fought then; But a Diviner Cause, wronged Honor,
And Sacred Vengeance now.

Enter King and Herminia, Mirvan, Amorin, Guards, etc. King. My best Tygranes
Life of my Cause, thou Eldest Son of War,
And boldest Heir of Fame; my waiting Armies
Call thy Commanding Arm to lead 'em forth to Glory.

Tygr. As far as humane Strength can push for Glory
This Arm shall lead; and Sir to join that Arm
I hope the Great Deciding Powers, that hold
The Fate of War and turn the Scales of Battle,
Have one kind Laurel for the poor Tygranes.
For it is but Justice, Heaven; one Smiling Day
For all the melancholy niggard Portion
Your unkind Stars have dealt me. And for all
The Massy Favors you have heaped upon me,
Great Sir permit my bending Duty fall
Thus low to take up the fair Load of Honor.

King Rise, my Tygranes, This too humble Gratitude
Orepays the Gift I make.

Tygr. Orepays! No! Sir.
You Have lodged in this Young Arm a Trust so glorious --

King And thou wilt discharge it with a Faith more glorious.

Tygr. I hope indeed I shall. This I dare promise;
I go so ke^n for War, so armed for Battle,
My Cause so Precious and my Life so worthless,
That the Great Game of Death was never played
By a less shaking Hand.

King. So speak the Souls
Of our Great Race, the transmigrating Fires
That warm thy noble Breast.

Tygr. But Sir before I go, take my Last Prayer:
May all the Sweets of ever fragrant Love
Heap your full Jo^s. 'Twixt that fair Heaven and You
Eternal Jo Peans sing before you:
Smiles wake Your Morns, and Angels lull your Sleeps.

King. This is too kind Tygranes,

Tygr. And when in my Rough Toyls and heavyer Marches
Amidst the Shriller Louder Voice of War
Some softer Trump of Fame shall sweetly Chant
In my pleass'd Ears how fair Herminia loves:
How that all Nuptial Truth, all Bridal Sweetness
With all the Riot o unmeasured blisses
Crowns the dear Love of her embracing Lord;
When I shall hear that dear that blessed Sound,
With open Arms I Will meet the darling Joy,
And clasp it as the Mrs. of my Soul --
Thus I may love Herminia --

Herm. Love me Prince!
Yes such a Love Tygranes -- Oh thou matchless
Original of Virtue! Love like Thine
How shall I e're return. Go then, brave Warrior,
Go where bright Honor calls, and when thy Sword
Through grappling Dangers hews thy path to Glory,
Be thou Herminia's Champion and I Thine.
For oh Tygranes to adorn that brow
And pull down Victory on that blessed Head,
I Will borrow from the Arms of my kind Lord
A bending Knee to He^v'n for dear Tygranes.

Tygr. And will the kind Herminia do all this,
For lost Tygranes, the Divine Herminia
A Beauteous Suppliant to the immortal Throne
Breath a soft Prayer, and melt the listening Gods,
And all for worthless me! Then I am orepay'd
For all my bleeding sighs. So blessed --

Herm. So blessed, if she can give thee blessings, all my Orisons
My tendrest Vows for Thy Success I Will pay,
With so much Zeal the pious offering given
Whilst thou shall combat Earth I Will wrestle Heaven.

King. Hold my Herminia, thou too Godlike Goodness,
And take me with thee in this generous Contest.
A Prayer for dear Tygranes! Prayers and Hecatombs:
Incense and Sacrifice, all Pomp Divine;
Altars shall smoke and blazing Temples Shine.
United Heaven and Earth shall join for Thee;
Thou and the World, brave Youth, the Gods and we,

Enter Messenger. Mess. Your Royal Sister
Conducted by ten-thousand Scythian Horse
Sent by the Mercy of her pitying Conqueror,
Free and unransom'd is returning home.

King. Free and unransom'd! Yes, relenting Tyrant,
Like flowery Garlands to a bleeding Victim,
A poor amends for Clarismunda's Wrongs.

Tygr. For the Reception of our Royal Sister,
Haste, Orimon, draw forth a thousand Horse
That these embracing Arms may fly to meet her. Exit.

King. My dear Herminia, the soft sweets of Love
Till this blessed Minute have been all my Theme.
But now, my fairest, I am forced to borrow
From the kind Arms of Joy one hour for pity.
I have a mourning Sister,
A wronged one my Herminia, whose Return
Must call one Tear even from the Eyes of Love.

Queen. A Tear for Clarismunda! Yes my dear
Loved Lord, if that wronged Sister does demand
The Royal Tribute of those richer Pearl,
I hope you will give these Eyes the Leave to add
Their pious Offering too.

King. Thine, my Herminia!

Queen. Mine, and all Eyes. At bleeding Virtues Sufferings
Our Griefs are but our Sympathetick pains.
Each melting Eye at that sad Object mourns:
The Loadstar draws, and trembling Pity turns.

Enter Tygranes Leading Clarismunda, Celestina, Rosalin etc. Clars. My Brother
and my King!
Take to thy Arms, thy generous pitying Arms
This Load of Misery, Despair and Ruin,

King. Fair Flower of Paradise, the sweetest Rose
Set in the Thorns of Life, dear Royal Mourner
My Souls best half, my own immortal Veins.

Clar. Thy Veins! No Sir that once fair Crystal Fountain
By the embitter'd Gall of Woes all poisoned,
The King gazes on Celestina. My blood runs Death, and I am thy Veins no more.

King What do I see! Great Gods!

Clar. But, oh, dread Sir,
In my affrighting Wounds, my Savage Wrongs,
I have brought home --

King, Those Eyes, my Clarismunda --

Clar. Eyes Sir! --

King. Those Wrongs, my Sister -- But proceed.

Clar. Those Wrongs indeed! So wronged,
There Is not that ministering Saint at Heavens high Throne
But midst his Scenes of everlasting Joys,
Looks down on Clarismunda's hideous Ruins.
Mine, mine is a Cause --

King. By Heavens, amazing Fair --

Clar. What says my King?

King. Thy Cause my Sweet, go on.

Clar. Yes, my dear Brother, and what is more then Brother
My Champion and my King; By those great Names
I call and challenge thy avenging Sword,
Thy Sword, my Soverain Justice

King. Artaban? withdrawing from Clarismunda and whispering, Clarismunda
strikes into Discourse in the mean while in dumb show with the Queen and Tygr.

Amor. Mirvan, do mark that Charming Stranger there?

Mir. Ay, and that firing King too. aside to Amorin.

King. That Lady to Artaban.

Art. My dread Lord!

King. That fair one.

Celest. Shoot home my Charms! now my Prophetic Glory! aside

Mir. Shine out fair stranger aside to Celestina.

Celest. Boy!

Mir. There Is Honor near ye.

Tygr. Dear Sister these Resenting Murmurs speak
With such an Emphasis.

Clar. Do they speak Brother!
They must act too: These wrongs that find a Tongue
Must find an Arm, Tygranes.

Tygr. Yes Royal sufferer,
Thou shall have Vengeance, Vengeance, Clarismunda,
If Arming Man and ayding Heaven can give it thee.

Clar. Do this, and all my work of Life is done:
And when thy Sword draws blood, drink deep, my Brother;
Remember nothing but a pile of Death
Can build the Tomb of Love. Build thou that Tomb
For Clarismunda; then I dare dye pleased
When I have seen my blazing monument raised.

King. Succeed and Challenge that Reward, my Artaban to Arta.

Exeunt all but Celestina and Mirvan. Celest. It Is don it is done; I read it in
his Eyes;
The Golden Shaft and all the whole Blind God.
Now my kind Sybill thou have fullfill'd thy Promise:
And I could kneel to thank thy Charming Oracle.
Oh Beauty! Love and Triumph wait thy Throne,
Hold my kind Toil but fast, the Game's my own. Exit.

Mir. So; -- a poor Slave has Charms to snare a King:
Yes, fair unknown, the Imperial Thunderer
Hangs gathering over thee in a glittering Shower,
And it is but spreading of thy Smiles before him
To catch the Golden God. -- well! There Is Love for you --
Death! what was I born for! Love's not my Province:
The Sweets of Life are banished from these Lips.
Kind Nature stamped me in Heavens Image, Man,
Born with a Face perhaps to have Captived Queens.
Till mercinary Infamous Barbarity
(An Eunuch Monster) basely robbed my Cradle,
And left me a dull Drone of the Creation. --
Since then the Gall, and Dreggs of Life, are all
My Portion; to requite the spightfull worlds
Unkindness, let me this one pleasure find
To doal round my own Draught to all Mankind.

Finis Actus Secundi.
ACT. III. SCENE. I.
Herminia discovered Sleeping on a couch attended by Mirvan and Amorin. Song.
WHy does the Idle World mistake,
And Love a Godhead make?
If Love were Heaven, like Heaven it would last,
And the Immortal Joys would never dye.
Ah no, false man, at every blast
In broken Vows Loves fleeting Shadows fly.
Down then let all his Glorys fall,
His Templet, Altars, Empire, all
To dirt and Ashes trod:
For oh the Fools, for oh the Fools, that make blind Love a God.
So when fair Celia mournd to find
Philander so unkind;
She saw the Tempest yoll too fast,
And all o'respread her rising Mornings dawn;
Her louring Fate was quite o'recast
And her Ecclipsing Glorys all withdrawn.
But though there shine such fading Jemms
In brittle Earthly Diadems,
Poor Celia never despair:
There Is Stars above, there is stars above to crown thee brighter there.
The Scene shuts and Mir. and Amo. advance upon the Stage. Amor. OH Mirvan,
this fair Scythians Charms are sure
Made up of Prodigy; and the blind God
Has stockt her with such Shafts, her Eyes Disdain
To play a lesser Game then Miracles,

Mir. Miracles indeed: An unknown Stranger face
Who, or from whence Hell knows, to catch a Monarch
from a young Princely Bride the fair Herminia,
A Beauty scarce Enjoyed.
The very Virgin Blushes on her Cheeks
Still warm; that lovelyest Rose gathered but yesterday,
And all the fragrant Sweets thrown by to day.
Abandoned, Slighted -- ay and all this too
By the strange Charms of such an Easy wanton
That Scarce held out the Courtship of an hour.
But See the glittring Pageant moves this way.
With what Devouring ravenous Eyes he swallows
The fair Destruction.

Amor. Put my dear Lost Mrs.
The poor Herminia, what a mournful part
Have thou in this gay Scene. Too unkind King --
Was it for this, in thy first blooming Youth,
By thy Imperial Fathers kind Commission
A Visitant in the fair Court of India,
That Early Votary to Herminia's Eyes,
Thou knelst at those dear Feet -- Sweet injured Goodness
My heart bleeds for thee.

Mir. Troth so does not mine.

Amor. How Mirvan, can thou see our Royal Mrs.
The poor neglected Queen, thus Scorned, thus Slighted,
Without one pitying Thought.

Mir. A pitying Thought!
Faith none at all.

Amor. Can thou be Man and say this?

Mir. No, Fool, were I a man I should not say this.
But when the cursed Luxury of Greatness
As the early brand of a Court Slave,
(A dog a nobler Creature) took Man from me,
It took Humanity too -- Spite, darling Spite.

Amor. But See the Queen and Princess

Mir. Well if this fair Scythian Wanton
This white she-devil do not prove at last
That firebrand, that State-Firebrand, as shall one day
Set Persia in a Flame: -- if this she-Phaeton
Prove not at last the arrantest State-grievance
E're ruined Monarch, or Sucked Nation poor,
May my Propheticks be believed no more.

Enter Queen and Clarismunda. Queen. The Treasure of my soul, my dear Lords
Love,
The hoarded Mass of a whole Ages Bliss
All by one midnight Thief for ever lost.

Clar. Indeed my Royal Sister thy sad Story
Melts pity from my Eyes; and trust me, dear Herminia,
My own unhappy Load of Miseries
Have drein'd these Streams so low, their did not want
Thy Sufferings to raise a second Spring.

Queen This generous Sense of my hard Fate speaks thee
So truly kind --

Claris. So truly just, Herminia.
For in the deep Resentments of thy Wrongs
Mine is no common Share. 'Twas Clarismunda
Was their unfortunate Cause. That infamous Creature
That Scythian Devil my unhappy Favorite;
By my mistaken Charity to that
Deluding Face, the fatal Cockatrice Egg
Hatched by my warmth to all this brood of Mischief.

Queen. Nay Clarismunda, charge not Thy fair Virtue
With so unjust a Stain. Thy part was innocent.
When angry Providence resolves to kill
It easily finds the Means. Misery, and
Misfortune still like Weeds and poisons Shoot.
Alas they want a very little Root.

Clar. Sweet murmuring Turtle hush thy mournful plaints
And bear thy Soul above the Worlds poor spite.
Let thy dark shades make thy fair Truth more bright.
It Is the True Diamond that shines by night.
And then the frowns of Fortune we out brave
When Grief is not our Tyrant but our slave. Exeunt.

Enter Orontes disguised attended only by Briomar. Oront Yonder she moves, my
louring planet moves.
But why do I not follow her, run to her,
Run to my doom, and catch her blasting fires.
Bid all her blazing Bolts of Thunder turn;
Court the Keen Lightning of her Eyes, and burn.

Briom. Oh Royal Sir, think to what threatening Danger
Will your Rash Love expose your Life and Glory.
Yes, if bold Truth may speak, to what unprincely
Nay what unmanly Dangers. --

Oront. Preaching fool
No more profane Reflections on a Cause
So sacred. --

Briom. Can there be a Cause so sacred
To draw you forth from your abandoned Kingdoms,
And in this poor Disguise to quit your Throne? Briomar

Oront. Quit Thrones! quit Worlds, quit Earth and Heaven my
Run mad, despair, and dye.

Briom. Dye Sir!

Oront* Yes, dye.
To Deaths short pain from lingering Tortures fly:
Plunge the Vast Deep, and launch to that blessed shore
Where Clarismunda's Scorn can kill no more.

Briom. Death I confess is Woes last certain Remedy.
But when the Great seek Death, they ought to meet him
In the fair Paths of Glory. Poorly dying
Is worse then basely Living. Sir, consider
You're born to Empire, hold the Charge of Kingdoms,
A Royal Cause, and a protected people;
Besides behold a gathering Storm before you,
Arms at your Gates, and Vengeance round your Walls,
Advanceing Enemies, and pushing Fate.
That Death thou seek'st, seek nobly, King. Crowned Heads
Should not fall crushed like poor despairing slaves,
But build their Monuments when they digg their Graves.

Oront. Kind Briomar, I thank thy honest Love.
It Is true the Charge of Empire lies upon us.
Yet Heavens Vicegerents are not so all Gods
But we have a little of the Man about us.
Shackled with Sovereignty, and tied up to Honor,
We are not so fast to golden Fetters cursed,
But Love one Link of the long Chain may burst.
Oh Briomar -- I have that last Account yet to make up
To that Fair Tyrants Ear before I dye.
That as thou valuest my Eternal Peace,
By all thy Loyalty I must conjure thee,
Under the shelter of this kind Disguise,
To gain me an Access. But one blessed Minute
At Clarismunda's Feet.

Briom. But in this kind Disguise can you so rule
Your mastered Passion, as to keep your shrowed,
No frantic start to burst your guardian Cloud.
Sir, dare you promise me. --

Oront. Yes I dare promise.
Shall I perform my Briomar?

Briom* How Sir.

Oront. No more; I Will be obeyed.

Briom. Then Sir, my Duty shall dispute no more;
The Access shall be obtained: Though I much fear
Effects too dismal.

Oront. Leave Effects to Fate:
Love spurs the Leap, and Danger Checks too late. Exeunt.

Scene a Room of State. Enter Celestina, Rosalin and Women. Ros. Madam, five
hundred Talents from the King, --

Cel. Have Kissed my Hand this Morning.

Ros. From Great Love
A fair presented Sum.

Cel. To buy me pins.
A small Oblation. But my Royal Vassal
Remembers his Allegiance; knows his Duty,
And pays my Eyes their Tribute -- Now, my Rosalin,
How do thou like the Port our Greatness bears?
Say is a Monarchs Hear a Toy worth wearing?

Rosal. Your Conquest is a perfect Reign of Wonders.

Cel. Nay, I have conquered now: And such a Conquest,
That surfeited Delight, and gorged Ambition
Have drunk so deep, that they can thirst no more.

Ros. Madam, the Princess --

Cel. Ha! What brings her here. -- perhaps
The Conscientious Fool comes to Preach Honor,
Herminia's Wrongs, and Celestina's Fraylty;
If so; I am resolved I will receive her
Like my great self, the Mistress of a Power
The World's too weak to shake.

Enter Clarismunda. Claris. I stoop beneath My self when I descend
To talk with Sin and Shame. But sweet Herminia
A Champion in Thy Cause commanding Justice
Forgive the Faults offending Honor makes
No; the proud Theif, the Siren has undon thee
Shall not move off with Her Rich prize so tamely.
I Will talk with the gay Sin, and glittring Infamy.

Cel These happy Walls and their more happy Mistress
Thus honored and thus grace'd! Believe me Madam,
You Have so surprised me with this wondrous Goodness,
Took me so unprepared for a Reception
Worthy of such a Guest --

Claris. Hold, there is no need
Of so much courtly Ceremony. All
I came to meet I Have found, thy self; and wish
The Visitant I bring thee may receive
But half this promised welcome.

Cel. If I am All
You came to seek, I am proud that you have found me,
And prouder to receive whatever Commands
Honor can give, or Honor can obey.
As such, no doubt, you bring me, speak Your pleasure.

Clar. Honor! Oh thou have named the richest Jem
That e're adorned the Fair True Honor, Beauties
Inestimable wealth; whilst we wear Thee
We have inexhausted Mines of endless Treasure,
Enough to enrich the world. Where Honor Shines,
Our Eyes are Sparks of Heaven, It Is that kind Sun
That lights 'em into Stars. The Great just Powers
Made us the fairest work of their Creation,
Till our own faults our own defacing Shame
Unmakes the work of Gods.

Celest. Ay, now you charm my Ear with ravishing Music,
Honor our Sexes warmest Pride, Our whole
Devotion, Saint, Heaven, All we kneel and pray to.
And Madam, if those Powers you name have made
Beauty the Master-stroak of their Creation,
I thank their Generous Moulding Hands These Eyes
Are not their poorest stamp. And to do Justice
To Heavens unfinisht Piece, I shall take care
In the bright sphere to which my charms have raised me,
Not to unmake, but mend the work of Gods.

Claris. The Sphere thy Charms have raised thee to! No thou
Gay gilded Vanity, call 'em thy Sorceryes,
The 'infatuating, false deluding Fires
Of Sin plumed up with Power, thou vile Usurper.

Celest. Usurper! That diminitive Imp of Majesty,
That puny poor Prerogative! no Madam
Your kinder Justice sure can find my Glories
A fairer name.

Claris. A fairer name!

Celest. perhaps
The little Murmures Envy and Ignorance,
Have been too buisy with your Royal Ear,
And breathed my Name with their unhallowed Lips.
But to correct the will manner'd Grin of Fools
Let the Kings Heart, and these victorious Eyes
Tell the vain babbling world I reign by Conquest.

Claris. What do I hear! Oh thou amazing Front
Of blushless Guilt! Thou sit'st enthroned in Sin then.
Hold'st thy black seat of shame by Claim and Title,
And stampst a Royal Soverainty on Damnation.

Cel. Madam, this Language -- But no more
You are too blame, mistaken angry Princess;
For when I shall enform that Peevish Snarler
For whom thou playst the Champion, what good Offices
I Have done her with the King, She Will have but small
Occasion of Complaint, For I must tell you
As my peculiar Grace I have given him Leave
T'allow her a fair Court, Guards and Attendants,
And all the Decency that suits her Quality.
Nay, and to show you I Am more generous still
I have permitted him to pay her the
Civilityes of a Wife.

Claris. Civilityes!

Celest. And let me tell you. It Is not
A Common Condescension in a Mrs.
To give a Wife that Liberty.

Claris. Great Gods! This is beyond all mortal Patience.
She gives her Husband Leave; it is she allows her; --
Her Favors all --
Oh poor Herminia, whither art thou fallen, aside.
Brought thy rich Royal Veins from thy fair India,
To be a Pensioner to a vile Wanton;
Reign the Precarious Partner of a Throne.
But thou rank Weed, thou poisonous plant of Death,
Oh that thou would give thy Soul but so much Leisure
As even to think --

Cel. Think! I have Thought.
For Thinking's half the pleasure

Claris. No, thou too hardend Brow, did thou but know
What it is to be --

Cel. The Mrs. of a King --
Yes, very well.

Clar. The Mrs. of a King! no fair Perdition
Change that gay name and call thy self a Prodigy.

Celest. A Prodigy! Right; all made up of Wonders.
The very Thing I would be.

Claris Barbarous Creature!
Is thy Lethargick Sleep of Death so deaf
To all the Alarms of Infamy and Vengeance;
That not one frighting Dream nor waking Horror
Tells thee what hideous Loads of Woe thou have heaped
On Wayling Innocence, the wronged Herminia;
Snatched a loved Lord from her embracing Arms,
And left her mourning Days and widowed Nights:
Robbed all her Dearest Joys.

Celest. It Is, true, I have so.
And I confess the Loss is something hard.
But to repair that Loss, tell the fair Mourner,
Her Charms are not so lost, but thousand Cupids
With thousand Darts, and every Shaft a Heart,
Attend the daily Triumphs of her Eyes.

Claris. Oh my Chaste Ears! aside.

Cel. What though the ungrateful King
Has played the Wanderer; can that fair Shrine
Want Homagers! The world is not so poor.

Claris. Hold profane Insolent! stop that sulphurous Breath.
Rooted with horror I have heard thee out;
And a chill Damp about my trembling Heart
Has but just left me blood enough to blush
That thou were born of Woman.
Quick Let me fly that cloven footed Treason,
Least yawning Earth, and swallowing Graves receive me. Exit.

Cel. Poor angry thing farewell; such chattring Daws
Dismount my Eagle Flight!
That bugbear Conscience! No,
I Have Loves whole Feast before me. And let those
Dull puny squeamish Fools that dare not carve
Hug their Lean Virtue, pine, Despair, and starve. Exit.

Scene Changes. Enter Herminia and Amorin. Herm. Art sure this is the Kings
Retiring Hour,
And this the place to meet him?

Amor. Every Minute
His Presence is expected. But dear Madam
I have one humble prayer, that this small service
Of your Obedient slave be kept a Secret;
This is forbidden Ground, and 'twill be more
Then half the price of my poor Life to serve you.

Her. Fear not sweet Youth, I Will guard thee from that Danger. Ex. Amo.
Forbidden Ground! Is Love a Crime so mortal?
And am I grown that poison to his Eyes!
Oh for the Spirit of the great Semiramis
To meet my wrongs, and stemm the storm that sinks me
No, I Have too much the Mothers Milk within me,
Weep like a Girl, and bend beneath my sufferings;
Nature intended me some humble shepherdess,
A Creature born to breath her plaints to Woods
And helpless Groves, to mix her feeble Tears
In murmuring Brooks; too weak to weild the Thunder,
And rowze the sleeping Rage of injured Majesty.

Enter King. King. Herminia! Ha! That Face, and in these Walls!
Methinks I feel a chilling Damp within me,
A secret check from those accusing Eyes --
Let my retiring shame -- going back.

Herm. My Lord, my King!

King. Madam --

Herm. I have a Grace to beg. Not that I Would ask
Ungrateful Favors from You. But methinks
From all your long long Hours of happier Blisses,
Herminia, sure, may beg one borrowed Minute --

King That painful Minute aside.

Her. There was once a day
When underneath my Native Royal Roof,
The Imperial Towrs of the proud Indian Court,
To my first Virgin Charms a gaudy Train
Of suppliant Kings, all Captives to my Eyes
Knelt at my Feet, unless their Sighs deceive'd me,
(For they were men and it is a flattering World)
I think (if you have not quite forgot) my Lord
Was one of that fair Train, and loved me too,
Or else my Virgin heart was poorly won.
I think you loved -- But if I am mistaken,
Correct my Fault, and I will weep and mend it.

King. This is too much thou murmuring Sweetness:
Dry up thy Tears, and weep no more.

Herm. No more!

King. No more; for trust me
It is a shower too rich to fall for me.

Herm. Ah King, to dry these ever streaming Sorrows,
Is not my work but Thine. To stop these Fountains
Shut thou the springs that feed 'em. Ah my Lord,
Remove the fatal cause of all these Tears
And then I Will cease to mourn.

King. Alas Herminia!
Upbraid my Guilt no more; but think me punished
Even in my very Sin: for when I am false
To so much Truth, a Love like thine; it is with
That conscious Shame, and those accusing Horrors --

Herm. That pleasing Pride and those transporting Charms:
Thou would say -- Poor Herminia, has no Charms
Or if she ever had any, even their very
Remembrance, like a last nights Dream, the thin
And vanishing Shadow gone, they are all lost
In Celestina's Arms, that fatal Ravisher
Of all my hopes, my Joys, my Life.

King. Ah Madam,
Cease this too killing Theme: consider me
As a poor helpless Wretch driven headlong by
An unaccountable resistless Power.
Alas, I would be faithful if I could.
All that I can, command my bleeding heart,
My bending Neck, my Head beneath thy Feet:
These I can grant; but do not ask impossibles.

Herm. Impossibles! nay then I read my Fate.

King. If it be Fate it is past our humane power
To reverse Destiny, and in submitting
TO immutable Decree exalted Virtue
Exerts her noblest Wisdom Patience.

Herm. Patience. Enter Tygranes.
Yes Sir you take the nearest way to teach it me,
For when your strange unkindness gives me death,
I shall be hushed all Patience in my Grave.

King. Madam, my Charity takes me from your sight
The greatest Height of pity we express
To shut our Ears from Greifs we cannot redress. Offering to go.

Herm. Oh stay upon my Knees I do conjure you.
Move not that way: That killing passage leads
To Celestina; And in all your Cruelty
Show that poor Mercy to the lost Herminia,
To stay one little Minute from her Arms.

Tygr. Oh King, can so much Beauty plead in vain?
All those rich pearl, those dear fair Streams of Life
Drop from those Eyes and unreguarded fall.

King. My Brother!

Tygr. My dread Lord, coud'st thou but think
What Glory waits on Majesty, where Virtue
Shines the bright Jem of Diadems, that sweetness
Need not have Knelt thus long.

King. Tygranes!

Tygr. Thou dear all Sovereign Goodness, turn but one
Kind look, and veiw that lovely Kneeling Mourner
Charming in Tears, and beauteous even in Ruins.

Herm. Kind Prince, no more: spend not thy prodigal Breath
On a poor Outcast Wretch, not worth his Thought.

Tygr. But one one Look. Think but what charms invite thee.
Humanity, Religion, Nature; the
Whole pitying World entreats thee back to Love.
Oh Sir consider raise your mounting Thoughts
To the exalted charms of Godlike Virtue:
Think what soft Down in Loves rich Bed of Honor,
Fills the calm pillows of embracing Innocence.

King. Oh my Tygranes.

Herm. Yes my dear loved Lord
In these incircling Arms these chaste Embraces
No guilty Dreams the starts of frighted sin
And pangs of aching guilt will wake your sleeps,
But fair all Heavenly Forms seal your closed Eyes,
And Quires of Angels lull your Golden slumbers.

King, Alas my poor Herminia,

Herm. Oh my Stars!
I see a dawning pity in his Eyes
Break forth my rising Sun and make it all
Immortal Day and ever shining Joys.
Take Take your kneeling Mourner to your Arms;
Take me to love, be kind and bid me live,
And stab my bleeding breaking Heart no more.

King. Thou talk, sweet Murmurer --

Tygr. Oh Sir embrace the blessed Minute,
Return to her dear Arms, return to all
The Joys of Earth and the Rewards of Heaven:
Think but what shining Host of Supliant Saints
Expand their Arms to embrace thy blessed Repentance.

King. My dear Tygranes,
My Fame, my Crown, and my Imperial Cause
Call thee to Arms, to Arms: My mustered Legions,
And marching Armies wait thee in their head.
Go forth my Son of War: the great To morrow
Leads to the Field.

Tygra. Doubt not that great To morrow;
Be you but Just to day. Run to her Bosom:
Oh run, and take her to your pitying Mercy,
Myriads of Joys and thousand thousand Blisses --

King. Battles and Arms! Hark the Shrill Trump Tygranes,
The Alarm of Honor calls.

Tygra. The Trump of Virtue, King;
It Is that that sounds to call thy wandering Heart
To these abandoned Arms.

King. The Scythian Tyrant,
And Clarismunda's Wrongs.

Tygr. The Scythian Sorceress, Exit King forcing himself from them.
And lost Herminia's, Wounds.

Queen. Too cruel King.
Sure I am not the first unhappy Woman
That wept for Broken Vows, and faithless Man:
Yet sure the first that ever wept so soon:
So Young, so early lost, in the very Morn
Of Love for ever set -- Put generous Prince.
So much I owe thee for this wondrous Goodness;
What kind Return can this vast Debt defray?
What I am too Poor I must beg Heaven to pay. Exit.

Tygr. Such charms and this unkind Return! Ah King,
Had those dear Eyes but smiled on blessed Tygranes
How had I loved! Oh Beauty, in thy whole Divinity
How narrow is thy Attribute of Mercy;
Thy Sovereign power of Life and Death so shackled,
That in a thousand Bleeding hearts before thee,
Thy kind repreiving smile can save but one!
Nay, and that very single Mercy too
Is often dealt with that unlucky Hand,
Made some ungrateful tastless Infidells prize,
Whilst perishing Truth stands by and starving dies. Exit.

Finis Actus Ter^ij.
ACT. IV. SCENE. I.
Celestina and Rosalin. Cel. THE Embraces of a King! Poor Satisfaction!
A Monarchs Darling, but a Kingdoms Loathing.
All a dishonourd Blot, the Worlds cheap Theme,
And common Tale of every grinning slave.
The Queen! -- Ay, she even in her lowest sufferings
Outshines my tallest Pride. The peoples Love
And the universal pity of mankind
Like perfumed Sweets embalm her fragrant Fame.
But me their Hate and Scorn; my very Sex
Stand at a Bay all frighted at my Name
And drive me like a hunted Fugitive
From out the Herd of Life. I cannot bear it.

Ros. Dear Madam --

Cel. Oh thou lying Oracle, where is
My promised Mountains, all your Boasted Miracles!
No; Flattring falsehood, tell thy Lord of Darkness
There is no Faith in Hell. Did thou not Promise
False Prophetess, that I should reign in Pleasure.

Ros. If Sovereignty, Dominion; if to hold
A King in Chains, and Crowns in Vassalage, be
To reign in Pleasure, she has performed that Promise.

Cel. A King my Slave! poor narrow-bounded Throne!
Thin empty Bliss; for in Possessing His,
I have lost the Hearts of all the World beside.
Nay what has all my mighty Conquest made me
That little despicable Wretch a Harlot.
Oh the foul Blister, Cankers and Diseases!
Is there that humblest of my cringing Flatterers,
That waits the uprising of my morning Smile,
And pays me his (All Hayl) for the snatched blessing,
Even with those Lips that kiss the Earth I move on,
No sooner is his fawning Face turned from me,
But with a low reviling Eye puts forth
His forked Tongue and hisses at my Shame.

Ros. Why all this foolish Murmur! Thus concerned
For that Course Vulgar Blast the Popular Breath!
Does your exalted Greatness want Their Love!
It is enough they fear you. Fear the noblest
Prerogative, 'twas Fear that first made Gods.

Cel. No, Girl, this Shallow Sophistry --

Ros. Nay Madam
Your Witches and your Propheycing Devils
I Am sure have done their Part. And if you have still
A giddy roving uncontented Thought,
E'ne blame your own unsatisfyed desires:
If Woman's vain Ambition covets more
Then all Hell has to give, it is not Hells Fault but Woman's.

Cel. But oh my Rosalin, I cannot bear
This public Odium of the World and live.
Only the Mistress of his loose Desires.
His burning Kisses all but Sooty Fires.
That little Outly of his Love, his Mistress.

Ros. His Mistress!
Why would you be his Queen?

Cel. His Queen! Ay, that is
A name indeed, that Sacred Post of Honor;
Myriads of pleasures wait the hallowed Brightness;
A Solid Heaven of Constellated Blisses,
Substantial Power, untainted Glory: Then
I should have Hearts as well as Knees to serve me.

Ros. His Queen! -- Why truly Madam, since your Wishes
Must soar so high, I know no wondrous Stops
That hold their Flight, considering your Ascendant,
The Eyes you wear, and the fond Heart you govern

Cel. Ha*

Ros. Were the Gordian Bar removed between you.
The golden Fruit would meet your reaching Hand,
And fairly bid you carve your own Desires.

Cel. The Gordian Bar removed! and fairly carve
My own Desires! -- What Bar but poor Herminia?
That feeble Thread -- Thou dear inspiring Devil!
Oh what a mountain Thought of vast Ambition --
Comes pouring ore me like a rolling Deluge.

Ros. Madam, Young Mirvan the Queens favorite Eunuch.
Waits for Access as your petitioner.

Cel. Mirvan!
Admit him. Enter Mirvan.

Mir. Madam, amongst the universal Knees
All bending to salute the rising Sun,
Might poor I dare t'implore one smiling Beam.

Cel. Push thy fair suit, and try thy generous Fortune.

Mirv. Then Madam, I Have a Brother, and a Brother
Not born like me to curse his riffled Cradle:
A Brother that writes Man, and would write Man
In Characters of Blood. A Youth that dares
As much as Courage can, or Honor ought.
And though his praise suits not my Mouth, to give
Fair Truth her due, he wears a Sword, he thinks
Too brave to rust, a Boy that would lead Men;
And therefore begs by me your gracious Interest
For a Commission for him.

Cel. If thy Brother,
Sweet Boy, but fights with half the Grace thou suest
He might lead Armies: Well, kind Advocate,
He shall have a Commission, and a Noble one.

Mirv. Thus low my Kneeling Gratitude --

Cel. Rise Mirvin. --
This Boy well managed -- aside.
Rise, my pretty Suppliant,
Thou look and talk so winningly, there is nothing
I can deny to that petitioning Face.

Mirv. My Face! It Is well
I have a Face to beg a Ladys favor. aside.

Cel. Well, gentle Boy, such early Wit as Thine
Tells me thou know the World. How do thou like
The pleasures of a Court!

Mirv. How should I like
What I want power to taste?

Cel. Nay, fie, my Boy.
Thou wrongst my Innocent meaning.

Mirv. Then to answer
Your Innocent meaning with an Equal Innocence,
That downright Truth your Bounty merits from me
How can I love the Court who hate the World?

Cel. Thou hate it. What have Thy young Years to quarrel at,
That thou should hate the World!

Mirv. I had a Father in it.
And for his sake I hate it.

Cel. For his sake!

Mirv. A poor meanspirited Slave, that got me Man,
And for a wretched Bribe of the Court Gold
Unmade the Thing he got me -- For which I owe him
My honest hearty Curses in his Grave,
And for his sake hate the whole loathed Creation.

Cel. How Mirvan if thou hate'st the whole Creation,
Thou must hate me, and it is not safe to talk with thee.

Mirv. Nay Madam (and believe I Scorn to flatter)
Of all the hated World I love you best:
Because I fancy all those Charms were given you
To do a little Mischief in the World,
That darling Mistress of Eyes dear Mischief.

Cel. Hate the whole world beside? and I alone
The favorite! Nay this is kind indeed.
But may I trust that Kindness?

Mir. Trust me Madam!
Now by those Eyes I swear, those brig^t Incendiaryes
What is it I dare not do to serve that fair Destruction.
Play the proud Juno and command me Labors
Like a young Hercules; and if I shrink or tire
Say I Have a Soul as abject and as base
As the poor frame the Imp of man that holds it.

Cel. This is so generous --

Mirv. Trust me say you.
Nay I will trust you First; and with a secret
Of that prodigious weight.

Cel. The rarest Tool!

Mirv. Know then the Queen, the more then Widowed Queen,
Too sad a Mourner at your fatal Triumph
In pure Despair for her deserting Lord
Resolves this very night --

Cel. Oh my big Hopes! aside.

Mir. In a disguise to leave the Court and Kingdom;
And bury all her Sorrows in a Cloister.

Cel. To my best wish! [aside.]

Mir. For this Religious Voyage
Who should she choose her Pilot but my self;
Her singular Trust of my confiding Truth,
Has picked out Me, her only leading Guide
TO her Melancholy Cell.
Peruse this Letter,
Committed to my Care to leave behind her
As her last farewell to her unkind Lord.

Cel. Reads.
Letter.
That I have loved you even to a Superstition, planted my very Heaven in Love,
the Transports of my Despair too plainly testify. But when my feeble fraylty
can bear my Wrongs no longer, pardon the Effects of what Your Unkindness is but
the too fatal Cause, when I thus fly from so much Inhumanity to the Arms of a
kinder Heaven.

Herminia.



Mir. Now Madam, as you like it, make your best on it.

Cel. Oh Mirvan! now I must believe thou love me.
This is so kind a Trust. Thou toldst me too
That thou lov'dst Mischief.

Mir. Faith, won'd You durst try.
How much I love it.

Cel. Say thou so, my Boy!
Nay then dare thou be kind, and let me in
A Party to this Plot, a kind Assistant
To hand this Mourning Wanderer to her Cell!
Say, dare thou let me choose her Cloister for her?

Mir. With all my Soul. If any Noble Spite
Glow warm within your Breast, set it a blazing.
At that sweet Game form your own dearest Wish,
And mould Your slave to serve you.

Cel. To my Arms
Thou kindest little Engine, serve me, but
As the Rewards I Will pay thee shall deserve,
And melt me into Gold.

Mir. Alas dear Madam,
There needs not a Reward to buy my Faith.
Be but your Great Designs what I can wish 'em,
Without the needless Bribe of Gold or Treasure,
I would give Wealth to purchase such a pleasure. Exeunt.

Scene Changes. Enter Orontes disguised. Oron. From Scythia's Throne, and my
proud Armies Head,
From softer Majesty, and rougher Wars
All glittering Plumes, all my once bright Regalia
Stripped to this narrow Shroud to wrap my Woes,
And bring my Death to Clarismunda's Feet.
Oh Love! How unaccountable's thy Power.

Enter Clarismunda attended. Clar. From that loathed Name --

Oront. From that loathed Name Orontes
To that loved Heaven, his cruel Clarismunda,
He has commanded these Commissioned Knees
To beg one listening Minute.

Clar. Your Petition
Is an Ungrateful Theme. Yet I am not
So deaf to my worst Foe, but my kind Patience
Shall lend the Ear thou ask'st.

Oront. Thus then by me
That Sentenced Criminal speaks. If by that fairest Hand
Death shakes his Glass, and waves his Brandished Shaft;
If executing Destiny's gone forth,
And meager Graves with all their hungry Yawn
Wait their last Gorge of poor Orontes Blood:
To his adored destroying Angels Ear,
Thus breath his Dying Accents. -- Oh Bright Madam!
If Tears that would melt Rocks, if Groans enough
To wake the Sleep of Tombs; if tortured Conscience
Above the very Pangs of lost Eternity.
And to all these a Penitence so true,
Enough to unlock Heaven. -- If these, all these
Might beg his Life from Cruel Clarismunda, --

Clar. Could all these beg his Life --

Oront. And with that Life
His Clarismunda's Love

Clar. My Love!

Oront Thy Love,
Dear, all Divine! For without Love it is Death still.
Oh could that dear forgiving Mercy take
A pardoned Penitent to those dear Arms,
Not Ransomed Slavery, not Life Reprieved,
Not Crowned Ambition, nor translated Martyr,
Half, half so blessed as he! To those fair Eyes
He Would raise those Monuments of mighty Love
Should outlive Worlds; and finishing Time close up
His last Recorded Volume with the Story
How blessed Orontes loved.

Clar. Mistaken Advocate
To have tried the Eloquence of those soft Sounds,
They should have spoke before Orsanes Death.

Oront. And does that Louring Vision wake for ever;
The lost Orontes Crime so all impardonable!

Clar. So impardonable, that
To leave the World with my loud wrongs unrighted,
When I shall meet my great Forefathers Souls,
'Twould make me blush in Heaven.

Oront. Too Cruel Fair!

Clar. Sir, I must hear no more. Go bear your Master
This Answer, as my fixed Eternal Vow,
I will have my Revenge: But tell him too
So much I owe to his Repenting Tears
That when my Arming Wrongs that hunted Blood
Shall spill, I Will give the Executing Blow,
Calm as the Priestess at an Altar Kills,
Yet still must Kill.

Oront. But can that Beauteous Priestess
Accept no gentler Sacrifice, no less
Appeasing Victim than the poor Orontes
All streaming Blood? And is one Thought of Mercy
That strange Impossible?

Clar. So much Impossible,
Perhaps beyond the Grave I may forgive him,
On this side Death I must not.

Oront. Then dear Cruelty, Discovers himself.
Take, take my thirsted Blood.

Clar. Good Gods, Orontes!
Oh King! How poorly thou have thy self undone?
Have put thy wretched Life into my Power;
And I must tamely take it. Had thou met
My Nobler Vengeance in thy Armies head,
Thrust thy bold Breast against ten thousand Javelins,
Thou might have fallen with Honor, Honor, King!
But now, now I must take this poor Advantage.
(Thou kill'st Orsanes poorly)
Forget thou art a King, Uncrown'd, Unthroned,
Led like a Vulgar Slave, bound in Vile Chains,
And at the Tomb of the great Cyrus, there,
There through thy humble naked yielding Throat
Hew out my Vengeance, carve thy bleeding Heart
A Sacrifice to Clarismunda's wrongs.
My Guards, my Slaves there. Enter Attendants, Guards.

1 Attend. Madam, Your Commands?

Clar. If your lost Honor, and your bleeding Country,
An injured Monarch, and a Kingdoms shame,
Can rouse your Swords --

Oront. Strike, strike 'em through this Breast.
Yes, generous Persians, behold before ye
The black Orontes, Scythias Tyrant Lord,
Stained in the Blood of Thousand, Thousand Persians;
And the deplored Orsanes barbarous Murderer.
But bear me to the Tomb of your great Cyrus;
There hew your Vengeance, carve my bleeding Heart
A Sacrifice to Clarismundas Wrongs.

Clar. So pleased with Fate! Then you are in love with Death!

Oront. So much in Love, that on my Knees I Will meet it.
I wear a Load of useless Life about me;
And you are so kind to ease me of my Burden.
Now Gentlemen, perform your Royal Charge:
Bear me to Death, to Death with the Vile Monster.
Loaded with Chains, led forth a public Spectacle
To pointing Infamy and hissing Scorn:
For that fair Doom will have it so.

Clar. Will have it so!

Orant. Quick, quick, ye tedious Slaves
Can she speak Death, and you want Wings to execute?
Let not Crown'd-Head, nor King, those titular Sounds
Tie up your Hands, those forfeit Names my Crimes
And this wronged Fair --
But bear me to my Death, to Scaffolds, Gibbets,
Stripped to a Naked Dungeon Malefactor,
Tread my crushed Soul. --

Clar. Stand off ye Impious Villains!
A Monarch's Blood, and shed by Hangmens hands!
Oh, whither was my Fleeting Glory going!
His bending Neck like a tame bleating Sacrifice,
A stroke beneath my Scorn -- But haste Arsaces.
Raise all my Persian Guards, and in their Head
Go, bear him back, back to his moving Armies,
Safe to his headed Legions. There Orontes,
At the Proud Front of all thy Royal Squadrons,
With Groves of Spears, and walling Shields around thee,
Rich in thy Crested Plumes, and Glittering Steel,
Worthy the Persian Swords, and Clarismundas Vengeance,
Strike then my Arm of Fate.

Oront. Oh wondrous Honor!
Even in amazing Cruelty!

Clar. Yes Scythian.
Though all the Persian Bolts
Are levelled at that Heart, thy Blood Orontes,
My whole rich Game of Death; yet not to snare
My hunted Lion in Ignoble Toils --
No, King; Return, return; thy Crown, thy Arms,
And Royal Standard want thy leading Sword. --

Oront. So brave a Foe! --

Clar. Reserve thy Sword thy Answer:
Armed at the head of slaughtered Fields, there Scythian
Fall thy great self, Die warm my Royal Enemy;
To morrows hotter Veins my Vengeance pay:
Thy Blood Orontes is too cold to Day. Exit.

Oront. Die warm! Yes, Generous Foe, thy envied Glory
Shall light my Fire; Despair to Fury turn:
In my last Flash my brightest Blaze shall burn.
Through Blood and Death move on against all thy odds,
Thy Wrongs, the Arming World, and battailing Gods!
For by those Eyes a Sacrifice decreed,
It Is just I should a glorious Victim bleed. Exit.

Scene Changes. Enter Celestina, and Rosalin. Cel. The Bolt is shot, and now a
Crown stand fair. aside.

Ros. Madam, I Am all Amazement at the News!

Cel. Amazed, at what? To hear a mad young wife
Has took a Midnight's Ramble!

Ros. But the Queen!
Oh Madam! Certainly some strange Despair
Has caused this Secret Flight, perhaps to seek
Some solitary Grot to Sigh and Die.

Cel. To Sigh and Die! Poor innocent Simplicity!
What if she is stolen to some retiring Solitude,
To meet a private Lover?

Ros. How! a Lover!

Cel. Mark the Truth, I tell thee
That very thing a Lover.

Ros. It Is impossible!
Such Tears, and so much Nuptial Faith --

Cel. Why, All
That Is nothing: Woman's Truth like Woman's Beauty,
Is not a thing Immortal.

Ros. But dear Madam,
Herminias rigid Principles of Honor,
And her fond Sighs even for her Faithless Lord,
Admit a Lawless Love!

Cel. Though it be Lawless
Is it not Love still, Fool? Enter King.

King. Dear Sovereign of my Soul,
Asia's fair Pride, and Persia's more than Conqueror,
Thou all amazing Brightness to my Bosom.

Cel. Oh Prince! Encircled in these Arms, methinks
The Transport of my Joys bears my winged soul so high
Till I look down on Under-Worlds beneath me.

King. Look down indeed, thou dear Triumphant Fair,
Whilst those poor Under-Worlds all blushing own
Their whole Creation cannot match these Eyes.

Cel. Nay, now you flatter.

King. By those sweets I cannot.
For thine are Charms above the reach of Flattery.
But, Madam, t'add one Trophy to your Eyes,
The poor Resenting Queen (would thou believe it)
Is this Night fled from Court.

Cel. Alas, poor pitied Sweetness!

King. Prithee be kind, and Read this murmuring Scrole,
A Farewell Letter she has left behind her.
Celest. Reads. That I have Loved you to a Superstition, planted my very Heaven
in Love. -- Your Unkindness is the too Fatal Cause when I thus fly -- to the
Arms of a kinder Heaven.

Herminia.



King. That she is gone, and the angry Cause that drives her,
Her Letter speaks too plain. But whither gone?
That she has wrapped in Mystery. I suppose
I must be kept in Darkness from that Secret.

Gel. Darkness and Mystery! Why is there any thing
In this plain, easy, naked, honest Letter
Writ in that Cipher that it wants a Key to it?

King. Why, Can thou Read her meaning?

Cel. Fie, my Lord,
Can you not Read it? -- Why this idle Question?
You will not Read it, Sir. -- And it is so generous
I love you for this goodness.

King. Will not Read it!

Cel. Ay, will not, must not: And it is Noble in you.
A little innocent Ignorance is sometimes
A Manly Virtue, worthy even a King.

King. Madam, This is all Riddle!

Cel. Riddle! -- Nay, Sir, as if you did not know
Where, and to whose Embracing Arms she is gone.

King. Arms, and Embraces!

Cel. Ah poor Lady!
We little guess the pains of slighted Love.
But her Despair has took the wisest remedy.
Her Griefs found a very gentle Cure.
Nay, she is so kind to make it her Confession,
And you're more kind to wink at little Frailties

King. Still you talk in Clouds.
Has she made you the Confident of her Flight,
Or is there ought coucht in that mystic Scrole
My shallow Reason has not depth to fathom!
If so, 'twere kind you would instruct my weakness.

Cel. Nay, if you will force me then to play th'Interpreter,
T'explain a Ladies blushing weakness. Mark Sir --
She tells you first she loved to a Superstition,
Planted her very Heaven in your embraces.
And when that slighting unkind Heaven forsakes her,
Tells you, as honestly, to supply your room,
She'as chose the Arms of a much kinder Heaven;
And pray what Heaven, what Arms, but kind Tygranes?

King. My Brother! ha!

Cel. You know he is gone to the Camp:
And she is as kindly gone to meet him there.

King. God's! it is impossible*

Cel. Nay, to convince you.
It Is now stale news, even Boys and Varlets talk it.

King. Confusion!

Cel. The young Mirvan, Sir's, my Oracle.
That ushering Squire to her amorous Errantry;
The Boy (as Boys will talk) the mighty Secret
Alas, too weighty for his tender strength,
Amongst his small Companions at their parting,
Dropped it behind him, and the Tale thus handed
Amongst my laughing Slaves it reached my Ear.

King. So hot my Minion,
A follower of a Camp,
A Leaguer Devil. --

Cel. Nay, now you're too unkind. What has she done!
Remember, Sir, she brought you Youth and Beauty,
And scarcely tasted Love before she lost it;
And if poor Lady, forsaken thus unkindly,
It takes some harmless freedom. Is It so great
A Fault in our poor Sex to look abroad
Only to borrow what we have lost at home!

King. My Brother too, that Preaching Saint her Stallion!

Cel. Oh fie, Sir, such hard Words, and such sad Names!

King. Damnation! This is Impudence enough
To fire the Veins of Statues. Had she played
The private Wanton, took her scapes in Covert,
In Groves or Shades -- But in the face of Day.
To run to a Camp, and publish my Dishonor
Before Two hundred thousand Witnesses,
Like a trail'd Scent for the whole Hunting World
To run me down a Monster --

Cel. Now the kind Gods defend your Sacred Peace.
Why all this Rage?

King. Death! At an Armies head;
The Din of War to tune her sporting Dalliance,
'Larm'd to Lust, and Trumpeted to Infamy!

Cel. Nay, if I thought I should have raised this Storm! --

King. Now, by the Fame of all my Royal Ancestors
That sleep beneath the Dust, or wake above the Stars
If I show Mercy on 'em --

Cel. How, Sir, Mercy!

King. Bring the returning Fiends but to my reach;
Not ^^terceding Victory, Crowns, Laurels,
The Conquered Scythia, nor Orontes Head
Shall buy their forfeit Lives.

Cel. How, Sir, their Lives! Oh Heavens what have I done!

King. Madam, forgive me one retiring Minute,
And think no common Fire my Bosom warms,
When it has power to snatch me from these Arms. Exit.

Cel. Both, both their Lives! A hearty Promise King,
And I Will take care thou shall perform as heartily.
Yes, through their Hearts my path to Empire lies;
Chalked out so plain my Devils must booty play,
If in so fair a Walk I miss my way. Exeunt

Scene, A Camp Enter Herminia and Mirvan. Mirv. Command the Chariot to attend.

Queen. Where is it thou lead'st me, Boy!

Mirv. To a Cloister, Madam.
The silent Cell for your reposing Sorrows.

Queen. But Boy, is this my way! Methinks I hear,
The sound of neighing Steeds, and ecchoing Trumpets,
And view a spacious Plain before me, covered
With Tents and Standarts, say, my gentle Boy
Where am I?

Mirv. In the Camp?

Queen. Ha! In the Camp.

Mirv. The Persian Camp.

Queen. Oh Boy, What have thou done?

Mirv. Nothing, dear Madam; only executed
Your dread Commands.

Queen. Mine!

Mirv. Since the Glorious choice
Of your retiring Solitude, a shrine
Worthy so bright a Saint, was Charge, too weighty
For my young Years, I have conducted you
This way, that kind Tygranes --

Queen. How! Tygranes!

Mirv. Yes, Madam, that that generous Prince's care
May be your Nobler Guide, and kindly finish
That Sacred Trust my weakness undeserves.

Queen. Good Heaven! The Prince!

Mirv. Madam, I have sent for him.
Pardon th'officious Zeal of your poor Slave.

Queen. Thou rash unthinking Boy Enter Tygranes.

Mirv. And see he is here.

Tygr. Madam, a pleasing, but surprising Message
Told me, that that all beauteous Excellence
My Camp thus Honored with her Royal Presence,
Was pleased to have some Commands for poor Tygranes.

Queen. Commands, Tygranes! No; that idle Boy,
That naughty thing -- Oh Prince, I am all Confusion.

Tygr. Let not a faint desire check your fair Thoughts.
Nor doubt your Vassals Honors, nor Obedience
If there is ought lodged within that Sacred Breast,
There needs no more than that dear Breath of Life,
To speak and to create.

Queen. Alas Tygranes,
I know not what to say: And yet my Silence
Has such a guilty Look Forgive my Blushes,
And I will speak, Oh Prince, despairing Loves
Tormenting Pangs have brought this wretched wanderer,
Stoll'n from a hated Court.

Tygr. How, Madam!

Queen. Stoll'n
From all the Sirens Songs, and Circes Bowls
That from these Arms have stoll'n my dearest Lord.
I have left th'uneasie Load of tarnish'd Diadems,
In some lone Cell to seek my Peace and Grave --
But this unlucky Guide, this foolish Boy --

Mirv. My Royal Mistress too much Honored Confident.
But the important Charge too great, my Zeal
For her dear Service has surpised her hither,
Only t'implore your kind assisting Hand --

Tygr. Madam, in this rash Deed, what have you done!

Queen. Done Tygranes!
Left Infidelity, Ingratitude,
False Oaths, gay Sin, and glittering shame behind me.

Tygr. Yes left Shame, to meet Shame.

Queen. What says Tygranes!

Tygr. What all Mankind must say. Oh Madam, think,
Think what reflecting Names the censuring World
Must give so frail a weakness. Fled from Court,
Run, poorly run!

Queen. Yes, with my wrongs.

Tygr. Wrongs, Madam!
Are Wrongs so heavy as to outweigh Honor!

Queen. And is it that dishonorable Flight
To quit the World, to seek the Arms of Heaven?

Tygr. Heaven must be sought as Heaven prescribes our seeking
Thou art a Wife, Herminia; and the Seal
Of plighted Faith, entailed Obedience on thee.
Is this Commissioned Flight thy Lords Command?
Or 'cause he breaks his Vows, must thou break thine?

Queen. What Is this I hear?

Tygr. Would thou seek Heaven, Herminia,
A noble Patience is thy Scale to mount it.
Is it a pain to live too near thy wrongs,
To see thy Lord run Faithless from thy Arms
To an Adultress Bed? Let thy wet Eyes
Turn from his Shame, and weep for his Conversion.
If he be False, wait his return to Truth:
But if he never return, perform Thy part:
Finish thy lingering mourning Race of Martyrdom
And 'win the Crown of Love.

Queen. Oh Prince, thou talk --

Tygr. As thou should Act Herminia. But this mean
Ignoble Flight will blemish all thy Brightness.
Thy Fame, thy Virtue, thy Religion, all
stand frighted at the Thought.

Queen. Kind Prince, no more.

Tygr. Yes, one thing more, let my prevailing Prayers
Recall thy wandering Reason, and return thee
To thy ungrateful Lord.

Queen. Enough, dear Prince,
You Have waked my Shame, and touched my Soul so near,
That I must follow where such Glory leads:

Tygr. Then instantly I Will dispatch a kind Express
T'excuse thy blushing Fault, and smooth thy way.
Till then, this Night accept a poor Pavilion;
Too mean a Palace: But Respect and Reverence
Shall make up what the humble Roof has wanting.

Queen. Dispose me as you please.

Tygr. To Morrow's Sun decides the face of Scythia.
If Victory shall please to attend my Chariot,
I Will be my self thy proud returning Guard.
But if I fall, with my last dying Breath
To the surviving World I will bequeath thee,
A charge worthy the World, protected Innocence.

Mirv. It goes on rarely.

Tyg. Look up, dear Madam; Heaven may still have Joys;
Reserved. But if of all all hopes bereft,
Thy wrongs are all thy mournful portion left;
Shine through thy Clouds, bear thy fair Head above
The frowning World, and mount a smiling Star.
In all thy Loads, too low disdain to stoop
It Is brave to suffer, when it is poor to droop.

Queen. Herm. Oh Prince, thou have read me so Divine a Lesson*
And painted Ruin in a Face so lovely,
That thou have tuned my Soul to all the Music
Of a whole Quire of Angels, Yes Tygranes,
To my too cruel Lord I will return
Return to all the Pangs, to all the Miseries
Of ever mourning Love; Life's bitter Draught
Lift to my Lips with that unshaking Hand --
For oh thou have taught me to be greatly wretched
To be Divinely Blessed.

Tygr. Do this Herminia!

Queen. No more my wandering Pilgrimage, no, Prince,
I Will build my House of Sorrow in a Palace,
Under my Roof of Gold a Hermit dwell;
A Court my Cloister, and a Throne my Cell. Exeunt all but Mirv.

Mirv. So now the Toil is set, and dear Destruction
Comes rolling on apace. What a vast Pile
Of Ruin shall I build. It Is hard Herminia,
And I could pity thee -- Why should I pity?
My bloody Cradle, and my barbarous Parents,
And shall I feel remorse; when even my Father
To his own Blood never felt it. No, vain pity,
Seek softer Breasts; mine has no room to lodge thee.
Besides, I move by that commanding Influence
I know not, Celestina, by what Charm
But thou have bound my Soul, and Nerv'd my Arm,
Joined in thy Cause, we that bright Comet Reign,
Thou the Fair Star, and I the Blazing Train. Exit.

ACT V.
Enter Celestina, Mirvan, and Rosalin. Cel. REturning home Victorious!

Mir. If to leave
A hundred thousand Foes in Battle slain.
If Conquered Scythia, and the great Orontes
Led home in Persian Chains can write Victorious,
Tygranes wears that Title.

Cel. And to grace
His Victory he brings the beauteous Fugitive
A fair Attendant to his Triumphant Chariot,
To court the Kind forgiving King's Reception
Of the returning Wanderer.

Mir. If her Religious Ramble (as I Have managed it)
Has not a little paved her Path too rough,
Some such good natured Office he intends her.

Cel. And thou my little Harbinger kindly come
Before 'em to prepare me for their Welcome.

Mir. Yes, Madam, That Is my Errand. For to give
My self, and dear sweet Villainy their due,
Mischief and I have both rid Post to serve you.

Cel. My dearest little Devil, how I love thee!
But, Mirvan, after this first lucky hit,
Dare thou be generous, and play out thy Game!

Mir. Dare! Can you doubt my Courage, or my Constancy?
Is glorious Treason a design too great,
Or this Young Arm too dastard? Have I launched
Thus far and stood thus firm to stagger now?
By my fair Truth this poor Suspicion wrongs me.

Cel. It does indeed, sweet Youth, forgive my Fears:
I know thy honest Truth too well -- to trust it. aside.
But my kind Boy, I am afraid I have kept thee
Awake too long. I know this Nights hard Travel
Has tired thy tender Limbs, and thou want Rest.
To Bed, my Boy; and when thou have reposed awhile
I Will send, my pretty Engineer, and call thee.
Retire sweet Boy, and Sleep -- Exit Mirvan.
-- Thy last; young Fool.
Thy Bed, thy Grave. Yes, my kind honest Traitor
Thy hand has done me too much faithful Service
To leave thee a dangerous Tongue alive to spoil it.
Besides my little Tool, my ripining Plot
Has business for thy Death: And bet thy Glory:
As thou have lived, so thou shall serve me Dead.
And therefore sleep thy last. -- Now my designs
Are all in my own Breast. Treason's a Jewel
When the rich Cabinet has but one Key.
They Are only truly Great who are safely so.

Ros. Well, Madam, Your Propheticks are all Oracles:
And the mad roving Queens amazing Ramble
Has filled the World with wonder.

Cel. Fame indeed
Talks something loud. --

Ros. It Is true, the Prince has sent a soft Express,
And smoothly laid it all upon Religion.

Cel Religion in a Camp. -- Ah, Girl, if the
Soft King has easy Faith enough about him
To think no warmer a Devotion hatched
This gentle Pilgrimage, than Zeal and Prayer-Books.
No, Rosalin, he is not that blind believer;
I fear thou wilt find that rougher Faith about him,
A gathering that black Storm as will rain Blood.

Ros. Herminia's Blood, and Celestina's Glory,
Her Scaffold, and your Coronation.

Cel. Right;
That fullen Hour that wraps her head in Dust
Wreaths mine in Diadems. Herminia's Grave
The Basis of my Pyramide. It Is true,
It is a little hard, thou poor Herminia,
To cut so keen as I must. But Ambition,
Ambition gives the blow; and when that strikes
Remorse nor Pity, no faint check controuls
That two-edged Fate though barred with Lives and Souls. Exeunt.

Enter Tygranes, Herminia, and Orontes Prisoner. Guards and Attendants. 1
Atten. A nobler Game of Glory never was played:
Fortune set high, a Kingdom on a Battle,
And one bold Throw has swept the mighty stake.

2 Atten. By this dear Light that Sun that smiled to see
The richest Crimson that the Earth ever died,
Not the proud Jove from the defeated Giants
Returned with fairer Laurels than Tygranes.

Tygr. Enough my generous sharers of my Fame;
Your lavish Goodness plays too much the Prodigal.
My Victory dares not challenge half this Triumph.
It Is true, the Fortunate Tygranes fought,
But 'twas the Justice of his Quarrel Conquered.
Courage is only ours, Success is Heavens: --
And for thy Fate, Orontes --

Oront. Mine, Tygranes,
Is to curse Life and Thee; my Life alone
Too much to bear; but Life and Shame together,
That double load of Misery -- Oh Prince!
When thy keen Sword cut through my Conquered Kingdom,
Had it been kind, and carved my Heart too, dying
I could have loved thee, but must hate thee Living.

Tygr. If thou repinest at thy ill Chance of War,
Blame thy bad Cause. If overtaking Destiny
Has dealt thee that hard Lot that does not please thee,
Remember King thy Ruin is no more
Than thy Desert, thy Punishment, Orontes:
And sufferers are not choosers of their pain. --
But to perform my last just Rites of Victory,
Thou Orimon, go Visit our wronged Sister;
And in a Brothers Name bear her that Trophy:
A present from her own Triumphant Vengeance.

Oront. To Clarismunda! My too generous Conqueror,
This is so kind, I Will thank thee for this Goodness
Even in my Grave: For Oh! a Grace so high,
Thou give me leave at those dear Feet to die.

Exit Guarded. Tygr. But hark, the King approaches.
My Beauteous Charge I am thy Champion now:
A prouder Cause than all my Scythian Conquests.
Enter King attended. My Royal Lord, low at your Sacred Feet
With the fair Harvest of your own rich Field,
Thus prostrate kneels the proudest of your Vassals,
By your great Cause, that fair inspiring Genius
Led forth to Victory.

King. Mine, Tygranes, my
Inspiring Genius! No; a little, sure
Of that fair Cause, that soft Inspirer.

Tygr. How, my dread Liege!

King. That Beauty, those fair Eyes,
They were so kind to See you Conquer.

Tygr. Sir!

King. To stand the kind Spectator of your Victory:
Oh the fair Hand of a soft melting Venus!
To buckle on the Sword of her proud Mars;
To plume his Crest, and send him forth to Battle.

Tygr. Death and Confusion!

Queen. Oh my blassed Ears!

Tygr. Oh thou amazing Voice of Royal Thunder
Break forth from thy dark-Cloud, thou louting Heaven,
And say what mean these Mystic Sounds of Horror?

King. Mean! Is that a Question
At this loud Hour of all thy Ecchoing Treason,
The crying Shame of that incestuous Devil.

Queen. Good Gods!

Tygr. Oh King! what false infernal Malice
Dares blast the Fame of that all beauteous Truth.

Queen. For the last Blow to all my bleeding Sufferings,
My Loyal Faith, and all my Mourning Innocence
Transformed into this hideous Gorgon!

King. Innocence! But my tame Justice sleeps too long.
Sieze this brace of Monsters.

Tygr. Hold angry King!
Oh stop your headlong Fury!
Till the wronged Virtue of that brightest Saint
Has wiped the spots from her fair Ermin Whiteness,
Stabbed the foul Falsehood through the Cankered Throat,
And Seer'd the Tongues of Blasphemy.

King. No doubt on it.
Run to a Camp to cool her burning Hell,
And in the height of the ingendring Crocadiles
Whine Heaven and Sanctity.

Queen. How can I hear these dismal Sounds and Live?

Tygr. Plot, rank Conspiracy! The Camp!
That undesigning Chance the foolish Error
Of an unlucky Boy. But if so slight
A shadow can assume a shape so dreadful,
Sir, let the Boy be called, the fatal Cause
Of this accursed Mistake, young Mirvan.

King. How! that young Bawd! Do thou call him thy Witness!
No, thou Grand-Fiend, thou know thy wiser Politics
Have hushed that Traitor with a Dose of Poison.

Tygr. Riddles and Death! Still more mysterious Horror.
Poison!

King. Yes Poison!
Your Midnight Purveyor, your trusty Pandar,
In a return for all his faithful Services,
Your dark designs too great for that weak Counsel-keeper;
By a kind Drug sent Sleeping from the World.
But your thin Arts and all your Cobweb-Veils --

Tygr. Some most accursed Engine of Damnation. --

King. Dull canting Fool -- But hence, I Will hear no more

Queen. Yes, Royal Sir, Hear your poor wronged Herminia.
By yon fair Lamps, and fairer Heaven that lights 'em,
By all the hopes of my Eternal Peace --

King. Whining Siren -- But
Treason never wants a Knee, nor Guilt a Tongue,
Sighs, Prayers and Tears are the false Tools they cheat with.
Take 'em away; and house 'em in a Dungeon.

Tygr. Yet hold your mad blind Rage
Till some kind God, the guard of pitied Innocence
In the dear Cause of that all Angel Goodness --

King. Silence that poisoned Breath, vain talking Slave, -- Exit.

Tygr. Oh thou all-ruling Providence, what an
Ungoverned World thy great first Mover turns,
If Truth has this Reward -- And Thou bright Virtue,
Thy most inhumane Wrongs, hard-fated Fair, --
Oh how can the Almighty Justice give
Prevailing Hell this strange unbridl'd Power

Queen. Yes, Prince, Hell has prevailed, and it is a sad
Sad Portion, but if the Divine Dispenser
Has so ordained, it is not our part to quarrel
Omnipotence; we may wail Misery,
But must not murmr at it.

Tygr. Miracle,
Of Goodness.

Queen. No, Tygranes, if the Toil
Of Fate is set, and our pursuing Blood hounds
Have caught our hunted Lives, our Stars have dealt us
The hardest-Lot on Earth, only to purchase
The fairest Crown in Heaven.

Enter a Messenger who speaks to the Officer that has the Custody of the Queen
and Tygranes. Mes. It Is the King's Pleasure
That Execution be dispatched immediately.
The Queen and Prince are both those popular Darlings,
Delay may be unsafe; and for that reason
He calls this hastening blow.

Officer. Curse on the Office. Aside.
If forced Obedience to the King's Command, Kneels to the Queen and Prince.
And the ungrateful Duty I must pay,
May hope a Pardon. --

Queen. If the King Commands
Rise and Obey: Thy Part; poor Slave, is innocent,
If he must Kill, and guiltless Veins must bleed,
The Axe is blameless, it is the Judge that is cruel.

Tygr. But, cruel King, thou merciless Arm of Fate.
Have all my Laurels, And what is more than Laurels?
Has that chaste Mourner deserved his hard hard Fate?

Queen. What we have deserved, Tygranes
Is ours no more; What we must suffer, Prince,
Is all our Business now? We must prepare
For Death. Death! Is that all! Witness ye Powers,
That I dare Die -- The only pain in Dying
Will be to leave a blotted Name behind me,
The branding Blazon of Recorded Infamy.

Tygr. No, thou fair Saint,
To Die's too much; fear not a Second Murder.
Treason and Perjury may have power to Kill
The Innocent, but not Innocence. The Martyrdom
Of Honor, Slandered Truth, and traduced Virtue
Are so Divine a Charge, that care of Providence,
That if no earlier Justice wakes to right 'em,
The very Prodigies of Heaven and all
Their aiding Miracles rise up their Champions.
Thy Fame, Herminia, must not dye, though thou must.

Queen. Shall my Fame live? Nay, then to death lead on.
Lie white my Winding Sheet, and soft my Grave.
But Prince, must thou bleed too? Herminia's Ruins
Pull down thy Fate with mine. Thy Blood Tygranes!
This is too much, ye Gods. How shall I make
My last great Audit at the Eternal Throne,
For thy unhappy Death. At my own Grave
There I can smile, but I must weep for thine.

Tygr. A tear, that fair rich Pearl of Life for me!
My poorer Veins not worth the care of Heaven!
When such neglected brighter Virtue bleeds.
But, if the generous Fair, must play the Prodigal,
Oh! let me teach thee how to give me Blessings
Beyond the price of Lives: When on thy Throne
Thy radiant Throne of Stars those Eyes I meet
T'obtain in Heaven what was on Earth too great,
Shall I have leave to kneel at those dear Feet?

Queen. Yes Prince, thou shall kneel there. And if there be
One richer, fairer Coronet above
For wondrous Truth, and more prodigious Love,
Over that dear Brow with the Jemm'd Wreath I Will stand,
And Crown thee Martyr with my own kind Hand.

Tygr. Nay, then to Death, to Life, to Glory, all
At one kind Blow.

Queen. And oh to meet that Blow
With all the pomp of Martyrdom we'll go;
And Shine above, to Light the World below. Exeunt.

Scene Changes, Enter Orontes and Clarismunda. Oront. To Heaven the dearest,
and on Earth the Fairest,
Thy Guardian Gods have done thee Justice now.
A Hundred thousand slaughtered Scythian Ghosts,
In the fresh Blushes of their Crimson Gore,
Walk the black Strand, to tell the trembling Shades
The wondrous Tale of Clarismunda's Vengeance.

Clar. Yes, King, my Stars at last are just.

Oront. So Just, that all yon bright Eternals,
The Powers that gild the Night, and guide the Day,
Ranked their embattell'd Fires for Clarismunda,
All the proud Champions in thy darling Cause:
So keen the Sword that arming Beauty draws.

Clar. If aiding Heaven has battel'd on my side,
It has no more than played its own Revenger;
Mine are Heavens wrongs, their own Divinest Image
Stabbed in my Wounds, and their own scourge has punished 'em

Oront. If their own scourge has punished 'em, and all
The pouring Vials of immortal Wrath
Have filled the whole embitter'd Draught of Woe,
May I have leave to ask that beauteous Judge
Is her avenging Sword of Fate yet satisfied.

Clar. Satisfied!

Oront. That Sword, thou dear Divine Destroyer.
After such streams of Blood, and piles of Graves,
Is the keen Death, the reeking Point still drawn
At poor Orontes Heart?

Clar. Indeed thou askst that Question --

Oront. I would have thy Mercy answer.
Say, thou All-Angel Sweet, if angry Heaven
Has emptied all its Quivers on this Head,
Has Clarismunda still new Bolts to Kill.

Clar. New Bolts! No, wretched King, those righteous Powers
Have made my Wrongs that ample satisfaction,
I now can ask no more.

Oront. If those kind Powers
Have paid thee all the whole indebted Sum,
May I presume to ask that fair Offended,
If a poor punished Criminal, his stains,
Washed with the Blood of thousand thousand Lives,
From tottering Power, and falling Empire lost,
From all the glittering Wreaths of Royal Honors
Crushed to base Chains, a vile inglorious Slave,
Say, is this little Outcast of the World
Still that strange hateful Monster?

Clar. No, Orontes,
You Are fallen so low, I must not hate thee now.

Oront. What says that Breath of Life?

Claris. Must hate no more.
No, suffering Wretch, thou have met thy Crimes Reward:
And Justice, when her executing Aim
Has struck the Blow, turns her yeil'd Eyes away
And sees the Guilt no more. On thy proud Throne
And towering at thy prouder Armies head
When Death met Death, and Thunder grapled Thunder,
Orontes then in all thy circling Glories
The Tyrant Lord of Power was worth my Frown,
I could look up and hate thee, down I must not.

Oront. Then farewell Empire, Thrones, Dominion, all
The plagues of Power, and curse of Crowns farewell.
And my dear Chains, and Glorious Misery Welcome.
For now she hates no more, Chant that blessed Sound,
Ye great Angelick Quires, immortal Sweets
Perfume the hallowed Breath, and bear it round
The ecchoing Skies, and all the listening Globe
That Clarismunda now can hate no more.
My Chains, my Fetters! No, thou Dear all Heaven,
My Bracelets, strings of Pearl, and links of Gold --
But thou all Sacred Sweetness, could that kind
Unclouding Brow to all this infinite Goodness
Add one rich Blessing more, could thou love too --

Clar. Love! Love!

Oront. Yes, Love, thou All-descending Goodness:
Turn not those beauteous Eyes away. Oh Arm
Those pointed Deaths no more. I am no longer
The black Orontes now: 'twas Seythia's Tyrant
Pride and Ambition's Purple Devil, all
The burning Hells of Power that sinned against thee.
But I am now no more. No, thy kind Brother
Like the Great Jove has crushed the tumbling Giant,
Script all my guilty Greatness to a little
Poor naked Slave, an humble crawling Wretch.
The Sceptered Savage, and Imperial Monster,
Those hideous Names all banished from the World,
And I am nothing now but kneeling Love.
And if that pardoning Mercy --

Clar. Oh Orontes.
Thy Tears, thy Penitence, and to Crown all
Thy murmuring Love pleads with that courting Eloquence --
But ha! What says my Heart?

Oront. Oh speak thou dearest Oracle of Life,
Breathe the Celestial Sound -- Methinks I saw
The pitying God in those relenting Eyes
Just issuing down with all his glittering Mercy,
But those sealed Lips shut up the lovely Paradise,
And cruelty hold back the kind descending Heaven.

Clar. Well Prince, if I must speak, -- But oh forgive
My blushing weakness, when these Eyes must tell thee,
That thou have conquered, thou have conquered, King,
My tenderest melting Souls all softest Pity.

Oront. And could that softest Pity --

Claris. Ask no more:
For beyond Pity it is all vast Eternity,
The All my utmost Life can ever give thee.

Oront. The All.

Claris. Alas! my Love's beyond my Power.
But I have given too much. Hence from my Sight;
For from this Hour I never must see thee more.

Oront. No more!

Claris. Retire without Reply, lest my reviving Wrongs,
Recall my prodigal blushing Mercy back.
Yes, Fly to some far corner of the Earth
Whilst I have power to give thy pitied Sufferings
This last kind Tribute from my melting Eyes,
Go, and bear with thee round the wandered World
A Sigh from Clarismunda.

Oront. It Is enough.
That Sigh, that Pity, all Eternal Bliss,
And, Gods, I ask no more. --
But, Madam, when I fly from those dear Eyes,
The wandered World will be too short a Walk.
No, Clarismunda, Love's last Race must run,
Beyond the narrow Travels of the Sun;
Far above Worlds, and Days dull mortal Light:
Thus he takes Wing, and thus sets out his Flight. Stabs hiwself.

Clar. By thy own Hand thy Hearts last pouring Flood.
Oh King! so kind a Stream, this rich atoning Sacrifice
Has washed thee all so White, and touched my Soul so near,
That I must whisper in thy dying Ear;
Had I a Heart to give 'twere all thy own.

Oront. Oh Divine Harmony! Now I am blessed.

Clar. Oh generous Prince! thou fill'st my painting Veins
With all that tender'st warmth: But have, oh haste!
Mount the bright Stars, and bear this Message with thee:
When thou shall meet thy own great Martyr there;
Tell him, thou have left
His Clarismunda a Divided Heart:
Thine all my Pity: all my Love Orsanes.

Oront. Yes Madam, I Will obey your blessed Commands;
Speed, speed my Posting Soul, and when we meet, Orsanes,
I Will Rival thee in Heaven. But oh! how much are all
My Sighs o'erpaid to die in these blessed Arms;
How worthless is dull Life, when Death's all Charms. Dies.

Clar. Now all the work I had on Earth is done!
My Dear Orsanes, that long waiting Bridegroom,
Holds an immortal Chaplet for my Brow.
Shut from the World, then to a Cell I Will fly:
There my dear Winding-sheets, my Robe of Glory,
Sweet Death's kind call with bending Knees I Will stay,
The Trump to my great Coronation-Day. Exit.

Scene Changes. Enter Celestina and Rosalin. Ros. What can this mean! Not
Lunacy more wild!
Her wandered Reason, and distracted Senses
Stung with that strange Tarantula --

Cel. Hush, Mirvan! Not a word. -- Should Boys tell Tales --
Not for a thousand Worlds. I Will have the Secret
Shut in a Marble Chest, locked up in Graves,
Deep as the Center of the groaning World,
That not one angry murmuring God shall hear it --
But ha! we are betrayed, betrayed dear Mirvan!
See there that grinning Tarquin in the Hangings,
Looks with a listening Face -- and yonder Parrot,
Oh it is a prating Bird -- The Air will breath it,
Winds whistle it, Ravens croke it --

Ros. Dear Madam --

Cel. Rosalin! Ha, art thou here!

Ros. Yes, Madam, a poor Mourner. --

Cel. Oh fie, in Tears, and on my Wedding day!
This is unkind: Ay, Girl, I am to be Married,
Do thou not see the Courting kneeling King!
Oh it is the fondest fool to make a Husband.
That kind believing thing. See he presents me
A Bracelet strung with bleeding Lovers Hearts,
And every Pearl a Tear of dying Innocence --
Poor Herminia,
Do not thou hang a blushing Ruby there.

Ros. Gracious Heaven!

Cel. Who talks of Heaven? Oh it is a Golden Palace,
Where my kind Mirvan, Jove's dear Darling Ganimede,
Fills the proud Thunderers Imperial Bowl,
To quaff the World's Confusion.

Ros. Oh my Fears!
There Is something talks in these wild Dreams!

Cel. Fear Rosalin!
What can thou fear, my Wedding Robe will not please me!
Ah no! it is dyed in that deep Royal Crimson
Not all the Waters of the Sea can whiten.

Enter King, Attendants, and Guards. King. What Is this I see! Why this
disordered frame!
Is this a Dress? Is this a Brow, when Diadems
Wait your receiving Hand. The cankered Sweets
Of Lawless Joys no more,
Prepare to mount the bright Crowned Queen of Persia.

Cel. The Queen of Persia! Queen of Hell, dull Fool --
Look, Rosalin, look --

Ros. Look, Madam!

Cel. Do not see
Yond' wrinkled withered Witch, the sooty Proserpine!
She with that dowdy Face, Great Pluto's Queen,
Enthroned the Glorious Partner of Damnation;
And Celestina but a puny Devil!
No, by yond' spightful Stars, I cannot bear it.
I Will dash the tumbling Hag from her proud Seat,
Snatch from her flaming Brow her blazing Diadem,
And mount her burning Throne.

King. All raving Frenzy.
But tell me honest Rosalin, how long
Have these strange Phantoms all these waking Dreams
Shook her soft peace?

Ros. Since fair Herminia's Death.

Cel. Who names Herminia's Death: I will not hear it.
There Is Treason in the sound. -- But see! Oh see!
She comes, she comes, she comes! The Ghosts of Herminia and Tygranes descend
in Glory.
-- Oh my sick Eye Balls!
How have I sinned to, wake these hideous Forms!
Have I done more than all my Sex beside?
Alas, the poorest Lowborn Peasant Girl,
That never heard of Crowns above a Garland,
Yet but to Reign the Sovereign of the Plains,
And have the bending Knees of Swains and Bores,
Would cut through Hearts and Lives to be a Queen:
And I have done no more.

King. What says my Fairest?

Cel. Say King! I say thou smelst too rank of Blood,
Blood, easy cheated Fool!

King. Death and Confusion!
There Is something in this dark mysterious Horror
That strikes my aching Soul. -- Pray Heaven the poor
Tygranes and Herminia --

Cel. Are a blessed pair of ever Royal Martyrs.
Innocence, Innocence, Innocence! Betrayed by me,
And by thee Murdered!

King. Murdered! Oh --

Cel. But look all Heavenly Fair, clothed and enrob'd
With the rich Beams of pure immortal Day.
Myriads of Angels, and Eternal Quires
All waiting for their Coronation Glory.
Yes, mount fair Stars, ye radiant Twins of Light,
Whilst I must set in Everlasting Night. Dies.

King. Dead! Thou fair Curse and Painted Sin farewell.
Oh that my shame and Guilt were with thee Dead.
Ah no! a thousand Racking Tortures live
To tear my sinking Soul. Oh Blood Blood! Blood!
Herminia! Poor wronged sweetness, could the price
Of Crowns or Worlds restore thee to my Arms --
No, Lovely Truth, too late we find thy Charms.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Rogers.
WELL, Gentlemen, our Author bids me say,
He Treats you with an Out-of-fashion Play.
His fair Court Miss, perkt in her Reigning Glory,
In the late Age had been a modish Story.
But now the old dull Tale will never do. --
And yet I Will Swear the Play has something new. --
New, did I say? Yes, if it has no more,
Here Is Two new Legs, you never saw before.
Nay, and what is more, they come to Court you too:
Ay, Sirs, You see what Wonders you can do;
Bring a young Suppliant to those Sweet Faces,
To beg to our poor Play your kind good Graces.
Faith Sirs, for once lay by your Critic Thunder,
Not for the Senseless Poet, Hang him Blunder,
But for Our sakes Your angry Vengeance stay:
Consider, Sirs, this is the Women's Play.
And when we woo your Favor, sure you are
Not so hard-hearted to deny our Prayer.
Besides, let me entreat, baulk not a poor
Petitioner, that never begged before.
Grant me but this First Suit, a Boon so easy,
And in Return, I Will one day hope to please ye.
Encouraged by your Smiles a Beam so fair
Here Is Two Good Works at once, for I Declare
You will both save a Play, and make a Player.

