Sad Nevvs from the Seas.

Being a true relation of the loss of that good Ship called the Merchant
Royal, which was cast away ten leagues from the Lands end, on Thursday night,
being the 23. of September. last, 1641. having in her a world of treasure, as
this story following does truly relate.

depiction of ship

Printed in the year 1641.

Sad news from the Seas.
THat Sailing is an art that is not to be undervalued by any, is confessed; that
Kingdoms and Countries are enriched thereby; that what other lands yield, this
has i^ by this art as well as they; that by this art gold and silver is
conveyed unto us from the Indies, fine Silks and Sattins from another climate,
spices and fragrant smells from another climate, and this by interchange, which
this art benefits both Kingdoms, Nations, and Countries, and this by that
famous admired art of Sailing, and brought to pass, now let us leave this art
so worthy of praise, and look a while on an object of sorrow, and wail our
brothers losses as our own.

The Royal Merchant (or Merchant Royal) some four years since sailed out of
this land as a ship hired here for the King of Spains employment in the West
India, she sailed out in company with other ships, but when come into Cales the
Captain was by some opposition like to be put by, and was a while dismissed, so
that giving over his hopes of the West India employment, received fraught, and
from Cales sailed into the Mediterranean unto the Island of Majorcke, one of
the King of Spaines Islands: in the mean, or about the time, S. Galleons being
bound for the West India, one of the^^ (...) a small fire was whole burned
down with the water, and loosed from her cables, did her self discharge all
her brass Ordnance, and burned 3. days and 3. nights under Pountal, most part
of the goods were ashore, not yet laden aboard; in place of which Galleon this
Royal Merchant was thought (as being a ship they might command, and of great
burden) to be a fit vessel to take aboard the first Galleons goods or
loading; a Mandate from the King of Spain commanded this Royal Merchant from
her Majorck voyage to make sail for Cales with all expedition, and to stand in
place of the burned Galleon, took aboard her goods, and sailed with the other
7. Galleons in company into the West or Spanish Indies: the Kings commands
obeyed, they proceed, and this English ship carried most of the best Spanish
governors, commanders, and gentry, whereby it redounded great benefit unto the
very meanest of the English, both in sailing thither, traffiquing there, and
fraughted richly home with great numbers of rich passengers, which with rich
fraught made the English a great voyage. Some dangers they past, but safely
arived in Cales, where they continued before they could prepare themselves for
England at least 7. or 8. months, at end of which they disimbogu'd for England
in company of Captain Legend of Dover, in the Dover Merchant, a lusty stout
ship of 400. tons, and 28. cast pieces of Ordnance; they sailed together, the
Royal Merchant in stresse of foul weather sprung a leake in the bottom of
the ship, to that the sailors were forced to tend the pumpe day and night:
Captain Legend not liking Captain Limbryes course, with joint consent shaped
another course some pount in variation, so that they did not absolutely part
suddenly, but glide sidingly from each other night came on, and foul weather,
they plied their two chain pumps, in midst of which labor both the pumpe
chains broke at once, and fell into the Wells, so that before they could any
way recover and mend the chains, they bad got 4. foot water in the hold. They
labor at their pumps with great strength, but could not prevail over what was
got in, but did keep her in that estate, nor more nor less diminishing.

They being ouerlaboured could hardly pumpe more to any purpose; some of the
Seamen to the number of 30. got into the long boat, cut her off, and called to
the Captain to save himself, he refused it, and would have a Merchant, his
passenger, to save himself, he answered he had lived long in Spain, and with
great trouble got up 10000. pound, and now would stay by it, for his life he
valued not, the Captain answered him it was all one whether he went in the
boat or no, for they were in no better estate then those left aboard, having
in the boat no oars, masts, sails, or any thing to keep the boat afar the
Sea, and must needs perish undoubtedly: being thus in despair they espied a
light at which they shot off 30. piece of ordnance, it prooved to be Captain
Legend who on consideration of the Royal Merchants distress returned to help
them; they observing their danger and the ship sinking, sent forth then long
boat, which at diverse times saved the men, but durst not come near the ship,
so that the men to save their lives were feign to sling themselves in tackles,
and so swing from the sinking ship into the boat, who caught hold of their
clothes with their boat hooks; the Captain was the last, who would not
forsake her until she was sunk even unto her Cook-roome ports, and then got
into the boat: 7. men that went down on the lower deck, (or orlope) to break
up a chest of gold, never came up the ship suncke so fast on them. This ship
was 700. tuns, 36. cast pieces of ordnance, 80. seamen, besides passengers, she
had in her 300000. pound in ready boloigne, 100000. pound in gold, and as much
value in Jewels, besides each man's adventure, and the whole Cargason, or rich
lading of the ship, all which was sunk in the sea, nothing saved. The Captain
on his landing repaired to his house and family, with a hankercher about his
neck, and will not be seen or spoken with (as yet) by any his grief is so
great: his name is Captain John Limbry living near Ratcliffe Cross.

FINIS.

