Absalom Senior: OR, ACHITOPHEL TRANSPROSED. A POEM.

Si Populus vult decipi, etc.
LONDON: Printed for S. E. and Sold by Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir
Edmondbury God^^ey, near Fleetbridge. 1682.

To the TORIES.
GEntlemen, for so you all write your selves; and indeed you are your own
Heralds, and Blazon all your Coats with Honor and Loyalty for your Supporters;
nay, and you are so unconscionable too in that point, that you will allow
neither of them in any other Scutcheons but your own. But who has 'em, or has
'em not, is not my present business; only as you profess your selves
Gentlemen, to conjure you to give an Adversary fair play; and that if any
person whatsoever shall pretend to be aggrieved by this POEM, or any part of
it, that he would bear it patiently; since the Licentiousness of the first
Absalom and Achitophel has been the sole occasion of the Liberty of This, I
having only taken the Measure of My Weapon; from the Length of his; which by
the Rules of Honor ought not to offend you; especially, since the boldness of
that Ingenious Piece, was wholly taken from the Encouragement you gave the
Author; and it is from that Boldness only that this POEM takes its Birth: for
had not his daring Pen brought that Piece into the World, I had been so far
from troubling my self in any Subject on this kind, that I may justly say in
one sense, the Writer of that Absalom, is the Author of this. This favor, as
in Justice due, obtained from you, I shall not trouble you with a long Preface,
like a tedious Compliment at the Door, but desire you to look in for your
Entertainment. Only I cannot forbear telling you, that one thing I am a little
concerned for you, Tories, that your Absoloms and Achitophels, and the rest of
your Grinning Satyrs against the Whiggs, have this one unpardonable Fault,
That the Lash is more against a David, than an Achitophel; whilst the running
down of the PLOT at so extravagant a rate, savours of very little less (pardon
the Expression) than ridiculing of Majesty it self, and turning all those
several Royal Speeches to the Parliament on that Subject, only into those
double-tongu'd Oracles that sounded one thing, and meant another. Besides,
after this unmannerly Boldness, of not only branding the public Justice of
the Nation, but affronting even the Throne it self, to push the humor a little
farther, you run into ten times a greater Vice, (and in the same st^^in too)
than what you so severely inveigh against: and whilst a POPISH PLOT through
want of sufficient Circumstances, and credible Witnesses, miscarries with you,
a PROTESTANT PLOT without either Witness or Circumstance at all, goes current.
Nay, you are so far now from your former niceties and scruples, and disputing
about raising of Armies, and not one Commission found, that you can swallow the
raising of a whole Protestant ARMY, without either Commission, or
Commission-Officer; Nay, the very When, Where, and How, are no part of your
Consideration. It Is true, the great Cry amongst you, is, The Nations Eyes are
opn'd; but I am afraid, in most of you, it is only to look where you like best:
and to help your lewd Eyesight, you have got a damnable trick of turning the
Perspective upon occasion, and magnifying or diminishing at pleasure. But alas,
all talking to you is but impertinent, and fending and pro^ing signify just
nothing; for after all Arguments, both Parties are so irreconcilable, that as
the Author of Absalom wisely observed, they will be Fools or Knaves to each other
to the end of the Chapter. And therefore I am so reasonable in this point, that
I should be very glad to divide 'em between 'em, and give the Food to the Tory,
and the Knave to the Whigg. For the Tories that will believe no POPISH PLOT,
may as justly come under that denomination, as They, that David tells us, said
in their Hearts there was no God. And then let the Whiggs that do believe a
Popish Plot be the Knaves, for daring to endeavor to hinder the Effects of a
Popish Plot, when the Tories are resolved to the contrary. But to draw near a
conclusion, I have one favor more to beg of you, that you will give me the
freedom of cl^pping but about a score of years extraordinary on the back of my
Absalom. Neither is it altogether so unpardonable a Poetical License, since we
find as great slips from the Auth^r of your own Absalom, where we see him bring
in a Zimri into the Court of David, who in the Scripture-story dyed by the Hand
of Phineas in the days of Moses. Nay, in the other extreme, we find him in
another place talking of the Martyrdom of Stephen, so many Ages after. And if
so famous an Author can forget his own Rules of Unity, Time, and Place, I hope
you will give a Minor Poet some grains of Allowance, and he shall ever
acknowledge himself

Your Humble Servant. ABSALOM

Absalom Senior: OR, ACHITOPHEL TRANSPROSED.
IN Gloomy Times, when Priestcraft bore the sway,
And made Heavens Gate a Lock to their own Key:
When ignorant Devotes did blindly bow,
And groaping to be saved they knew not how:
Whilst this Egyptian darkness did orewhelm,
The Priest sat Pilot even at Empires Helm.
Then Royal Necks were yoked, and Monarchs still
Hold but their Crowns at his Almighty Will.
And to defend this high Prerogative,
Falsely from Heaven he did that power derive:
By a Commission forged in the hand of God,
Turned Aarons blooming wand, to Moses snaky Rod.
Whilst Princes little Scepters overpowr'd,
Made but that prey his wider Gorge devoured.
Now to find Wealth might his vast pomp supply,
(For costly Roofs befit a Lord so high)
No Arts were spared his Luster to support,
But all Mines searched to enrich his shining Court.
Then Heaven was bought, Religion but a Trade;
And Temples Murder's Sanctuary made.
By Phineas Spear no bleeding Cozbies groaned,
If Cozbies Gold for Cozbies Crimes atoned.
With these wise Arts, (for Humane Policy
As well as Heavenly Truth, mounts Priests so high)
'Twixt gentle Penance, lazy Penitence,
A Faith that gratifies both Soul and Sense;
With easy steps to everlasting Bliss,
He paves the rugged way to Paradise.
Thus almost all the Proselyte-World he drives,
Whilst th universal Drones buz to his Hives.
Implicit Faith Religion thus conveyed
Through little pipes to his great Channel laid,
Till Piety through such dark Conduits led,
Was poisoned by the Spring on which it fed.
Here blind Obedience to a blinder Guide,
Nursed that Blind Zeal that raised the Priestly pride;
Whilst to make Kings the Sovereign Prelate own,
Their Reason ^e enslaved, and then their Throne.
The Mitre thus above the Diadem soared,
Gods humble servant He, but Man's proud Lord.
It was in such Church-light blind-zeal was bred,
By Faiths infatuating Meteor led;
Blind Zeal, that can even Contradictions join;
A Saint in Faith, in Life a Libertine;
Makes Greatness though in Luxury worn down,
Bigoted even to the Hazard of a Crown;
Tied to the Girdle of a Priest so fast,
And yet Religious only to the wast.
But Constancy atoning Constancy,
Where that once raigns, Devotion may lie by.
T'espouse the Churches Cause lies in Heavens road,
More than obeying of the Churches God.
And he dares fight, for Faith is more renowned
A Zealot Militant, than Martyr crowned.
Here the Archpriest to that Ambition blown,
Pulled down Gods Altars, to erect his own:
For not content to publish Heavens command,
The Sacred Law penned by The Almighty Hand,
And Moses-like 'twixt God and Israel go,
Thought Sinai's Mount a Pinnacle too low.
So charming sweet were Incense fragrant Fumes,
So pleased his Nostrils, till th'Aspirer comes
From offering, to receiving Hecatombs;
And ceasing to adore, to be adored.
So fell Faiths guide: so loftily he towr'd,
Till like The Ambitious Lucifer accursed,
Swel^'d to a God, into a Fiend he burst.
But as great Lucifer by falling gained
Dominion, and ever in Damnation reigned;
And though from Lights blessed Orb for ever driven,
Yet Prince o'th'Air, he had that vast Scepter given,
To Have Subjects far more numerous than Heaven.
And thus enthroned, with an infernal spite,
The genuine Malice of the Realms of night,
The Paradise he lost blasphemes, abhors,
And against Heaven proclaims Eternal Wars;
No Arts untried, no hostile steps untrod,
Both against Truths Adorers, and Truths God.
So Faiths fallen Guide, now Baals great Champion reigned;
Wide was his Sway, and Mighty his Command:
Whilst with implacable Revenge he burned,
And all his Rage against Gods Israel turned.
Here his envenomed Souls black gall he flings,
Spots all his Snakes, and points his Scorpions stings:
Omits no Force, or Treacherous Design,
Blessed Israel to assault, or undermine.
But the first Sword did his keen Malice draw,
Was aimed against the God-like Deborah.
Deborah, the matchless pride of Judah's Crown,
Whose Female hand Baal's impious Groves cut down,
His banished Wizards from her Israel thrust,
And pounded all their Idols into dust.
Her Life with indefatigable pain,
By Daggers long, and poisons sought in vain:
At length they angry Iabins Rage enflamed,
Hazors proud King, for Iron Chariots famed;
A Warrior powerful, whose most dreadful Host
Proclaimed Invincible, (were humane Boast
Infallible) by haughty Sisera led,
Against Deborah their bloody Banners spread.
Here Deborah her Barak calls to War;
Barak, the Suns famed fellow-traveller,
Who wandering over the Earths surrounded Frame,
Had traveled far as his great Mistress Fame.
Here Barak did with Deborah's vengeance fly,
And to that swift prodigious Victory,
So much by Humane Praises undefin'd,
That Fame wants Breath, and Wonder lags behind.
To Heavens high Arch her sounding Glories rung,
Whilst thus great Deborah and Barak sung.
HEar, oh ye Princes, oh ye Kings give Ear,
And Isreal's great Avengers honor hear.
When God of Hosts, thou Isreal's Spear and Shield,
Wentst out of Seir, and marched'st from Edoms field,
Earth trembled, the Heaven's dropped, the Clouds all poured;
The Mountains melted from before the Lord;
Even thy own Sinai melted into streams,
At Isreal's dazzling Gods refulgent Beams.
In Shamgar and in Jael's former days,
The wandering Traveller walked through by-ways.
They chose new Gods. No Spear nor Sword was found,
To have Idolatry deposed, Truth Crowned:
Till I alone, against Jehovahs Foes;
I Deborah, I Isreal's Mother rose.
Wake Deborah, wake, raise thy exalted Head;
Rise Barak, and Captivity Captive lead.
For to blessed Deborah, beloved of Heaven,
Over the Mighty is Dominion given.
Great Barak leads, and Isreal's Courage warms;
Ephraim and Benjamin march down in Arms:
Zebulon and Nepthali my Thunder bore,
Dan from her Ship^ and Asher on the Shore.
Behold Megiddoes waves, and from afar,
See the fierce Jabins threatening storm of War.
But Heaven against Sisera fought, and the kind Stars
(...) their embattel'd Fires for Deborah's Wars,
Shot down their Vengeance that miraculous day,
When Kishons Torrents swept their Hosts away.
But curse ye Meroz, curse 'em from on high,
Did the denouncing voice of Angels cry;
Accursed be they that went not out to oppose
The Mighty; Deborah's, God's, and Israel's Foes.
Victorious Judah! Oh my Soul, thou have trod,
Trod down their strengths. So fall the Foes of God.
But they who in his Sacred Laws delight,
Be as the Sun when he sets out in might.
Thus sung, th^^ conquered Deborah; thus fell
Hers, and Heavens Foes. But no Defeat tames Hell.
By Conquest overthrown, but not dismayed,
Against Israel still their private Engines played.
And their dire Machinations to fulfill,
Their stings torn out, they kept their poison still.
And now too weak in open force to join,
In close Cabals they hatched a damned Design,
To light that Mine as should the world amaze,
And set the ruined Israel in a blaze.
When Iudahs Monarch with his Princes round,
Amidst his glorious Sanedrim sat Crowned,
Beneath his Throne a Cavern low, and dark
As their black Souls, for the great Work they mark*
In this lone Cell their Midnight-Hands bestowed
A Stygian Compound, a combustive load
Of Mixture wondrous, Execution dire,
Ready the Touch of their Infernal Fire.
Have you not seen in yo^ ethereal Road,
How at the Rage of the angry driving God,
Beneath the pressure of his furious wheels
The Heavens all rattle, and the Globe all reels?
So does this Thunder's Ape its lightning play,
Keen as Heavens Fires, and scarce less swift than they.
A short-lived glaring Murderer it flies,
In Times least pulse, a Moments winged surprise;
It Is born, looks big, talks loud, breaths death, and dies.
This Mixture was th'Invention of a Priest;
The Sulphurous Ingredients all the best
Of Hells own growth: for to dire Compounds still
Hell finds the Minerals, and the Priest the Skill.
From this cursed Mine they had that blow decreed,
A Moments dismal blast, as should exceed
All the Storms, Battles, Murders, Massacres,
And all the strokes of Daggers, Swords, or Spears,
Since first Cain's hand at Abels Head was lift:
A Blow more swift than Pestilence, more swift
Than ever a destroying Angel rod,
To pour the Vial of an angry God.
The Train was laid, the very Signal given;
But here th'all-seeing, Isreal's Guardian, Heaven
Could hold no longer; and to stop their way,
With a kind Beam from th'Empyraean Day,
Disclosed their hammering Thunder at the Forge;
And made their Cyclops Cave their Bolts disgorge.
Discovered thus, thus lost, betrayed, undone,
Yet still untir'd, the Restless Cause goes on;
And to retrieve a yet auspicious day,
A glowing spark even in their Ashes lay,
Which thus burst out in flames. In Geshur Land,
The utmost Bound of Isreal's Command,
Where Judah's planted Faith but slowly grew,
A Brutal Race that Isreal's God never knew:
A Nation by the Conquerors Mercy graced,
Their Gods preserved, and Temples undefac'd;
Yet not content with all the Sweets of Peace,
Free their Estates, and free their Consciences;
Against Israel those confederate Swords they drew,
Which with that vast Assassination slew
Two hundred thousand Butchered Victims shared
One common doom: No Sex nor Age was spared:
Not kneeling Beauties Tears, not Virgins Cries,
Nor Infants Smiles: No prey so small but dies.
Alas, the hard-mouthed Blood-hound, Zeal, bites through;
Religion hunts, and hungry Jaws pursue.
To what strange Rage is Superstition driven,
That Man can outdo Hell to fight for Heaven!
So Rebel Geshur fought: so drowned in gore,
Even Mother Earth blushed at the Sons she bore;
And still ashamed of her old staining Brand,
Her Head shrinks down and Quagmires half their Land.
Yet not this blow Baals Empire could enlarge
For Israel still was Heavens peculiar charge:
Unshaken still in all this Scene of Blood,
Truths Temple firm on Golden Columns stood.
Whilst Saul's Revenging Arm proud Geshur scourged,
From their rank soil their Hydra's poison purged.
Yet does not here their vanquished spleen give over,
But as untir'd, and restless as before,
Still through whole waiting Ages they outdo
At once the Chimists pains and patience too.
Who though he sees his bursting Limbecks crack,
And at one blast, one fatal Minutes wrack,
The forward Hopes of sweating years expire;
With sad, yet painful hand new lights his Fire:
Pale, lean, and wan, does Health, Wealth, all consume;
Yet for the great Elixir still to come,
Toyls and hopes on. No less their Plottings cease;
So hope, so toil, the foes of Isreal's peace.
When lo, a long expected day appears,
Sought for above a hundred rolling years;
A day in the register of Doom set down,
Presents 'em with an Heir of Isreal's Crown.
Here their vast hopes of the rich Isreal's spoils,
Requites the pains of their long Ages Toyls.
Baals Banners now in the face of day shall march,
With Heavens bright Roof for his Triumphal Arch.
His lurking Missioners shall now no more
From Foreign Schools in borrowed shapes come over;
Convert by Moonlight, and their Mystic Rites
Preach to (...) Female half-Soul'd Proselytes.
An all-commanding Dragon now shall soar,
Where the poor Serpents only crawled before.
Baals Restoration, that most blessed Design,
Now the great work of Majesty, shall shine,
Made by his consecrating hand Divine.
He shall new plant their Groves with each blessed Tree,
A graft of an Imperial Nursery.
In the kind Air of this new Eden blessed,
Percht on each bough, and Palaces their nest;
No more by frighting Laws forced t'obscure flight,
And gloomy walks, like obscene Birds of Night;
Their warbling Notes like Philomel shall sing,
And like the Bird of Paradise their wing.
Thus Isreal's Heir their ravished Souls all fired;
For all things to their ardent hopes conspired.
His very youth a Bigot Mother bred,
And tainted even the Milk on which he fed.
Him only of her Sons designed for Baals
Great Champion against Ierusalems proud Walls;
Him dipped in Stygian Lake, by timely craft,
Invulnerable made against Truths pointed shaft.
But to confirm his early poisoned Faith,
'Twas in the cursed Foreign Tents of Gath,
'Twas there that he was lost. There Absolon
By David's fatal Banishment undone,
Saw their false Gods till in their Fires he burned,
Truths Manna, for Egyptian Fleshpots, scorned.
Not David so; for he Faiths Champion Lord,
Their Altars loathed, and profane Rites abhorred:
Whilst his firm Soul on wings of Cherubs rod,
And tuned his Lyre to naught but Abraham's God.
Thus the gay Israel her long Tears quite dried,
Her restored David met in all her Pride;
Three Brothers saw by Miracle brought back,
Like Noah's Sons saved from the worlds great wrack;
An unbelieving Ham graced on each hand,
'Twixt God-like Shem, and pious Iaphet stand.
It Is true, when David, all his storms blown over,
Wafted by Prodigies to Iordans shore,
(So swift a Revolution, yet so calm)
Had cured an Ages wounds with one days Balm;
Here the returning Absolon his vows
With Israel joins, and at their Altars bows.
Perhaps surpised at such strange blessings showered,
Such wonders shown both to Isreal's Faith, and Lord,
His Restoration-Miracle he thought
Could by no less than Isreal's God be wrought.
Whilst the enlightened Absolon thus kneels,
Thus dancing to the sound of Aarons Bells,
What dazzling Rays did Isreal's Heir adorn,
So bright his Sun in his unclouded Morn!
'Twas then his leading hand in Battle drew
That Sword that David's famed ten thousand slew:
David's the Cause, but Absolons the Arm.
Then he could win all Hearts, all Tongues could charm:
Whilst with his praise the ecchoing plains all rung,
A thousand Timbrels played, a thousand Virgins sung;
And in the zeal of every jocund Soul,
Absolons Health with David's crowned one Bowl.
Had he fixed here, yes, Fate, had he fixed here,
To Man so Sacred, and to Heaven so dear,
What could he want that Hands, Hearts, Lives could pay,
Or Tributary Worlds beneath his feet could lay?
What Knees, what Necks to mount him to h^^ Throne;
What Gems, what Stars to sparkle in (...) Crown?
So pleased, so charmed, had Isreal's Genius smiled.
But oh, Ye Powers, by treacherous snakes beguiled,
Into a more than Adams Curse he run,
Tasting that Fruit has Isreal's World undone.
Nay, wretched even below his falling state,
Wants Adams Eyes to see his Adams Fate.
In vain was David's Harp and Isreal's Quire;
For his Conversion all in vain conspire:
For though their influence a while retires,
His own false Planets were th'Ascendant Fires.
Heaven had no lasting Miracle designed;
It did a while his fatal Torrent bind.
As Joshua's Wand did Iordan's streams divide,
And ranged the watery Mountains on each side.
But when the marching Israel once got over,
Down crack the Crystal Walls; the Billows pou'r;
And in their old impetuous Channel roar.
At this last stroke thus totally overthrown,
Apostasy now sealed him all her own.
Here ope'd that gaping Breach, that fatal door,
Which now let in a thousand Ruins more.
All the bright Virtues, and each dazzling Grace,
Which his rich Veins drew from a God-like Race;
The Mercy, and the Clemency Divine,
Those Sacred Beams which in mild David shine;
Those Royal Sparks, his Native Seeds of Light,
Were all put out, and left a Starless Night.
A long farewell to all that is Great and Brave:
Not Cataracts more headstrong; as the Grave
Inexorable; Sullen and Untuned
As Pride deposed; scarce Lucifer dethroned
More Unforgiving; his enchanted Soul
Had drank so deep of the bewitching Bowl,
Till he whose hand, with Iudahs Standart, bore
Her Martial Thunder to the Tyrian shore,
Armed in her Wars, and in her Laurels crowned;
Now, all forgotten, at one stagg'ring wound,
Falling from Isreal's Faith; from Isreal's Cause,
Peace, Honor, Interest, all at once withdraws:
Not is he deaf t'a Kingdoms Groans alone,
But could behold ev'^^ David's shaking Throne;
David, whose Bounty raised his glittering Pride,
The Basis of his Glories Pyramide.
But Duty, Gratitude, all ruined fall:
Zeal blazes, and Oblivion swallows all.
So Sodom did both burnt and drowned expire;
A poisoned Lake succeeds a Pile of Fire.
On this Foundation Baals last Hope was built,
The sure Retreat for all their Sallying Guilt:
A Royal Harbor, where the rolling Pride
Of Isreal's Foes might safe at Anchor ride;
Defy all Dangers, and even Tempests scorn,
Though Iudahs God should Thunder in the Storm.
Here Isreal's Laws, the dull Levitick Rolls,
At once a clog to Empire, and to Souls,
Are the first Martyrs to the Fire they doom,
To make great Baals Triumphant Legends room.
But ere their hands this glorious work can Crown,
Their long-known Foe the Sanedrin must down;
Sanedrins the Freeborn Isreal's Sacred Right,
That God-like Balance of Imperial Might;
Where Subjects are from Tyrant-Lords set free,
From that wild Thing unbounded man would be;
Where Power and Clemency are poys'd so even,
A Constitution that resembles Heaven.
So in the united great THREE-ONE we find
A Saving with a Dooming Godhead joined.
(But why, oh why! if such restraining power
Can bind Omnipotence, should Kings wish more?)
A Constitution so Divinely mixed,
Not Natures bounded Elements more fixed.
Thus Earths vast Frame with firm and solid ground,
Stands in a foaming Ocean circled round;
Yet This not overflowing, That not drowned.
But to rebuild their Altars, and enstal
Their Moulten Gods, the Sanedrin must fall;
That Constellation of the Jewish Power,
All blotted from its Orb must shine no more;
Or stamped in Pharoahs darling Mould, must quit
Their Native Beams, for a new-model'd Light;
Like Egypts Sanedrins, their influence gone,
Flash but like empty Meteors round the Throne
That that new Lord may Iudahs Scepter weild,
To whom the old Brickill Taskmasters must yield;
Who, to erect new Temples for his Gods,
Shall th'enslav'd Israel drive with Iron Rods;
If they want Bricks for his new Walls t'aspire,
To their sad cost, he will find 'em Straw and Fire.
All this to effect, and their new Fabric build,
Both close Cabals and Foreign Leagues are held:
To Babylon and Egypt they send over,
And both their Conduct and their Gold implore.
By such Abettors the sly Game was played;
One of their Chiefs a Jewish Renegade,
Highborn in Israel, one Michals Priest,
But now in Babylons proud Scarlet dressed.
It Is to his Hands the Plotting Mandats come
Subscribed by the Apostate Absalom.
Nay, and to keep themselves all danger-proof,
That none might track the Belial by his Hoof,
Their-Correspondence veiled from prying Eyes,
In Hieroglyphick Figures they disguise.
Hushed as the Night, in which their Plots combined,
And silent as the Graves they had designed,
Their Ripening Mischiefs to perfection sprung.
But oh! the much-loath'd David lives too long.
Their Vultures cannot mount but from his Tomb;
And with too hungry ravenous Gorges come,
To be by airy Expectation fed.
No Prey, no Spoil, before they see Him Dead.
Yes, Dead; the Royal Sands too slowly pass,
And therefore they are resolved to break the Glass:
And to ensure Times tardy dubious Call,
Decree their Daggers should his Sithe forestall.
For th'execrable Deed a Hireling Crew
Their Hell and They pick out; whom to make true,
An Oath of Force so exquisite they frame,
Sworn in the Blood of Isreal's Paschal Lamb.
If false, the Vengeance of that Sword that slew
Egypts Firstborn, their perjured Heads pursue.
Strong was the Oath, the Imprecation dire;
And for a Viand, lest their Guilt should tire,
With promised Paradise they cheer their way;
And bold's the Soldier who has Heaven his pay.
But the ne'r-sleeping Providence that stands
With jealous Eyes over Truths up-lifted Hands;
That still in its Loved Israel takes delight,
Their Cloud by Day, and Guardian Fire by Night;
A Ray from out its Fiery Pillar cast,
That overlooked their driving Iehu's have.
All Is ruined and betrayed: their own false Slaves
Detect the Plot, and dig their Masters Graves:
Not Oaths nor Bribes shall bind, when great Jehovah saves.
The frighted Israelites take the Alarm,
Resolve the Traitors Sorceries t'uncharm:
Till cursing, raving, mad, and drunk with Rage,
In Amnons Blood their frantic Hands engage.
Here let the Ghost of strangled Amnon come,
A Specter that will strike Amazement dumb;
Amnon the Proto-Martyr of the Plot,
The Murdered Amnon, their Eternal Blot;
Whose too bold zeal stood like a Pharos Light,
Israel to warn, and track their Deeds of Night.
Till the sly Foe his unseen Game to play,
Put out the Beacon to secure his way.
Baals Cabinet-Intrigues he open spread,
The Ravished Tamar for whose sake he bled.
T'unveil their Temple and expose their Gods,
Deserved their vengeances severest Rods:
Wrath he deserved, and had the Vial full.
To lay those Devils had possessed his Soul,
His silenced Fiends from his wrung Neck they twist;
Whilst his kind Murd'rer's but his Exorcist.
Here draw, bold Painter, (if thy Pencil dare
Unshaking write, what Israel quaked to hear,)
A Royal Altar pregnant with a Load
Of Humane Bones beneath a Breaden God.
Altars so rich not Molocks Temples show;
'Twas Heaven above, and Golgotha below.
Yet are not all the Mystic Rites yet done:
Their pious Fury does not stop so soon.
But to pursue the loud-tongu'd Wounds they gave,
Resolves to stab his Fame beyond the Grave,
And in Eternal Infamy to brand
With Amnons Murder, Amnons righteous Hand.
Here with a Bloodless wound, by Hellish Art,
With his own Sword they goar his Lifeless Heart.
Thus in a Ditch the butchered Amnon lay,
A Deed of Night enough to have kept back the Day.
Had not the Sun in Sacred vengeance rose,
Ashamed to see, but prouder to disclose,
Warmed with new Fires, with all his posting speed,
Brought Heavens bright Lamp to show The Infernal Deed.
What art thou, Church! when Faith to propagate,
And crush all Ba^s that stop thy growing state,
Thou break'st through Natures, Gods, and Humane Laws,
Whilst Murder's Merit in a Churches Cause.
How much thy Ladder Jacobs does excel:
Whose Top's in Heaven like His, but Foot in Hell;
Thy Causes bloody Champions to befriend,
For Fiends to Mount, as Angels to Descend.
This was the stroke did th'alarm'd World surprise,
And even to infidelity lent Eyes:
Whilst sweating Absolon in Israel pent,
For fresher Air was to bleak Hebron sent.
Cold Hebron warmed by his approaching sight,
Flusht with his Gold, and glowed with new delight.
Till Sacred all-converting Interest
To Loyalty, their almost unknown Guest,
Oped a broad Gate, from whence forth-issuing come,
Decrees, Tests, Oaths, for well-sooth'd Absalom.
Spite of that Guilt that made even Angels fall,
An unbarr'd Heir shall Reign: In spite of all
Apostasy from Heaven, or Natures ties,
Though for his Throne a Cain-built Palace rise.
No wonder Hebron such Devotion bears
T'Imperial Dignity, and Royal Heirs;
For they, whom Chronicle so high renowns
For selling Kings, should know the price of Crowns.
Here, Glorious Hushai, let me mourn thy Fate,
Thou once great Pillar of the Hebron State:
Yet now to Dungeons sent, and doomed t'a Grave.
But Chains are no new Sufferings to the Brave.
Witness thy pains in six years Bonds endured,
For Isreal's Faith, and David's Cause immured.
Death too thou often for Iudahs Crown have stood,
So bravely faced in several Fields of Blood.
But from Fames Pinnacle now headlong cast,
Life, Honor, all are ruined at a Blast.
For Absolons great LAW thou durst explain;
Where but to pry, bold Lord, was to profane:
A Law that did his Mystic Godhead couch,
Like th'Ark of God, and no less Death to touch.
Forgot are now thy Honorable Scars,
Thy Loyal Toyls, and Wounds in Iudahs Wars.
Had thy pil'd Trophies Babel-high, reached Heaven,
Yet by one stroke from Absolons Thunder given,
Thy towering Glorie's levelled to the ground;
A stroke does all thy Tongues of Fame confound,
And, Traitor, now is all the Voice they sound.
True, thou had Law; that even thy Foes allow;
But to thy Advocates, as damned as Thou,
'Twas Death to plead it. Artless Absolon
The Bloody Banner to display so soon:
Such killing Beams from thy young Daybreak shot;
What will the Noon be, if the Morn's so hot?
Yes, dreadful Heir, the Coward Hebron awe.
So the young Lion tries his tender Paw.
At a poor Herd of feeble Heifers flies,
Ere the rough Bear, tusk'd Boar, or spotted Leopard dies.
Thus flusht, great Sir, thy strength in Israel try:
When their Cowed Sanedrims shall prostrate lie,
And to thy feet their slavish Necks shall yield;
Then reign the Princely Savage of the Field.
Yes, Isreal's Sanedrin, 'twas they alone
That set too high a Value on a Throne;
Thought they had a God was Worthy to be served;
A Faith maintained, and Liberty preserved.
And therefore judged, for Safety and Renown
Of Isreal's People, Altars, Laws and Crown,
Th'Anointing Drops on Royal Temples shed
Too precious Showrs for an Apostates Head.
Then was that great Deliberate Council given,
An Act of Justice both to Man and Heaven,
Isreal's conspiring Foes to overthrow,
That Absolon should th'Hopes of Crowns forego.
Debarred Succession! oh that dismal sound!
A sound, at which Baal staggered, and Hell groaned;
A sound that with such dreadful Thunder falls,
'Twas heard even to Semiramis trembling Walls.
But hold! is this the Plots last Murdering Blow,
The dire divorce of Soul and Body? No.
The mangled Snake, yet warm, to Life they will bring,
And each disjoynted Limb together cling.
Then thus Baals wise consulting Prophets cheered
Their pensive Sons, and called the scattered Herd.
Are we quite ruined! No, mistaken Doom,
Still the great Day, yes that great Day shall come,
(Oh, rouse our fainting Sons, and droop no more.)
A Day, whose Luster, our long Clouds blown over,
Not all the Rage of Israel shall annoy,
No, nor denouncing Sanedrims destroy.
See yon North Pole, and mark Boots Carr:
Oh! we have those Influencing Aspects there,
Those Friendly powers that drive in that bright Wain,
Shall redeem All, and our lost Ground regain.
Whilst to our Glory their kind Aid stands fast,
But one Plot more, our Greatest and our Last.
Now for a Product of that subtle kind,
As far above their former Births refined,
As Firmamental Fires t'a Tapers ray,
Or Prodigies to Natures common Clay.
Empires in Blood, or Cities in a Flame,
Are work for vulgar Hands, scarce worth a Name.
A Cake of Shewbread from an Altar taken,
Mixed but with some Levitical King-bane,
Has sent a Martyred Monarch to his Grave.
Nay, a poor Mendicant Church-Rake-hell slave
Has stabbed Crowned Heads; slight Work to hands well skilled,
Slight as the Pebble that Goliath killed.
But to make Plots no Plots, to clear all Taints,
Traitors transform to Innocents, Fiends to Saints,
Reason to Nonsense, Truth to Perjury;
Nay, make their own attesting Records lie,
And even the gaping Wounds of Murder whole:
I, this last Masterpiece requires a Soul.
Guilt to unmake, and Plots annihilate,
Is much a greater work than to create.
Nay both at once to be, and not to be,
Is such a Task would pose a Deity.
Let Baal do this, and be a God indeed:
Yes, to his Immortal Honor it is decreed,
His Sanguine Robe though dipped in reeking Gore,
With purity and Innocence all over,
Shall dry, and spotless from the purple hue,
The Miracle of Gideons Fleece outdo.
Yes, they are resolved, in all their foes despite,
To wash their more than Ethiop Treason White.
But now for Heads to manage the Design,
Fit Engineers to labor in this Mine.
For their own hands 'twere fatal to employ:
Should Baal appear, it would Baals Cause destroy.
Alas, should only their own Trumpets sound
Their Innocence, the jealous Ears around
All Infidels would the loathed Charmer fly,
And through the Angels voice the Fiend descry.
No, this last game wants a new plotting Set,
And Israel only now can Israel cheat.
In this Machine their professed Foes must move,
Whilst Baal absconding sits in Clouds above,
From whence unseen he guides their bidden way:
For he may prompt, although he must not play.
This to effect a sort of Tools they find,
Devotion-Rovers, an Amphibious Kind,
Of no Religion, yet like Walls of Steel
Strong for the Altars where their Princes kneel.
Imperial not Celestial is their Test,
The Uppermost, indsputably Best.
They always in the golden Chariot rod,
Honor their Heaven, and Interest their God.
Of these then subtle Caleb none more Great,
Caleb who shines where his lost Father set;
Got by that sire, who not content alone,
To shade the brightest Jewel in a Crown,
Preaching Ingratitude t'a Court and Throne;
But made his Politics the baneful Root
From whence the springing Woes of Israel shoot,
When his Great Masters fatal Gordian tied,
He laid the barren Michal by his side;
That the adored Absolons immortal Line
Might on Iudeas Throne for ever shine.
Caleb, who does that hardy Pilot make,
Steering in that Hereditary Track,
Blind to the Sea-Mark of a Fathers Wrack.
Next Jonas stands bull-fac'd, but chicken-soul'd,
Who once the silver ^^nedrin Controlled,
Their Gold-tip'd Tongue; Gold his great Councels Bawd:
Till by succeeding Sanedrins outlawed,
He was preferred to guard the sacred Store:
There Lordly rolling in whole Mines of Oar;
To Diceing Lords, a Cully-Favourite,
He prostitutes whole Cargoes in a Night.
Here to the Top of his Ambition come,
Fills all his Sayls for hopeful Absalom.
For his Religion's as the Season calls,
Gods in Possession, in Reversion Baals.
He bears himself a Dove to Mortal Race,
And though not Man, he can look Heaven in the Face.
Never was Compound of more different Stuff,
A Heart in Lambskin, and a Conscience Buff.
Let not that Hideous Bulk of Honor escape,
Nadab that sets the gazing Crowd agape:
That old Kirk-founder, whose course Croak could sing
The Saints, the Cause, no Bishop, and no King:
When Greatness cleared his Throat, and scowr'd his Maw,
Roard out Succession, and the Penal Law.
Not so of old: another sound went forth,
When in the Region from Judea North,
By the Triumphant Saul he was employed,
A huge fang Tusk to goar poor David's side.
Like a Proboscis in the Tyrants Jaw,
To rend and root through Government and Law.
His hand that Hell-penn'd League of Belial drew,
That Swore down Kings, Religion overthrew,
Great David banished, and Gods Prophets slew.
Nor does the Courts long Sun so powerful shine,
T'exhale his Vapors, or his Dross refine;
Nor is the Metal mended by the stamp.
With his rank oil he feeds the Royal Lamp.
To Sanedrins an everlasting Foe,
Resolved his Mighty Hunters overthrow.
And true to Tyranny, as the only Jem,
That truly sparkles in a Diadem;
To Absalons side does his old Covenant bring,
With State razed out, and interlin'd with KING.
But Nadabs Zeal has too severe a Doom;
Whilst serving an ungrateful Absalom,
His strength all spent his Greatness to create,
He Is now laid by a cast-out Drone of Sta^e.
He rowz'd that Game by which he is undone,
By fleeter Coursers now so far outrun,
That fiercer Mightier Nimrod in the Chase,
Till quite thrown out, and lo^t he quits the Race.
Of Low-born Tools we bawling Shimei saw,
Ierusalems late loud-tongu'd MOUTH of Law.
By Blessings from Almighty Bounty given,
Shimei no common Favorite of Heaven.
Whom, lest Posterity should loose the Breed,
In five short Moons indulgent Heaven raised Seed;
Made happy in an Early teeming Bride,
And laid a lovely Heiress by her side.
Whilst the glad Father's so divinely blessed,
That like the Stag proud of his Brow so dressed,
He brandishes his lofty City-Crest.
'Twas in Jerusalem was Shimei ^^rst,
Jerusalem by Baals Prophets ever cursed,
The greatest Block that stops 'em in their way,
For which she once in Dust and Ashes lay.
Here to the Bar this whiffling Lurcher came,
And barkt to rowze the nobler Hunters Game.
But Shimei's Lungs might well be stretched so far;
For steering by a Court-Ascendant Star,
For daily Oracles he does address,
To the Egyptian Beauteous Sorceress.
For Pharaoh when he wisely did essay
To bear the long-sought Golden Prize away,
That fair Enchantress sent, whose Magic Skill
Should keep great Isreal's sleeping Dragon still.
Thus by her powerful inspirations fed,
To bite their Heels this City-Snake was bred,
Till Absalon got strength to bruise their Head.
Of all the Heroes since the world began,
To Shimei Ioshuah was the bravest Man.
To Him his Tutelar Saint he prays, and oh,
That great Jerusalem were like Iericoh!
Then bellowing loud for Ioshuahs Spirit calls,
Because his Rams-horn blew down City-Walls.
In the same Roll have we grave Corah seen,
Corah, the late chief Scarlet Abbethdin.
Corah, who luckily in the Bench was got,
To (...) the Bloodhounds off to save the Plot.
Corah, who once against Baals Impious Cause,
Stood strong for Isreal's Faith and David's Laws.
He poys'd his Scales, and shook his ponderous Sword,
Loud as his Fathers Basan-Bulls he roared;
Till by a Dose of Foreign Ophir drencht,
The Feavour of his Burning Zeal was Quenched.
Ophir, that rescued the Court-Drugsters Fate,
Sent in the Nick to gild his Pills of State.
Whilst the kind Skill of our Law-Emperick,
Sublimed his Mercury to save his Neck.
In Law, they say, he had but a slender Mite,
And Sense he had less: for as Historians write,
The Arabian Legate laid a Share so gay,
As Spirited his little Wits away.
Of the Records of Law he fancied none
Like the Commandment Tables graved in Stone.
And wished the Talmude such, that Sovereign sway
When once displeased might the angry Moses play.
Only his Law was Brittle in the wrong place:
For had our Corah been in Moses Case,
The Fury of his Zeal had been employed
To build that Calf which the others Rage destroyed.
Thus Corah, Baals true Fayry Changeling made,
He Bl^ated only as the Pharisees prayed,
All to advance that future Tyrant power,
Should Widows Houses gorge, and Orphans Tears devour.
Nor are these all their Instruments; to prop
Their Mighty Cause, and Isreal's Murmurs stop;
They find a sort of Academick Tools;
Who by the Politic Doctrine of their Schools,
Betwixt Reward, Pride, Avarice, Hope and Fear,
Prizing their Heaven too cheap, the World too dear,
Stand bold and strong for Absolons Defense:
Interest the Thing, but Conscience the Pretense.
These to ensure him for their Sions King,
A Right Divine quite down from Adam bring,
That old Levitick Engine of Renown,
That makes no Taint of Souls a bar t'a Crown.
It Is true, Religions constant Champion vowed,
Each open-mouthed, with Pulpit-Thunder loud,
Against false Gods, and Idol Temples bawls;
Yet lays the very Stones that raise their Walls.
They preach up Hell to those that Baal adore,
Yet make it Damnation to oppose his power.
So far this Paradox of Conscience run,
Till Isreal's Faith pulls Isreal's Altars down.
Grant Heaven they don't to Baal so far make way,
Those fatal Wands before their Sheepfolds lay.
Such Motley Principles amongst them thrown,
Shall nurse that Py-ball'd Flock that is half his own.
Nor may they say, when Molocks Hands draw nigher,
We built the Pile, whilst Baal but gives it fire.
If Monarchy in Adam first begun,
When the Worlds Monarch dug, and his Queen spun,
His Fig Leaves his first Coronation-Robe,
His Spade his Scepter, and her Wheel his Globe;
And Royal Birthright, as their Schools assert,
Not Kings themselves with Conscience can divert;
How came the World possessed by Adams Sons,
Such various Principalities, Powers, Thrones?
When each went out and chose what Lands he pleased,
Whilst a new Family new Kingdoms raised?
His Sons assuming what he could not give,
Their Sovereign Sires right Heir they did deprive;
And from Rebellion all their power derive:
For were there an original Majesty
Upheld by Right Divine, the World should be
Only one Universal Monarchy.
O cruel Right Divine, more full of Fate,
Then the Angels flaming Sword at Edens Gate,
Such early Treason through Mankind conveyed,
And at the door of Infant-Nature laid.
For Right Divine in Esau's just defense,
Why don't they quarrel with Omnipotence,
The firstborn Esau's Right to Jacob given,
And Gods gift too, Injustice charge on Heaven.
Nay, let Heaven answer this one Fact alone,
Mounting a Bastard Iephtha on a Throne.
If Kings and Sanedrims those Laws could make,
Which from offending Heirs their Heads can take;
And a Firstborn can forfeit Life and Throne,
And all by Law: why not a Crown alone?
Strange-bounded Lawmakers! whose power can throw
The deadlier Bolt, cannot give the weaker Blow.
A Treasonous Act; nay, but a Treasonous Breath
Against offended Majesty is Death.
But, oh! the wondrous Church-distinction given
Between the Majesty of Kings and Heaven!
The venial sinner here, he that intreagues
With Egypt, Babylon; Cabals, Plots, Leagues
With Isreal's Foes her Altars to destroy,
A Hair untouched, shall Health, Peace, Crowns enjoy.
Truths Temple thus the Exhalations bred
From her own Bowels, to obscure her Head.
And Absalom already had subdued
Whole Crowds of the unthinking Multitude*
But through these Wiles too weak to catch the Wise,
Thin as their Ephod-Lawn, a Cobweb Net for Flies,
The searching Sanedrim saw; and to dispel
Th'ingendring Mists that threatened Israel,
They still resolved their Plotting Foes defeat,
By barring Absolon The Imperial Seat.
But here is his greatest Tug; could he but make
Th'encluding Sanedrims Resolves once shake;
Nay, make the smallest Breach, or clashing Jar,
In their great Council, push but home so far,
And the great Point's secured. -- And, lo! among
The Princely Heads of that Illustrious Throng,
He saw rich Veins with Noble Blood new filled;
Others who Honor from Dependence held.
Some with exhausted Fortunes, to support
Their Greatness, propt with Crutches from a Court.
These for their Countries Right their Votes still pass,
Moved like the Water in a Weather-glass,
Higher or lower, as the powerful Charm
O*th' Sovereign Hand is either cool or warm.
Here must th'Attacque be made: for well we know,
Reason and Titles from one Fountain flow:
Whilst Favor Men no less than Fortunes builds,
And Honor ever Moulds as well as Guilds.
Honor that still does even new Souls inspire;
Honor more powerful than the Heav'n-stoln Fire.
These must be wrought to Absolons Defense.
For though to baffle the whole Sanedrims Sense
T'attempt Impossibles would be in vain;
Yet it is enough but to Divide and Reign.
Here though small Force such easy Converts draws,
Yet it is thought fit in glory to their Cause,
Some learned Champion of prodigious Sense,
With Mighty and long studied Eloquence,
Should with a kind of Inspiration rise,
And the unguarded Sanedrim surprise;
And such resistless conquering Reasons press,
To charm their vanquished Souls, that the Success
Might look like Conscience, though it is nothing less.
For this Design no Head nor Tongue so well,
As that of the profound Achitophel.
How, great Achitophel! his Hand, his Tongue!
Babylons Mortal Foe; he who so long
With haughty Sullenness, and scornful Lowr,
Had loathed false Gods, and Arbitrary power.
Against Baal no Combatant more fierce than he;
For Isreal's asserted Liberty,
No Man more bold; with generous Rage enflamed,
Against the old e^snaring Test declaimed.
Besides, he bore a most peculiar Hate
To sleeping Pilots, all Earth-clods of State.
None more abhorred the Sycophant, Buffoon;
And Parasite, th'excrescence of a Throne;
Creatures who their creating Sun disgrace,
A Brood more abject than Niles Slime-born Race.
Such was the Brave Achitophel; a Mind,
(If but the Heart and Face were of a kind)
So far from being by one base Thought depraved,
That sure half ten such Souls had Sodom saved.
Here Baals Cabal Achitophel surveyed,
And dashed with wonder, half despairing said,
Is this the Hand that Absolon must Crown,
The Founder of his Temples, Palace, Throne?
This, This the mighty Convert we must make?
Gods, h'has a Soul not all our Arts can shake.
At this a Wiser graver Head stepped out,
And with this Language chid their groundless Doubt:
For shame, no more; what is it that frights you thus?
Is it his Hatred of our God, and us,
Makes him so formidable in your Eye?
Or is it his Wit, Sense, Honor, Bravery?
Give him a thousand Virtues more, and plant
Them round him like a Wall of Adamant,
Strong as the Gates of Heaven; we'll reach his Heart:
Cheer, cheer, my Friends, I Have found one Mortal part.
For he has Pride, a vast insatiate Pride,
Kind Stars, he is vulnerable on that side.
Pride that made Angels fall, and Pride that hurled
Entayl'd Destruction through a ruined World.
Adam from Pride to Disobedience ran:
To be like Gods, made a lost wretched Man.
There, there, my Sons, let our poured strength all fly:
For some bold Tempter now to rap him high,
From Pinnacles to Mountain Tops, and show
The gaudy Glories of the World below.
At which the Consult came to this Design,
To work him by a kind of Touch Divine.
To raise some holy Spright to do the Feat.
Nothing like Dreams and Visions to the Great.
Did not a little Witch of Endor bring
A Visionary Seer t'a cheated King?
And shall their greater Magic want Success,
Their more Illustrious Sorceries do less!
This final Resolution made, at last
Some Mystic words, and invocations past,
They called the Spirit of a late Court-Scribe;
Once a true Servant of the Plotting Tribe:
When both with Foreign and Domestic Cost,
He played the feasted Sanedrims kind Host.
He Had scribbled much, and like a Patriot bold,
Bid high for Isreal's Peace with Egypts Gold.
But since a Martyr. (Why! as Writers think,
His Masters Hand had over-gall'd his Ink.)
And by protesting Absoloms wise care,
Popt into Brimstone ere he was aware.
Him from the Grave they raised, in ample kind,
His severed Head to his seer Quarters joined;
Then cased his Chin in a false Beard so well,
As made him pass for Father Samuel.
Him thus equipt in a Religious Cloak,
They thus his new-made Reverence bespoke.
Go, awful Spright, have to Achitophel,
Rouse his great Soul, use every Art, Charm, Spell:
For Absalom thy utmost Rhetoric try,
Preach him Succession, roared Succession cry,
Succession dressed in all her glorious pride,
Succession Worshipped, Sainted, De^fy'd.
Conjure him by Divine and Humane Powers,
Convince, Convert, Confound, make him but ours,
That Absolon may mount on Iudahs Throne,
Whilst all the World before us is our own.
The forward Spright but few Instructions lackt,
Strait by the Moons pale light away he packt,
And in a trice, his Curtains opened wide,
He sat him by Achitophels Bedside.
And in this style his artful Accents ran*
Hear Isreal's Hope, thou more than happy Man,
Beloved on high, witness this Honor done
By Father Samuel, and believe me, Son,
It Is by no common Mandate of a God,
A Soul beatifyed, the blessed Abode
Thus low deserting, quits Immortal Thrones,
And from his Grave resumes his sleeping Bones.
But Heaven's the Guide, and wondrous is the way,
Divine the Embassy: hear, and obey.
How long, Achitophel, and how prof^^nd.
A Mist of Hell has thy lost Reason drowned?
Can the Apostasy from Isreal's Faith,
In Isreal's Heir, deserve a murmuring Breath?
Or to preserve Religion, Liberty,
Peace, Nations, Souls, is that a Cause so high,
As the Right Heir from Empire to debar?
Forbid it Heaven, and guard him every Star.
Alas, what if an Heir of Royal P^ace,
Gods Glory and his Temples will deface,
And make a prey of your Estates, Lives, Laws;
Nay, give your Sons to Molocks burning paws;
Shall you exclude him? hold that Impious Hand.
As Abraham gave his Son (...) Gods Command,
Think still he does by Divine Right (...):
God bids Him Reign, and you should bid Them Bleed.
It Is true, as Heavens Elected Flock, you may
For his Conversion, and your Safety pray
But Prayers are all. To Disinherit him,
The very Thought, nay, Word it self a Crime.
For that is the MEANS of Safety: but forbear,
For Means are Impious in the Sons of Prayer.
To Miracles alone your Safety owe;
And Abraham's Angel wait to stop the Blow.
Yes, what if his polluted Throne be strowd
With Sacrilege, Idolatry, and Blood;
And it is you mount him there; you're innocent still:
For he is a King, and Kings can do no ill.
Oh Royal Birthright, it is a Sacred Name:
Rowze then Achitophel, rowze up for shame:
Let not this Lethargy thy Soul benum;
But wake, and save the Godlike Absalom.
And to reward thee for a Deed so great
Glut thy Desires, thy full-crown'd wishes meet,
Be with accumulated Honors blessed,
And grasp a STAR t'adorn thy shining Crest.
Achitophel before his Eyes could open,
Dreamt of an Ephod, Mitre, and a Cope.
Those visionary Robes to his Eyes appeared:
For Priestly all was the great Sense he heard.
But Priest or Prophet, Right Divine, or all
Together; 'twas not at their feebler call,
'Twas at the Star he waked; the Star but named,
Flasht in his Eyes, and his rowz'd Soul enflamed.
A Star, whose Influence had more powerful Light,
Then that Miraculous Wanderer of the Night,
Decreed to guide the Eastern Sages way:
Their's to adore a God, his to betray.
Here the new Convert more than half inspired,
Strait to his Closet and his Books retired.
There for all needful Arts in this extreme,
For knotty Sophistry t'a limber Theme*
Long brooding ere the Mass to Shape was brought,
And after many a tugging heaving Thought,
Together a well-orderd Speech he draws,
With ponderous Sounds for his much-labour'd Cause.
Then the astonished Sanedrim he stormed,
And with such doughty strength the Tug performed:
Fate did the Work with so much Conquest bless,
Wondrous the Champion, Glorious the Success.
So powerful Eloquence, so strong was Wit;
And with such Force the easy Wind-falls hit.
But the entirest Hearts his Cause could steal,
Were the Levitick Chiefs of Israel.
None with more Rage the Impious Thought run down
Of barring Absolon, Power, Wishes, Crown.
With so much vehemence, such fiery Zeal!
Oh, poor unhappy Church of Israel!
Thou feelst the Fate of the Archangels Wars,
The Dragons Tail sweeps down thy Falling Stars.
Nay, the black Vote against Absolon appeared
So monstrous, that they damned it ere 'twas heard.
For Prelates never in Sanedrims debate,
They argue in the Church, but not in the State;
And when their Thoughts aslant toward Heaven they turn,
They weigh each Grain of Incense that they burn,
But t'Heavens Vicegerents, Soul, Sense, Reason, all,
Or right or wrong, like Hecatombs must fall.
And when State-business calls their Thoughts below,
Then like their own Church-Organ-Pipes they go.
Not David's Lyre could more his Touch obey:
For as their Princes breathe and strike, they play.
Against Royal Will they never can dispute,
But by a strange Tarantula struck mute,
Dance to no other Tune but Absolute.
All Acts of Supreme Power they still admire:
It Is Sacred, though to set the World on Fire,
Though Church-Infallibility they explode,
As making Humane knowledge equal God;
Infallible in a new name goes down,
Not in the Mitre lodged, but in the Crown.
It Is true, blessed Deborahs Laws they could forget.
(But want of Memory commends their Wit.)
Where 'twas enacted Treason, not to own
Hers and her Sanedrins right to place the Crown.
But her weak Heads oth' Church, mistaken fools,
Wanted the Light of their sublimer Schools:
For Divine Right could no such Forces bring.
But Wisdom now expands her wider Wing,
And Streams are ever deeper than the Spring.
Besides, they have sense of Honor; and who knows
How far the Gratitude of Priestcraft goes?
And what if now like old Elisha fed,
To praise the Sooty Bird that brought 'em Bread,
In pure acknowledgment, though in despite
Of their own sense, they paint the Raven White.
Achitophel charmed with kind Fortunes Smiles,
Flusht with Success, now glows for bolder Toyls.
Great Wits perverted greatest Mischiefs hold,
As poisonous Vapors spring from Mines of Gold.
And proud to see himself with Triumph blessed,
Thus to great Absalom himself addressed.
Illustrious Terror of the World, all hayle:
For ever like your Conquering Self prevail.
In spite of Malice in full Luster shine;
Be your each Action, Word, and Look Divine.
Nay, though our Altars you have so long forborne;
To your derided Foes Defeat, and Scorn,
For your Renown we have those Trumpets found,
Shall even this Deed your highest Glory sound.
That spite of the ill-judging Worlds mistake,
Your Soul still owns those Temples you forsake:
Only by all-commanding Honor driven,
This self-denial you have made with Heaven:
Quitting our Altars, cause the Insolence
Of profane Sanedrims has driven you thence.
A Prince his Faith to such low Slaves reveal!
'Twas Treason though to God to bid You kneel.
And what though senseless barking Murmurers scold,
And with a Rage too blasphemously bold,
Say Isreal's Crown's for Esau's Pottage sold.
Let 'em rayl on; and to strike Envy dumb;
May the Slaves live till that great Day shall come,
When their hushed Rage shall your keen Vengeance fly,
And silenced with your Royal Thunder dye.
Nay, to outsoar your weak Forefathers Wings,
And to be all that Nature first meant Kings;
Damned be the Law that Majesty confines,
But doubly damned accursed Sanedrins,
Invented onely^to eclipse a Crown.
Oh throw that dull Mosaic Landmark down.
The making Sanedrims a part of Power,
Nursed but those Vipers which its Sire devour.
Lodged in the Palace toward the Throne they press,
For Powers Enjoyment does its Lust increase.
Allegiance only is in Chains held fast;
Make Men never thirst, is never to let 'em taste.
Then, Royal Sir, be Sanedrims no more,
Lop off that rank Luxurious Branch of power:
Those hungry Scions from the Cedar root,
That its Imperial Head toward Heaven may shoot.
When Lordly Sanedrims with Kings give Law,
And thus in yokes like Mules together draw;
From Iudahs Arms the Royal Lion raze,
And Issachars dull Ass supply the place.
If Kings over common Mankind have this odds,
Are Gods Vicegerents; let 'em act like Gods.
As Man is Heavens own clay, which it may mould
For Honor or Dishonor, uncontrould,
And Monarchy is moved by Heavenly Springs;
Why is not Humane Fate in the Breath of Kings?
Then, Sir, from Heaven your great Example take,
And be th'unbounded Lord a King should make:
Resume what bold Invading Slaves engrost,
And only Powers Effeminacy lost.
To this kind Absalom but little spoke;
Only returned a Nod, and gracious Look.
For though recorded Fame with pride has told,
Of his great Actings, Wonders manifold;
And his great Thinkings most Diviners guess;
Yet his great Speakings no Records express.
All things thus safe; and now for one last blow,
To give his Foes a total Overthrow;
A Blow not in Hells Legends matched before,
The removed Plot's laid at the Enemies door.
The old Plot forged against the Saints of Baal,
Cheat, Perjury, and Subornation all,
Whilst with a more damned Treason of their own,
Like working Moles they are digging round the Throne;
Baal, Baal, the cry, and Absalom the Name,
But David's glory, Life and Crown the Aim.
Nay, if but a Petition peep abroad,
Though for the Glory both of Church and God,
And to preserve even their yet unborn Heirs;
There Is Blood and Treason in their very Prayers.
This unexampled Impudence upheld;
The Governments best Friends, the Crowns best Shield,
The Great and Brave with equal Treason brands.
Faith, Honor, and Allegiance strongest Bands
All broken like the Cords of Sampson fall,
Whilst th'universal Leprosy taints all.
These poisonous shafts with greater spleen they draw,
Than the Outrageous Wife of Potypha.
So the chaste Joseph unseduc'd to her
Adult'ries, was pronounced a Ravasher.
This hellish Ethnic Plot the Court alarms;
The Traitors seventy thousand strong in Arms,
Near Endor Town lay ready at a Call,
And garrisoned in Airy Castles all.
These Warriors on a fort of Coursers rid,
Never log'd in Stables, or by Man bestrid.
What though the stee^e with which the Rebels fought,
No Forge e're felt, or Anvi^e ever wrought?
Yet this Magnetic Plot, for black D^signs,
Can raise cold Iron from the very Mines.
To this were twenty Under-plots, contrived
By Malice, and by Ignorance believed,
Till Shamms met Shamms, and Plots with Plots so crossed,
That the True Plot amongst the False was lost.
Of all the much-wrong'd Worthies of the Land
Whom this Contagious ^nfamy profan^d,
In the first Rank the youthful Ithream stood,
His Princely Veins filled with great David's Blood.
With so much Manly Beauty in his Face,
Scarce his High Birth could lend a Nobler Grace.
And for a Mind fit for this shrine of Gold
Heaven cast his Soul in the same Beauteous Mould;
With all the sweets of Prideless Greatness blessed,
As Affable as Abraham's Angel-Guest.
But when in Wars his glittering Steel he drew*
No Chief more Bold with fiercer Lightning flew*
Witness his trial of an Arm Divine,
Passing the Ordeal of a Burning Mine:
Such forward Courage did his Bosom fill,
Starting from nothing, but from doing ill.
Still with such Heat in Honors Race he run,
Such Wonders by his early Valor done,
Enough to charm a second Joshua's Sun.
But he has Fo^^; his fatal Enemies
To a strange Monster his Fair Truth disguise;
And show the Gorgon even to Royal Eyes.
To their false perspectives his Fate he owes,
The spots in the Glass, not in the Star it shows.
Yet when by the Imperial Sentence doomed,
The Royal Hand the Princely Youth unplum'd,
He his hard Fate without a Murmur took,
And stood with that Calm, Duteous, Humble look.
Of all his shining Honors unarray'd,
Like Isaac's Head on Abraham's Altar laid.
Yes, Absalom, thou have him in the Toil,
Rifled, and lost; now Triumph in the Spoil.
His Zeal too high for Isreal's Temples soared,
His God-like Youth by prostrate Hearts adored,
Till thy Revenge from Spite and Fear began,
And too near Heaven took Care to make him Man.
Though Isreal's King, God, Laws, share all his Soul,
Adorned with all that Heroes can enrol,
Yet Vowed Successions cruel Sacrifice,
Great Judah's Son like Ieptha's Daughter dies.
Yes, like a Monument of Wrath he stands;
Such Ruin Absolons Revenge demands;
His Curiosity his Doom assigned;
For 'twas a Chime of as destructive Kind,
To pry how Babylons Burning Zeal aspires,
As to look back on Sodoms blazing Fires.
But spoiled, and robbed, his drossier Glories gone,
His Virtue and his Truth are still his own.
No rifling Hands can that bright Treasure take,
Nor all his Foes that Royal Charter shake.
The dreadful'st Foe their Engines must subdue,
The strongest Rock though which their Arts must hew,
Was great Barzillai: could they reach his Head,
Their Fears all hushed, they had struck Danger dead.
That second Moses-Guide resolved to free
Our Israel from her threatening Slavery,
Idolatry and Chains; both from the Rods
Of Pharoh-Masters, and Egyptian Gods:
And from that Wilderness of Error freed,
Where Dogstars scorch, and killing Serpents breed:
That Isreal's Liberty and Truth may grow,
The Canaan whence our Milk and Honey flow.
Such our Barzillai; but Barzillai too,
With Moses Fate does Moses Zeal pursue:
Leads to that Bliss which his own Silver Hairs
Shall never reach, Rich only to his Heirs.
Kind Patriot, who to plant us Banks of Flowers,
With purling Streams, cool Shades, and Summer Bowers,
His Ages needful Rest away does fling,
Exhausts his Autumn to adorn our Spring:
Whilst his last hours in Toyls and Storms are hurled,
And only to enrich th'inheriting World.
Thus prodigally throws his Life's short span,
To play his Countries generous Pelican.
But oh, that all-be-devill'd Paper, framed,
No doubt, in Hell; that Mass of Treason damned;
By Esau's Hands, and Jacobs Voice disclosed;
And timely to the Abhorring World exposed.
Nay, what is more wondrous, this wast-paper Tool,
A nameless, unsubscrib'd, and useless scrowl,
Was, by a Politician great in Fame,
(His Chains foreseen a Month before they came)
Preserved on purpose, by his prudent care,
To brand his Soul, and even his Life ensnare.
But then the Geshuritish Troop, well-Oath'd,
And for the sprucer Face, well-fed, and Clothed.
These to the Bar Obedient Swearers go,
With all the Wind their managed Lungs can blow.
So have I seen from Bellows brazen Snout,
The Breath drawn in, and by th'same Hand squeezed out.
But helping Oaths may innocently fly,
When in a Faith where dying Vows can lie.
Were Treason and Democracie his Ends,
Why was it not proved by his Revolting Friends?
Why did not th'Oaths of his once-great Colleagues,
Achitophel and the rest prove his Intreagues?
Why at the Bar appeared such sordid scum,
And all those Nobler Tongues of Honor dumb?
Could he his Plots to his great Allies conceal,
He durst to leaky Starving Wretches tell;
Such Ignorant Princes, and such knowing Slaves;
His Babel building Tools from such poor Knaves.
Were he that Monster his new Foes would make
Th'unreasoning World believe, his Soul so black,
That they in Conscience did his Side forego,
Knowing him guilty they could prove him so.
Then 'twas not Conscience m^de ^em change their side.
Or if they knew, yet did his Treasons hide;
In not exposing his detested Crime?
They Are greater Monsters than they dare think Him.
Are these the Proselites renowned so high,
Convert^ to D^^y, Honor, Loyalty?
Poorly they change, who in their change stand mute:
Converts to Truth ought Falsehood to confute.
To conquering Truth, they but small glory give,
Who turn to God, yet let the Dagon live.
But who can Amiels charming Wit withstand,
The great State-pillar of the Muses Land.
For lawless and ungoverned, had the Age
The Nine wild Sisters seen run mad with Rage,
Debaucht to Savages, till his keen Pen
Brought their long banished Reason back again,
Driven by his Satyrs into Natures Fence,
And lasht the idle Rovers into Sense.
Nay, his sly Muse, in Style Prophetic, wrote
The whole Intrigue of Isreal's Ethnic Plot;
Formed strange Battalions, in stupendious-wise,
Whole Camps in Masquerade, and Armies in disguise.
Amiel, whose generous Gallantry, whilst Fame
Shall have a Tongue, shall never want a Name.
Who, whilst his Pomp his lavish Gold consumes,
Moulted his Wings to lend a Throne his Plumes,
Whilst an Ungrateful Court he did attend,
Too poor to pay, what it had pride to spend.
But; Amiel has, alas, the fate to hear,
An angry Poet play his Chronicler;
A Poet raised above Ob^i^io^s Shade,
By his Recorded Ve^se (...) made.
But, Sir, his livelier Figure to engrave,
With Branches added to the ^ays you gave:
No Muse could more He^^ick (...) rehearse,
Had with an equal all (...) pla^ding Verse,
Great David's S^^p^e^, and Saul's Javelin praised:
A Pyramide to his S^int, Interest, raised.
For which Religiously ^o Change he mist,
From Common-wealth^man up to Royalist:
Nay, would have been his own loa^^'d thing called Priest.
Priest, whom with so which Gall he does describe,
'Cause once unworthy thought of Levies Tribe.
Near those bri^^^ ^^^i^rs where Art has Wonders done,
Where David's sight glads the blessed Summers Sun;
And at his feet proud Iordans Waters run;
A Cell there (...) by Pi^^^ Founders raised,
Both for its Wealth and Learned Rabbis praised:
To this did an Ambitious Bard aspire,
To be no less than Lord of that blessed Quire:
Till Wisdom deemed so Sacred a Command,
A Prize too, ^^eat for his unhallowed Hand. --
Besides, lewd Fame had told his plighted Vow,
To Laura's cooing Love percht on a dropping Bough
Laura in faithful Constancy confined
To Ethiops Envoy, and to all Mankind.
Laura though Rotten, yet of Mold Divine;
He had all her Claps, and She had all his Coin.
Her Wit so far his Purse and Sense could drain,
Till every Pox was sweeth'd to a Strain.
And if at last his Nature can reform,
(...) weary grown of Loves tumultuous storm,
It Is Ages Fault, ^ot P^is, of power bereft,
He left not Whoring, out of that was left.
But wandering (...) thy flagging Wing:
To thy more glorious Theme return, and sing
Brave Iotha^ms Worth, Impartial, Great, and Just,
Of unbrib'd Faith, had of un^^aken Trust:
Once Geshurs Lord, their Throne so nobly filled,
As if to the borrowed Scepter that he held,
The inspiring David yet more generous grew,
And lent him his Imperial Genius too.
Nor has he worn the Royal Image more
In Isreal's Viceroy, than Ambassador:
Witness his Gallantry that resolute hour,
When to uphold the Sacred Pride of Power,
His stubborn Flags from the Sydonian shore,
The angry storms of Thundering Castles bore.
But these are Virtues Fame must less admire,
Because derived from that Heroic Sire,
Who on a Block a dauntless Martyr died,
With all the Sweetness of a Smiling Bride;
Charmed with the Thought of Honors Starry Pole,
With Joy laid down a Head to mount a Soul.
Of all the Champions rich in Honors Scarrs,
Whose Loyalty through David's ancient Wars,
(In spite of the triumphant Tyrants pride,)
Was to his lowest Ebb of Fortune tied;
No ^^ink more strong in all that Chain of Gold,
Then Amasai, the Constant, and the Bold.
That Warlike General whose avenging Sword,
Through all the Battles of his Royal Lord,
Poured all the Fires that Loyal Zeal could light,
No brighter Star in the lost David's night.
No less with Laurels Ashurs Brows adorn,
That mang^led Brave^ who with Tyres Thunder torm,
Brought a dismembered Load of Honor home,
And lives to make both The Earth and Seas his Tomb.
With Reverence the Religious Helon treat,
Refined from all the looseness of the Great.
Halon who ^e^s his Line of Virtue^ run
Beyond (...) ^enter of his Grave, his own
Unfinisht Luster sparkling in his Son.
A Son so high in Sanedrims renowned,
In Isreal's Intrest strong, in Sense profound.
Under one Roof here Truth a Goddess dwells,
The Pious Father builds her Shrines and Cells,
And (...) the Son she speaks her Oracles.
In the same list young Adriels praise record,
Adriel the Academick Neighbor Lord;
Adriel ennobled by a Grandfather,
And Uncle, both those Glorious Sons of War
Both Generals, and both Exiles with their Lord
Till with the Royal Wanderer restored,
They lived to see his Coronation Pride;
Then surfeiting on too much Transport died.
Over Adriels Head these Heroes Spirits shine,
His Soul with so much Loyal Blood fenced in;
Such Native Virtues his great Mind adorn,
Whilst under their congenial Influence born.
In this Record let Camries Name appear,
The Great Barzillais Fellow Sufferer;
From unknown Hands, of unknown Crimes accused,
Till th'hunted Shadow lost, his Chains unloos'd.
Now to the Sweet-tongu'd A^ra^^ praise be just,
Once the State-Advo^ate, that Wealthy Trust,
Till Flattery the price of dear-bought Gold,
His Innocence for Pallace^ unsold,
To Naked Truths more shining Beauties true,
Th'Embroiderd Man^le from his Neck he threw.
Next Hothriel write, Baals watchful Foe, and late
Ierusalems protecting Magistrate*
Who, when false Iur^rs were to Frenzy Charmed,
And against Innocence even Tribunals armed,
Saw depraved Justies open her Ravenous Jaw,
And timely broke her Canine Teeth of Law.
Amongst th'Asserters of his Countries Cause,
Give the bold Micah his deserved Applause,
The Grateful San^drims repeated Choice,
Of Three Great Councels the Successive Voice.
Of (...) hardy Tribe of Israel borne,
Fear their Disdain, and Flattery their Scorn,
Too proud to t^ckle, and too Tough to bend.
Of the same Tribe was H^^an^, Ith^eams Friend,
From that famed Sire, the Long Robes Glory, sprung,
In Sanedrims his Countries Pillar long;
Long had he fadom'd all the Depths of State;
Could with that strength, that ponderous Sense debate,
As turned the Scale of Nations with the weight:
Till subtley made by Spightful Honor Great,
Preferred to Isreal's Chief Tribunal Seat,
Made in a higher Orb his Beams dispense,
To hush his Formidable Eloquence.
But Isreal's numerous Worthies are too long
And Great a Theme for one continued Song.
Yet These by bold flagitious Tongues run down,
Made all Conspirers against David's Crown.
Nay, and there was a Time, had Hell prevailed,
Nor Perjury and Subornation failed,
When a long ^ist of Names, for Treason doomed,
Had Isreal's Patriots in one Grave entombed:
A List, with such fair Loyal Colors laid,
Even to no less than Royal Hands conveyed.
And the great Mover in this pious Fraud,
A Dungeon Slave redeemed by^ a Midnight Bawd:
Then made by Art a Swearer of Renown,
Nursed and embraced by th'Heir of Iudahs Crown:
Encouraged too by Pension for Reward,
With his forged Scrowls for Guiltless Blood prepaid.
Poor Engine for a greatness so sublime:
But oh, a Cause by which their Baal must climb,
Ennobles both the Actor and the Crime.
Yet This, and all Things else now quite blown over,
And Absalom, his Isreal's Fear no more:
Luster and Pride shall hem his radiant Brow;
All Knees shall fall, and prostrate Nations bow.
By Heavens, he is, he will, he must, he shall
Be Isreal's Hero, Friend, Saint, Idol, all.
What though provoked withal the crying sins
Of Murmuring Slaves, excluding Sanedrins:
By profane Crowds in dirt his Prophets spurn^d,
And even his Gods in mock Processions burned:
Himself from Israel into Hebron sent,
And doomed to little less than Banishment.
In spite of all his Scrowls to Babylon;
And all the promised Wonders to be done,
When Egypts Frogs should croak on Iudahs Throne.
Though of a Faith that propagates in Blood;
Of Passions unforgiving, less withstood
Then Seas and Tempesta, and as Deaf as they.
Yet all Divine shall be his Godlike Sway,
And his calm Reign but one long Halcyon Day.
And this Great Truth he is damned that da^es deny;
Against Absalom even Oracles would lie;
Though Sense and Reason Preach it is Blasphemy.
Then let our dull Mistaken Terror cease*
When even our Comets speak all Health and Peace.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
THE Reader is desired to Correct these following Mistakes. Page 1. (...) 1^.
for Ibid, read (...)* p. 4. l. 22. r. Ships; ibid. l. 26. for Kindled, r.
(...); ibid. l. ^2, ^. the Mighty; ibid. l. 37. for they r. thus; p. 7. l. 18.
for poor, r. weak; p. 9. l. 3. and 4. for his r. ^; l. 6. for the, r. ye; ibid.
l. ^0. r. Walls* the Billows pour; p. ^^. l. (...) loved Israel^ p. 19. l. 27.
for lo^ ^. (...) p. ^2. l. ^^ ^ Excluding.


