SCHISM DIS-ARM'D OF The Defensive Weapons, LENT IT By Doctor Hammond, and the
Bishop of DERRY. By S. W.

Prove. 17. 15. Qui justificat impium, and qui condemnat justum abominabilis est
uterque apud Deum. At PARIS: By M. Blageart. 1655.

To the Reader.
BEfore you can have past three Chapters, I know you will be objecting, that
the blows I give are too rude for so civil an Adversary, and therefore I have
placed these few Lines to meet you in the very entry, and stop you, till you
have answered this Question. How would you take it, if one should spit in your
face, and justify the affront, because his breath is sweet? or, What would you
say to him, that ruins your Estate by Perjury, and defends himself, that he
held up his hands and eyes to Heaven, and swore demurely? Whatever Answer you
give, I am confident it will perfectly clear my behavior toward the Doctor;
with whom I should have very little contention, were the difference between us
in any thing of less concernment then Eternity.

Let him, if he please, maintain, with all his Rhetoric, that King Richard was
a strait and handsome Person; let him employ as much wit* as he thinks he has,
to prove Perkin Warbeck no Counterfeit; for my part, I shall be so far from
finding fault with him, that I shall not so much, as seek any: But if he will
abusively treat matters of so high importance as Religion, and think to escape,
because his perverse meaning goes disguised, under the mask of a courteous
style. I conceive my self sufficiently warranted, if sometimes in pulling off
his Vizard, I twitch him by the Beard; especially since falsehood is so much the
worse, the better it is expressed, every one being apt to believe there is surely
some Reason, where there appears no Passion.

S. W.

THE Table of the Contents of the several Sections.
THe Introduction. The First Part. Containing an Answer to the Four first
Chapters. Sect. 1. NOtes upon Dr. Hammonds first Chapter, Of the danger and sin
of Schism P. 1 Sect. 2. Concerning his notion of Schism, and the
Excommunication of the Church 6 Sect. 3. Of his Plea of a weak Conscience, not
suffering him to subscribe to the Churches Doctrine, against his present
persuasion 14 Sect. 4. Concerning the ground of Unity, groundlesness of Schism;
and of his manner of arguing to clear himself of the later 21 Sect. 5. Contains
some observations upon his third Chapter, Of the division of Schism 29 Sect. 6.
Of the Doctors advance toward the Question, in the beginning of his fourth
Chapter 37 Sect. 7. Of his first Evidence against St. Peter's Universal
Pastorship 42 Sect. 8. The Examination of his second Evidence, that the
Apostles had distinct Provinces, so to prejudice St. Peter's Universal
Pastorship 48 Sect. 9. Some Consequences out of the Doctors former Grounds, and
his further process in Evidencing 55 Sect. 10. The Examination of Ten dumb
Testimonies, which Dr. Hammond brings to plead for him 63 Sect. 11. The
Examination of his irrefragable Evidence, and other silent Testimonies produced
by him 71 Sect. 12. Another dumb show of the Doctors Testimonies, to prove St.
Peter over the Jews only 80 Sect. 13. His second general Evidence against St.
Peter's Supremacy, from the Donation of the Keys, found to be obscurer then the
former 87
The Second Part. Comprehending the Answers of the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh
Chapters. Sect. 1. OF the pretended Primogeniture of Antioch, and the Doctors
mistake of the Council of Chalcedon 105 Sect. 2. His Arguments from the Canon
of Ephesus, and the Instances relating to Justiniana Prima refuted 115 Sect. 3.
A discovery of the Doctors Fundamental Error, which runs through this Chapter,
and his ingratitude for our Countries Conversion 125 Sect. 4. His continuance
of the same Fundamental Error, and some mistaking Proofs, That Kings can erect
Patriarchates. Sect. 5. The Doctors Testimonies from Councils and Histories,
found to be partly against himself, partly frivolous, and to no purpose 144
Sect. 6. The Examination of his Testimonies produced to prove his Fundamental
Position, That Kings are supreme in Spiritual Matters 159 Sect. 7. Other empty
Proofs of his pretended Right, confuted 169 Sect. 8. A Reply to the Doctors
Narrative* Confession of his Schism 178 Sect. 9. The nature of Schism, fetched
from its first Grounds; and the material part of it fastened on the Protestants
193 Sect. 10. That the reforming Protestants were, and are guilty of the formal
part of Schism 203 Sect. 11. The Doctors Argument, That the Popes power in
England was derived under the Kings Concession, refuted 210
The Third Part. Containing the Answers to the Four last Chapters of Dr.
Hammonds Schism. Sect. 1. HIs second sort of Schism, and his pretense, That
they retain the way to preserve Unity in Faith, refuted 229 Sect. 2. His
evasion in recurring to the first Three hundred years, and concerning the
humble and docible temper of his Church 245 Sect. 3. An Examination of some
common Notes, produced by the Doctor, to particularize his Clients, to be no
Schismatics 253 Sect. 4. Of his charitableness in admitting all to his
Communion, and our pretended uncharitableness, for refusing to go to their
Assemblies 263 Sect. 5. Our pretended uncharitableness in judging, and
despising others, retorted upon the Objectors 274 Sect. 6. Our Objection, that
the pretended Church of England is now invisible, maintained and asserted to be
just 290
Down-Derry, Or Dr. Bramhals, Just Vindication of the Church of England,
refuted 305
The Stationer to the READER.
THough the entertainment, to which the Author invites thee, be almost wholly
new, and the Food substantial and solid; yet the Stomach of the Times, seeming
quite cloid with Controversy, obliged both him to quicken thy relish with a
little Piquant Sauce, and me to tempt thy coy Appetite with this short and
drolish

BILL of FARE.
1 HOw the Doctor of Divinity* has forgot his Accidence Page 7 2 Dr. Hammond
turned a zealous Advocate for Bastwick, Burton, and Prynn's Ears 16 3 How the
Doctor has found Judas a Diocese among the Devils; wherein he would have St.
Matthias succeed him 48 4 How the Doctor has got all the Apostles leave to
play, except St. Peter and St. Paul; and, consequently, established the PP.
their Successor, Universal Pastor 56 5 How the Doctor makes account, there is
no Communion but in Eating and Drinking 64 6 The Doctors miraculous gift, in
making dumb Witnesses speak as he pleases 63, 64, etc. 7 A general Rendevouz of
the Doctors Auxilliaries 84 8 The Doctor brings his Evidences, at length, to a
fair Market, by the unlucky introduction of one blabbing Testimony p. 87 9 The
Doctor falls into a sudden fit of Popery, too violent for the constitution of
many strong Papists 95 10 Well done Doctor 96 11 How Dr H: would have all the
Apostles called Peter 101 12 The Doctor winks and fights 112 13 The properer
man the worse luck 120 14 A comfortable sample of the Doctors Annotations, in
Folio, on the Bible 167 15 How Doctor H: will have the allowance of a House to
dwell in, and Meat to eat, the erection of a Primacy 172 16 The Doctor constant
to his Principles, putting the strongest Argument in the Rear 173 17 The Doctor
cries, he is out of his way, when he comes to a Passage he cannot get over 177
18 How Doctor Hammond blows and sups all at once 187 19 The Doctor as valiant
as Sir John Falstaff 211 20 Doctor Hammonds two sorts of Gifts, given and
not-given 214 21 How the Doctors ill-favored, etc. dashes out the best 221 22
Dr. H. like the Fellow that thought the Sun set at the next Town 226 23 The
Doctors confusion, for Methods sake 230 24 Dr. H. neither goes to Church, nor
stays at home 233, etc. 25 The Doctors courteous point of Faith, obliging all
the Apostles, under pain of Damnation, to make a leg to St. Peter 241 26 The
Doctors wise appointment of time and place for his Duel, in a Wilderness and a
da^k night 246 27 A magnanimous piece of docible humility, in Dr. H. and his
Church 251 28 How the world must needs look upon Dr. Hammond, as another St.
John Baptist 254 29 The Doctors Logic, proving Protestants no Schismatics,
because they have all Noses on their faces 270 30 How Dr* Hammonds Church keeps
open house for all comers 273 31 The Doctor never meddles with any point, but
he blunders, and destroys all the Reason that ever concerns it 277 32 The
Doctors Goliahs sword has no more edg then a Beetle 278 33 Dr. Hammonds
artificial, incomparable nonsense 286, etc.
And for digestion, a solid Postpast, under the slight name of Down-Derry.

THE Introduction.
IT bred in me at first some admiration, why the Protestant Party, who
heretofore seemed still more willing to skirmish in particular Controversies,
then bid battle to the main Body of the Church, or any thing which concerned
her Authority, should now Print Books by Pairs, in defense of their disunion
from her, and subducing themselves from her Government. Especially, at this
time, when it were more seasonable for the Church of England, (as they entitle
themselves) to denounce to those many minute Sects gone out of their Communion,
the unreasonableness of their Schism, then plead the reasonableness of their
own; and to threaten them with the Spiritual Rod of Excommunication, unless
they return, then cry so loud Not guilty, after the lash has been so long upon
their Shoulders.

But the Reason of the latter, (I mean why their Pens rather decline to
endeavor the reducing their own Desertors) I conceive, is, because no
colorable pretense can possibly be alleged by the Protestants, why they left
us, but the very same will hold as firm, nay, much more for the other. Sects,
why they left them. For, that we pressed them to believe false Fundamentals Dr.
Hammond, and his Friends will not say, since they acknowledge ours a true
Church, which is inconsistent with such a lapse: They were therefore, in their
opinion, things tolerable which were urged upon them; and, if not in the same
rank, yet more deserving the Church should command their observance, then Copes
or Surplisses, or the Book of Common Prayer; the allowance whereof they pressed
upon their Quondam-Brethren.

The Reason of the former, that is, their earnestness at this time to clear
themselves from the imputation of Schism, I conjecture to be the
self-consciousness of feeling at length the smart of their own folly, in the
present dissipation of their Church, proceeding from their leaving that Body,
in which alone is found the healthful vigor of Peace-maintaining Discipline,
the want of which causes all their distractions. Yet, not willing to
acknowledge an inveterate Error, they seek to cover the deformity of their
breach, with the veil of innocence; that that which evidently causes their
misfortune, may at least seem not to have been their fault.

And indeed, this is the last game they have to play; for after their coy
conceit of an Invisible Church was unmasked, and found plainly to be nothing
but a blind Chimera, and less then a Conventicle: After that, by consequence,
a visible Church was found necessary to perpetuate a line of Successive
Governors; without obedience to which, they saw by dear experience all Order
would be levelled into Anarchy: After the consideration of this had obliged them
to grant, that to raise a Schism, or to subtract ones self from Obedience to
those Governors, was in a high manner destructive to Gods Church; and therefore
a sin deserving the deepest damnation in the abetters and maintainers of it, as
also in their voluntary adherents: Lastly, since it was most manifestly
acknowledged on all sides, That our Church was that Body of Christianity, in
whose Bowels their Predecessors, the first Reformers, were bred; with whom
only, and no other community in the world, before the Rupture was made, they
communicated; and from which Body, by little and little they became, and now
are totally disunited; they saw plainly, and Dr. Hammond will not stick to
grant it, That no Sacrifice remained to expiate that heinous sin of Schism, in
the present Protestants, but to wipe off the Aspersion from themselves, and lay
the occasion of the breach at the doors of the Catholic Church.

This is the scope, as far as I understand, of Dr. Hammonds Book, at which I
aim this Answer: Only solicitous, that he was so tedious in things acknowledged
by both parties, or which little or nothing concerned the main point in
question, as to make up three parts of his Books of these trifles: And of the
very hinge of the Controversy, which is, When and why the Schism began, to say
so little, and so weakly; that being the chief knot to be untied in this
difficulty.

But, since the Doctor will have it otherwise, I must be content in most of the
Book, to Answer mere words, that is, to fight with the air; at least, when any
thing occurs, which may seem to have some mixture of a solider element, I shall
allow it such a reflection, as I conceive in Reason it may deserve.

I am his Friend, and will go along with him hand in hand through his whole
Book; Not that the solidness of the Treatise it self requires so exact a
proceeding, but the weakness of less-understanding Readers, who suspect
frivolous things that bear a bulk and a specious show of Words, to be
important, unless the Answerer either out-word them, or manifest them plainly
to be impertinent; of which, as the former is far from my intent, so the later
must, for the reason alleged, be a part of my present Task, and consequently I
hope, a satisfactory Plea for my seeming unnecessary tediousness to the more
judicious Reader.

SCHISM DISARMED.
THE FIRST PART.
Containing an Answer to the four first CHAPTERS:

SECT. 1.
Notes upon Dr. Hammonds first Chapter, of the Danger and Sin of Schism.

HIS first Chapter is most of it a good Sermonlike preparative to his ensuing
Theme. Who would not think he intended to treat the question in earnest, seeing
him begin with so serious a Preamble? In the first five Paragraphs there is not
a word concerning our question to be taken notice of in quality of a
difficulty, being nothing but a moral Preface, indifferent to either side. Only
I desire by way of Memorandum, that we may reflect well upon, and bear in mind
that virtue of ready and filial obedience of those under authority, to Cap. 1.
Sect. 4.
their lawfully authorized Superiors; mentioned by him, and extolled for a
virtue of the first magnitude. And the indifferent Reader will a^ once both
easily discern hereafter, whether the present Catholics, who hear the Church,
and believe her in her Lawfully authorized Governors, or the first Reformers,
who without any, and against all Authority, disobeyed and disbelieved her, have
the better title to that eminent virtue; and he will also wonder why the Doctor
should face his Book with the Encomiums of that Virtue, the bare explication
whereof applied to the carriage of the first Reformers, must manifestly condemn
them, and quite confute and disgrace all Doctor Hammonds laborious endeavors.

But a pretense to a virtue, if confidently carried on, seems to the vulgar an
argument of a just claim; and high commendations of it makes the pretense more
credible: For who willingly praises, but what is either his own or his friends,
or dispraises but what is his enemies. Which makes him in the next three
Paragraphs, proceed in the same tenor of Rhetoric, and from Scriptures and
Fathers, paint ^ut the horrid vice of Schism in her own ugly shape, as that it
is carnality, self-condemning, contrary to charity, Cap. 1 Sect. 6, 7. 8
bereaving one of the benefits of prayers and Sacraments; as bad as, and the
foundation of all heresies; that there is scarce any crime, (the place cited is
absolute, that there is not any crime, though he mince it with scarce) so great
as Schism; not Sacriledg, Idolatry, Parracide, that it is obnoxious to
peculiar marks of Gods indignation, Antichristianism, worshipping or serving the
Devil; not expiable by martyrdom; it being according to Iraen^^s, impossible
(though the Dr. mitigates the dangerous expression with, very hard, if not
impossible) to receive such an injury or provocation from the Governors of the
Church, as may make a separation excusable. And lastly, impossible, according
to St. Austin, that there should be any just cause for any to separate from the
Catholic Church. Instead of which last words, the Doctor, full of jealousies
and fears, puts, the Church truly Catholic, as if there were much danger,
lest perhaps any should imagine Christ's Church (of which I conceive St. Austin
meant it) to be untruly Catholic.

And now, what good, honest, well-minded Reader, not much acquainted with the
Doctors manner of Rhetoric, would be so unconscionable as to think him guilty
of that vice, which he so heartily and largely sets forth in its own colors;
although in those expressions which might too directly prejudice his future
work, he seems something chary. And indeed, I wonder for whose sake he has
gathered such a bundle of severe rods out of the sacred Scriptures and the best
Fathers, to whip Schismatics. Such expressions as I hope will strongly incite
the Protestant Reader, whom a true care of his eternal good, may invite to seek
satisfaction in this point, seriously to consider, that the decision of no one
controversy is more nearly concerning his salvation, than this; as appears by
the abominable character of Schism, which the Doctor has with so much pains
deciphered to be an Abridgement of all the most hainons, damnable, inexcusable,
unexpiable vices that can be named or imagined. Of which Augaean stable, if Mr.
Hammond can purge the Protestant Church, he shall ever wear the most deserved
title of the Reformers Hercules. But I am sorry to foresee that the more he
handles his work, the more the dirt will remain sticking upon his own fingers.

He proceeds, or rather infers from the former C. 1. S. 9.
Premises, an irrefragable Conclusion (as he cal^ it, that the examination of
the occasion, cause or motive of any man's Schism is not worth the producing or
heeding in this matter. This (besides the manifest advantage it gives us, of
which hereafter) is the pre^tiest fetch to wave the whole question, and
whatsoever is material in it, that I ever met with. That you are
excommunicated, or separated from the Communion of our Church (whence, as you
say, the Schism springs) all the world sees and acknowledges: What remains
then to justify or condemn you or us, but that there was or was not,
sufficient cause to cast you out, and deny you Communion: For, that our Church
had authority to do it, if you be found to deserve it, being then her subjects
or children, none doubts. If then there were no cause, our Church was
tyrannical: If there were, you are truly and properly Schismatics; first, in
giving just cause of your own ejection; next, in remaining out of our Church
still, and not removing those impediments which obstruct your return.

This is most evidently the very point of the S. 9.
difficulty; which, being in great haste, to shorten your method, you would
totally decline. Make what haste you please, so you take the question along
with you: For, assure your self, however you would avoid it now, you cannot
possibly treat it without examining the causes and motives of breaking, as de
facto you do afterward. Although, if you can evidence that there is actually
no Schism made between us, then indeed I must confess there can be no need of
examining the causes of a thing that is not: But it is impossible to make this
seem evident, without putting out ours, your own, and the whole worlds eyes.

But you desire only that the truth of the matter S. 9*
of fact be looked into, whether the charge of Schism be sufficiently proved,
etc. It is proved, Mr. Doctor, if you be proved to have so misbehaved your
selves within the Church, that, to conserve he Government inviolate, she was
forced to ourlaw you from her Communion. These are the motives and causes,
which you (conscious of, and very tenderly sensible in those parts) would have
us leave untouched. But on this we shall insist more at large when the very
handling the question forces you, though unwilling, to touch the occasions or
causes of Schism; at least such as you thought fit, and seemed most plausibly
answerable by the notes you had gleaned up and down to that purpose.

SECT: 2*
Concerning his Notion of Schism, and the Excommunication of the Church.

HIs second Chapter begins with the distinction of Heresy and Schism;
concerning which, what he has said is true, but yet he has omitted some part
of the truth which was necessary to be told. Wherefore let him but take along
with him, that not only Schism is a dissenting from Authority, and Heresy, an
introducing a false doctrine into the Church; but also C. 2. S. 1.
that all heresy (which it concerns his cause to be willing to pretermit) must
necessarily include Schism, and we shall not fall out about this point: For
(...) signifying electio, that is, a choosing to onesself some private opinion
contrary to the commonly* received Doctrine of the Church, it follows, that by
every Heresy the Church is truly wounded and rent asunder, the proper effect
of Schism. So that, to conserve her self in her primogenial integrity, when
she sees that pertinacity has thoroughly and irrecoverably corrupted such a
member, she is obliged even in charity, as well as justice to cut it off, ne
pars sincer a trahatur.

His next Observation is an Eagle eyed Criticisme about the passive vetb (...),
which he ^. 2: ^. 2.
will have to signify reciprocal action, and passion from and upon himself,
and to answer to the Hebrew Hithpael; which he tells you, he could largely
exemplify in the use of other words. But first, if we may have leave to
criticize upon so acute a Critic, since it is only for want of conjugations
(as he says) designed to supply the place of the Hebrew Hithpael; how knows he
it must necessarily supply that place here? since (...), and its fellows coming
from perfect actives, must in the first place have a signification perfectly
passive; and so, only for want of Conjugations, be translated upon occasion to
signify the neutropassive. So that all the Doctors Criticisme (at the best) is
come to this, that the Verb (...) may be capable of such a signification, in
which (though the word did not force it) he was pleased without any end or
necessity, but only to show his art, to take it at this time. Secondly, though
in the Hebrew Language the Voices and Conjugations be jumbled, and therefore
the Grammarians admit there eight Conjugations, whereas in reality there is but
one, and rather eight Votes, as the said Grammarians affirm; yet it is certain
and evident to every Schoolboy, that in the Latin and Greek Tongues, Voices
and Conjugations are things distinct, and of a far different nature. The
former alluding chiefly to the sense and signification of the word; as appears
in our active, passive, etc. the latter being taken from some diversity in the
letters of the word; which in the Greek is the characteristical letter, in the
Latin, some long or short, letter or syllable correspondent, and fit to cause,
by a constantly-divers manner of varying a distinction in the Conjugation. Now
comes this Doctor of new Grammar, who has quite forgot his accidence, and tells
us, a passive verb must have a neuter signification for want of Conjugations;
as if vapulo and amo could not be of the same conjugation, and yet have a
different sense, the one signifying actively, the other neutrally. Thirdly, if
Conjugations will do the deed, that is, make the Verb (...) signify neutrally,
I see no reason why the Dr. should complain for want of Conjugations in the
Greek Language, there being, more there than in Hebrew. Fourthly, whereas he
says this nice kind of signification is fully expressed by the Latin neutrals,
which partake both of active and passive, but are strictly neither; I conceive
the instances of such verbs, as sto and ardeo will best fit his purpose; the
former signifying either, I stand, or, I am standing: the latter, I burn, or, I
am burning: and then he need not have run so far as Hithpael, since the first
Conjugation Kal, more properly challenges such kind of absolute or intransitive
verbs, as appears by (...) stetit, which is of that Conjugation. Fifthly, our
Latin neutrals, as such, do not signify reciprocal action or passion fr^om and
on himself, though the Dr. says they fully express it; for we say, Roma
ardet, and yet affirm also that the action of that burning came from Nero, and
use not to blame Rome that it burnt it self. Sixthly, the Hebrew Hithpael, when
it* is not coincident with Kal, or Niphal, (as sometimes it is) signifies an
express action upon it self, as fully as two words in Latin or Greek can
render it; insomuch as (...) express, as perfectly, he delivered over himself,
as in Greek is denoted by (...), or in Latin by tradidit seipsum; and then I
would know where the Doctor, among all his critical observations, can show me
one Verb in all the Latin or Greek Language to parallel it, or (as the Doctor
expresses it) that is of the nature of Hithpael. Seventhly, either he meant his
Criticisme of the verbal (...) (which seems more likely, it being the word in
question) or of the verb (...); if, of the former, it is most evident to any
man that ever saluted Greek, a limine, that those verbals signify a thing
done, in a sense as perfectly passive as can be imagined, without relating at
all to the person, or any the least intimation whether the action, which
inferred that passion, were performed by himself or some others; as appears by
(...), etc. which denote a work done, an Ordinance constituted, without
reference to the person that wrought or ordained it. The self-same is visible
in our present verbal (...), which signifies a rupture made; for which reason
St. Paul's words; (...), 1 Cor* 11: 18:
are rendered in the Latin translation, Audio scissuras in vobis esse; which
scissure or rupture signifies most perfectly a division made, passively; not,
as the Doctor would have it, a reciprocal action or passion from and on
himself; since a rupture is equally called a rupture, whoever it be that makes
it. But if the Doctor means the Verb (...)* then I desire to know where he
reads that passives in (...) forming verbals in (...), are used in his sense
upon the account of being such passives. Indeed it may happen, and does often,
that a Verb in (...) has a neuter signification, and consequently is used in a
neuter sense; but that (...), a Verb perfectly passive, coming from a perfect
active (and consequently that all passive Greek verbs) should be observable to
be of the nature (as he says) of the Hebrew Hithpael, is such an observation
as none could ever before discern but Doctor Hammond; who, both here, and all
over his Book, by much hending his sight, creates objects at pleasure, o^ else
by an extraordinary faculty sees things tha^ are not; no not even so much as in
their cause^ Lastly, whereas the word was out of controversy between us, and
good enough before he meddled with it, he has made it by his unnecessary scruing
it, speak perfect nonsense; as is manifest by the plain link of consequences
which evidently follow out of the nice sense, which maugre all Grammar, he will
needs give it. For (that I may be allowed to speak rigorously and critically
when I am examining a Criticisme) if it signify reciprocal action or passion,
it must signify an act of dividing, exercised upon himself who therefore is
the thing divided; and since, divisio est motus ab unitate ad pluralitatem;
division i^ a progress or motion from unity to plurality, its proper and formal
effect is to make that which it works upon more of one; but that which it works
upon (says the Doctor) is himself the Schismatic; therefore it cuts the
Schismatic in two, and either kills or mangles him, as the Critic pleases. See
to what a pitiful case the Doctors acuteness has brought a poor Schismatic,
from the too quaint notation of the killing letter of the Hithpael-like verb
(...)!

I crave the Readers pardon for transgressing so long upon his patience to lay
open a foolery; but I did it to the intent Mr. Dr. and his friends may see how
ridiculous, and sometimes unsecure a thing it is to stand showing ones skill in
Grammar, or letting the world see they understand a little Greek and Hebrew, or
interlarding their discourse with so many scraps of exotic languages to amuse
the vulgar; and in the mean time very little, and very weakly to close with
their adversary in the point in controversy with rigorous discourses, solid,
pregnant, and convincing reasons, only which (and not Greek and Criticisms) are
expected in so grave, and concerning a Treatise. But the former impertinences,
with sayings indifferent to both parts, intermingled with some few gleaned
citations, and blind stories, sawced with some pretty expressions, sugared over
with Scripture Phrase, and then dish'd up handsomely with the help of a learned
distinction, will serve to make up several paragraphs; Paragraphs, Chapters;
Chapters, a Book: Iamque opus exegi, etc. and the work is done, which if none
thinks worth the pains of a reply (all the substantial part being already
confuted an hundred times over, and only the cooking it up changed) presently
with the loudest Trumpet of Fame it is proclaimed unanswerable (as this book
has been) and has a solemn triumph sounded in its behalf, whereas only its
contemptibleness made it victorious.

But to proceed; all he concludes from his C. 2: S. 2:
Criticism is this, that Schism is a voluntary recession from the Church: and
might not plain sense have told us this without critically straining and
spoiling a word to prove it from Grammar? For, what man in his wits could
possibly imagine, Schism being such an horrid sin, that one might perhaps
fall into it, whether he would or no, and so become a Schismatic against his
will. There needs neither Greek nor Hebrew to understand this: Every child
knows by the very first principles of Nature that no man sins, if he cannot
help it. Yet Mr. Hammond goes on a whole leaf, and with most potent Argument^
overthrows that which would fall of it self (like him that all-to-be-bang'd the
dead Bear) not the least hair of an objection bristling it self against him to
fright him from his Conquest. He maintains therefore that the actual
Excommunication used by the Governors of the Church, is not the crime of
Schism; as if he should go about to prove that the sentence of a Judge, when
he condemns a murderer or a thief, is neither the sin of murder nor the every.
For Excommunication (as all men know) is the Churches condemnation or
punishment of the crime of Schism, as the Judges last sentence of death is of
the aforesaid delinquencies. Who will not grant him this at the first word? yet
nevertheless he will needs prove it with many.

But Governors (you say) being men, may possibly err, and so censure and
excommunicate the innocent. ^. 2. ^. 3.
If what you say here, may be, you prove to have been, I shall grant you have
acquitted your self well. In the mean time what only may be, may also not be;
and till such time as you can evidence an immunity from error in the governed,
as well as pretend a liableness in the Governors, the whole economy of the
world gives it, that the opinion of right shall stand on the Governors side:
For surely, the order of the Politic World were a very pitiful slack thing, if
every frivolous and probable exception of Subjects, should be held a sufficient
cause to break asunder the well compacted Frame, and dissolve the strongest
Nerves of a long-setled Government; even in may-be's, then you are worsted:
What will become of you when we come to demonstrate to you hereafter, that
however in some private proofs of a particular fact, the Governors may be
mistaken, yet in such public misbehavior, as your few newfangled Predecessors
used, when they opposed themselves to the ever-self-constant Church, it was
impossible the Governors should be mistaken in judging you to be truly-named
Schismatics, and consequently did well in treating you accordingly.

That there may be a continuance out of actual C. 2. S. 2, 3, 4.
Communion without Schism, as also, That unjust Excommunication hurts no man,
would have been granted you for one word in plain English, without the citing
of so much Greek to so little purpose. Only we desire you would grant us in
recompense, what in all reason is due, That a voluntary continuance in a just
Excommunication, makes the thus excommunicated Schismatics. Which part of the
distinction being counterpois'd to those others you mentioned, of actual
continuance out of the Church, and unjust Excommunication, hurting no man, and
most nearly concerning the Question, being objected by us to be your guilt,
whereas the other you treat, are out of controversy between us, it could not
stand with the sincere treating a Question, wholly to omit it, and pass it over
in silence. But the seeming exactness of your method, can yet easily over-slip
that part of the distinction, which sounds dangerously, and is hard to be
confuted, though the main of the Question only stands upon it; and mention
only that which is easily excused, because none objects it, and very facile to
be proved, because none denies it. Scilicet isthuc est sapere! C. 2. S. 4.


Your other testimonies here alleged, tending only (as I conceive) to prove,
That unjust Excommunication hurts no man, are very current and allowable: And I
could have helped you to twenty more as good as these, to the same purpose,
some of them In Greek too, which would have made a fine show. Your
interpretative C. 2. S. 5.
Excommunication runs upon the same strain, and so needs no further Answer,
besides that which the following Section affords it.

SECT. 3.
Concerning Dr. Hammond's Plea of a Weak Conscience, not suffering him to
subscribe to the Churches Doctrine against his present persuasion.

BUt now the Doctor has got a new cloak for his Schism, to wit, the pretense
of a weak Conscience; which makes him think he ought not to communicate with
the Church, but is excused for not-communicating, because the conditions of the
Communion contain in them a sin. And what sin should this be, But to C. 2. S.
7, 8, 9, 10.
subscribe to things which their Conscience tells them is false: Nay even
(says the Doctor) though the truth be on the Churches side, yet really
apprehended by him, to whom they are thus proposed to be false, it is hard to
affirm that that man can lawfully subscribe; and therefore rather then do it,
the Doctor makes account he may remain out of Communion, and that lawfully too.

This is the Doctors assertion, which indeed might serve out of a Pulpit to an
Auditory that he would claw, with giving them that sweet and (as they esteem
it) Christian liberty of holding what they list; but to any judicious person
that knows what Government is, it is, in reality, the sublimated quintessence
of perfect Non-Religion and Anarchy. The Position comes to this, That none
should be condemned or punished by his Governors for not-doing that, the
contrary whereof he thinks is to be done. To give which Position the least
shadow of likelihood, the Doctor is necessarily obliged to prove first, That no
Pride, Interest, or Passion can make one think wrong, and consequently culpable
in so thinking; which if the Doctor do, he will work wonders, and with a turn
of his hand, convert this world of miserable sinners, into a Heaven of pure and
perfect Saints.

But let us hear an Argument or two upon the Doctors principles: An ambitious
or proud man, blinded by his Passion, begins to think (and really true) that
the long established Government of the Commonwealth is tyrannical; and upon
this thought, he proceeds to jumble all the Land into intestine Seditions, and
to dismount the Governors from the top of Authority, and (as he tells you)
conscientiously too, that is, with a perfect persuasion according to his
present Passion. Force him not to subscribe to obey his lawful Magistrate,
(says the Doctor) he may not do it lawfully, it is against his Conscience. A
revengeful or malicious man thinks that in all right and reason he may endamage
the party that offered the affront; and upon the lawfulness of his so doing
(while his humor possesses him) he would lay his Soul, Control him not (says
the Doctor) he is in an ^rror, but yet governs himself at present according to
Conscience, he may not lawfully subscribe, or ^eal a pardon, contrary to his
present persuasion. The Anabaptist thought himself nearly touched in
Conscience, to cut off the heads of his Mother and Sister for kneeling at the
Communion. Urg^ him not to the contrary (says the Doctor,) (...) cannot
lawfully spare them, it is against his prese^ persuasion. The Puritans
(following the Protestants example) refuse obedience to the Church of England,
seeing in her so many dreg^ of Popery remaining. Unjustly did the Church of
England (says the Doctor) in obliging them to her obedience, and cutting off
poor Bast^ wicks, Burtons, and Prynnes Ears, who did according to their
Conscience, or present persuasion. Neither will it avail you to Answer, that
these were told by Gods Law, that their act^ were unwarrantable, and therefore
were culpable: For, it is easy to reply, that you were as much, and as
earnestly commanded by God to hear the Church, and obey your lawful Superiors;
and incurred a far greater sin, if you did not, to wit, the sin of Schism;
which your self unfortunate Pen has out of the Fathers described to be a
venomous compound, swollen with the mixed poison of all sorts of Vices.

The Reader will by this see, to what a pass this Doctors Logic would bring
the world, if his Position should take place, That no man should be obliged to,
or punished for anything against his present persuasion, which he terms his
Conscience. The contrary to which, that I may a little more elucidate from its
first grounds, the Reader may please to consider, That this present persuasion,
which a man is so fixed in, may either begin in the Understanding, or proceed
from the Will: If in the Understanding, it must be only a perfect
demonstration that can beget in it so firm an adherence; and then, being
rational, it is not only excusable but laudable: Otherwise it is an irrational
resolvedness sprung from a passionate distorsion of the interessed Will;
pushing and exciting the Understanding without due deliberation first to pitch
upon, and afterward pertinaciously to adhere to a thing, more then the light
of Reason it self gives. Which being in the Will vicious, is consequently (as
all other Vices are) culpable, liable to correction, and by correction
reformable. So as, Licet non possumus opinari quando volumus, that is, Although
we cannot deem or think a thing true, but we must have some Motive or other,
true or false, why we think so, yet with this it well consists, that a perverse
affection in the Will, may blind and lead astray the Understanding, by
proposing false Motives for true ones. And therefore when the Will by deserved
punishment is whipped out of her viciousness, the Native luster of the
Understanding will quickly disenvelop its self from the cloud of mistake, in
which the Passion* exhaled vapors had enwrapt her.

You see then, Doctor, (which perhaps you never reflected on before,) A man may
be obliged to retract a present persuasion, and (however he pretends Conscience
for his excuse) be punished too, if he does not, since his bad will was the
cause of his erroneous judgment, as the cases of the forementioned
Malefactors, your Clients, have, as I hope, by this time better informed you.
But perhaps you would not have this method used in matters of Religion: And why
not? Unless the violating the ever-sacred Authority of Christ's Church, and
renouncing the main support of all Religion* the Rule of Faith, (things in the
conserving of which, the eternal salvation of mankind consists) be less
deserving punishment in the offenders, or less worth taking notice of by the
Governors of the Church, then the wrong of thirteen-pence halfpenny is by the
Laws and Governors of the Commonwealth.

The result then of your discourse comes to this, That all your dwindling
suppisitions an^ C. 2. S. 12.
may* bees, (which you wisely put down for proofs, and sometimes for grounds)
remain still in question, or rather unquestionably unsupposable. Your
tenderness of Conscience not to sin against God in subscribing to the errors
(forsooth) C. 2. S. 7, 8, 9, 10.
of his Church, which he has commanded you to hear, only Pharasaical
arrogance* and singularity in you, which makes you think and style at pleasure
any thing Error, which the whole Church holds, if contrary to your private
judgment: Lastly, Our pretended making Communion impossible, will be found to
be only a self-opinionated pride in you, and of all prides the most miserable
and filly, to adhere so pertinaciously against Evidence of Authority to a few
obscure scraps of writers speaking on the by, and your own self acknowledged
fallibility. All these, and whatever pretenses you here in sinuate, will all
lie at your doors, and loudly call you Schismatics, unless you can evidence,
with most perfect demonstrations, that those things were Errors which the
Church obliged you to subscribe to; that is, that the Churches doctrine was, or
is erroneous, and consequently her self not infallible. This, if you evidence,
I shall grant you have not only overthrown ours, but all Religion; not only
acquitted your self of Schism, but also quite taken away all possibility of
being a Schismatic; since no Authority can with any face or conscience, oblige
to a belief; of which her self is not certain.

But, I doubt not, you make your self sure of the conquest, not apprehending
any but Saints C. 2. S. 6.
and Angels in Heaven, and God himself, to be infallible. To which you add, of
your own invention, impeccable; as your custom is, never to speak of our Tenet,
without the disgraceful addition of some forged calumny or other imposed upon
us. But that none else should be infallible except those you mention, I much
wonder. I thought the Apostles had been also infallibly assisted, when they
penned the sacred Writ, and peach'd the Gospel: I thought also our Savior when
he sent them to teach, and promised them his assistance, had said, He would
remain with them always, even till the end of the world; that is, with the
succeeding Church. I thought there had been some means to be
infallibly-certain, that such and such Books were Gods Word, and genuine
Scripture, without an Angel, Saint, or Christ's coming from Heaven, or the
Doctors private-spirited opinion, which he will call, God. Neither do I doubt,
but the Doctor himself will grant it impossible, That all the Protestants in
England should be fallible or mistake, in witnessing whether twenty years ago,
there were Protestant Bishops, or no; and that such was the Tenet, and
Government of their Church at that time: Yet a thousand time^ greater evidence
have we of the indefectibility of the Churches Faith, and her infallibility. As
you may to your amazement see (if you will but open your eyes) in that
incomparable Treatise of Rushworth's Dialogues, vindicated from all possible
confute, by that excellent Apology for it, writ by the learned Pen of Mr.
Thom^^ White, in his Friends behalf, whose Dialogues he set forth, enlarged,
and defended against your acute Friends, Faulkland and Digby: Persons who did
not use to treat Controversies i^ such a dreaming shallow way, as it has been
your misfortune to do here; nor stand Preaching to their adversary, when they
should Dispute. To these Dialogues, and their Apology, I refer you, that you
may know what to do; if you confute them solidly, and demonstrate plainly, That
our Church is liable to Error, you will eternally silence us, and clear your
selves. But take heed you bring not whimpering probable may-be's, and
onely-self-granted suppositions for proofs; These might serve your turn in your
first Book, which might hope for the good fortune to escape without answering;
but in your second, and after you are told of it, it will fall short of
satisfactory.

Remember, Mr. Hammond, that you granted ^ cheerful obedience and submission of
your judgments C. 2: S. 5.
and practices to your Superiors, under penalty o^ not being deemed true
Disciples of Christ. If this be real (as I wish it were) then what easier
condescension and deference to the judgment of Superiors can be imagined, then
to submit one^ private judgment, when he has only probability to the contrary?
Evidence therefore, demonstrable evidence you must give in, of the Churches
erring, ere your pretense, that you were obliged by her to subscribe to Errors,
can take place, and so excuse you from Schism. But as your profession of the
obligation you have, to submit your judgment to the Church, renders your
probable Reasons insufficient to fall to judge her; so (God be praised) your
own self acknowledged fallibility will secure us from the least fear of your
Demonstrations. Yet unless you do this, you undo your cause; for if the Church
could not err, she could need no reforming. So that your Preaching of
Reformation is vain, your Faith vain; and by consequence your selves
Schismatics, and an Ace more.

SECT. 4.
Concerning the ground of Unity, groundlesness of Schism, and of Dr. Hammonds
manner of arguing to clear himself of the later.

ALl that is material in the Doctors second Chapter, is sum'd up in these two
heads, that the Church does ill in obliging men to subscribe against their
present persuasion; and, That the Church which they left, was erroneous, and so
obliged them to the subscription of Errors. Upon these two notes, as on a
base-ground he runs division all along this Chapter; repeating them so often in
each Paragraph, that I was forced to omit my intended method at present; not
making a Countet-sermon to each in order, but bringing together his dispersed
Doctrine into Heads, and then confuting them; not doubting, but the Leaves and
Branches, which counterfeit some small flourish of devotion, will quickly fade
into Hypocrisy, when the sapless roots are plucked up from their rotten ground.
The former of them has been discovered in the former Section, to be worse then
weak; his manner of arguing from the second, shall be laid open in this.

But, because I perceive Mr. Hammond very much unacquainted with our grounds,
why our Church obliges her sons to rest in her belief, and continue in her
Communion, thinking her (doubtless) very discourteous, that will not le^ her
subjects in civility (as the modest and moderate Church of England does) hold
and do what they list, I will at present* undeceive him somewhat in that point*
having a better occasion to do it more largely hereafter. First, The Doctor
stumbles much, and (as Ignorance i^ C. 2. S. 6.
ever the Mother of admiration) thinks Master Knot's Inference very strange,
that the Church i^ infallible, otherwise men might forsake her Communion.
Whereas, on the contrary, I not only think it strange to infer otherwise, but
as great an absu^dity as can be imagined; for why may not me^ forsake the
Communion of the Church, if they may forsake her Doctrine (since it is
impossible to preserve the former, if he renounce the latter;) and why may they
not forsake her Doctrine, if she have no Power nor Authority ^o tie them to the
belief of it; and how can she have any Authority to bind them to the belief of
it, if she her self knows not certainly, whether it be true o^ no; that is, be
not infallible: Or what man living (who has so much wit as to raise or
understand the difficulty) can possibly so degenerate from Reason, which is his
nature, as to submit it, in believing things above his Reason, and which
concern his eternal Salvation, upon such an Authority, as may perhaps lie, and,
so damn him for believing her, since, Without true Faith it is impossible to
please God.

Hence follows by an inevitable consequence, that, since the Church pretends,
and has ever pretended to have a Promise from Christ of a perpetual assistance
from Error, if Christ have made good that promise, that is, if she be
infallible, then her obliging her sons to rest in her Faith, is most plainly
evidenced, to be charitable, just, and necessary; because in that case it were
both men's obligation, and also their greatest good to believe so qualified a
Mistress. Whereas, on the other side, any other Congregation that professes her
self fallible, that is, uncertain of the truth of her Doctrine, cannot without
accusing her self of the greatest injustice and tyranny in the World, bind
others to the belief of the said Doctrine: For, it carries the prejudice of the
highest unreasonableness with it; for a man to tell me, I will force you ^o
believe that, which yet I my self know not whether it is to be believed, or no.
Let not Dr. Hammond then blame our Church for obliging men to subscribe to her
Doctrine, unless he can evidence first, That she has not that which she has
ever from the beginning of the Church, pretended to; to wit, a security from
fallibility by the perpetual assistance of her Spouse and Savior. But rather
let him invent, if he can, any rational excuse for his own Church, which
professing her self fallible, and so wanting all power to oblige to belief,
would notwithstanding have others believe her, accounting the Puritans,
Anabaptists, Presbyterians, and Independants, Schismatics if they do not; and
dares enstyle her self a Church, that is, a Commonwealth which has power and
means to oblige to Unity in belief, whereas, her own professed fallibility or
uncertainty, evidences, that she wants all the Nerves which should connect the
Members of such a Body.

These grounds laid, it were not amiss to insert here, what the Author of that
Epistle which was writ from Bruxels, in answer to Dr. Hammond, says upon this
place. By this (says he) you may perceive much of his discourse to be not
only superfluous and unnecessary, but contrary to himself; for he laboreth to
persuade, That the Protestant may be certain of some truth, against which the
Roman Catholic Church binds to profession* of Error; which is as much as to
say, That he who pretends to have no infallible Rule, whereby to govern his
Doctrine, shall be supposed to be infallible, and that he who pretends to have
an infallible Rule, shall be supposed to be fallible; at most, because fallible
Objections are brought against him Now then consider what a meek and humble son
of the Church (as this Dr. would he thought) C. 2. S. 10.
ought to do, when on the one side is the Authority of Antiquity, and
Possession (such Antiquity and Possession without dispute, or contradiction
from the Adversary; as no King can show for his Crown, and much less any other
person for any other thing) together with the persuasion of Infallibility, and
all the pledges Christ has left to his Church for motives of Union: On the
other side, uncertain Reasons of a few men pretending to Learning, every day
contradicted by incomparable numbers of men wise and learned; and those few men
confessing those Reasons, and themselves uncertain, fallible, and subject to
Error: Certainly, without a bias of interest or prejudice, it is impossible to
leave the Church, if he be in it, or not return if he be out of it. For, if
infallibility be the ground of the Churches power to command belief, as she
pretends no other; no time, no separation within memory of History, can
justify a continuance out of the Church* Thus far that Letter; which, had it
not been strangled in the birth, and miscarried in the Printer's hand, might
have saved me the labor of this larger con^ute; and, being exactly short, might
justly be styled Dr. Hammonds Iliads in a Nut-shell; since the force of it was
so united, the Reason in it so firmly connected, as might have cost the Doctor
a full ten years siege, ere he could make a breach into it with his Brown-Paper
Bullets.

But now it is high time to reflect upon the Doctors manner of arguing; who
tells us here, That he needs give no more answer to our objection C. 2. S. 12*
of a Schismatical departure, then this, That they who acknowledge not the
Church of Rome to be Infallible, may be allowed to make a supposition which is
founded in the possibility of her inserting Errors in her Confessions, etc. And
so goes on with three or four Suppositions, all built upon that first general
Supposition, That the Roman Catholic Church has erred, or is not infallible.
I commend the Doctor for his wit. The whole question is reduced to this one
point, Whether the Church erred or no; as is most manifest: For if she
evidently err^d, he and his Ancestors may possibly be excused for not believing
her, and rejecting her Government by Schism, which she told you was sacred; but
if she was infallible, no plea nor evasion can possibly serve your turn*
neither is it your, or their supposing it, which can make her fallible, and so
be a fit ground to build your excuse on. Now comes this Gentleman, who in the
first page of his Book is entitled Doctor of Divinity, to handle this Question;
and only desires in courtesy, that the main matter in controversy (out of
which it was easy to infer what he pleased) should first be supposed or
granted, and that upon that ground he would evince his cause. Just like that
young smat^e^er in Logic, who undertook to prove his fellow a Goose; but first
he would needs have him suppose, that whatsoever had two Legs, was one of those
tame Fowl; which his wary fellow, notwithstanding his importunity, refusing to
grant, he was left quite blank, and his wise Argument at an end. Such is the
on-se^, such must be the event of the Doctors Logic: You and your first
Reformers, are Schismatics (says the Catholic) in rejecting the Government of
the Church, and her chief Pastor, which she told you was both lawful and
sacred. Your Church erred (says the Doctor) and so we could not be obliged to
believe her. I but (answers the Catholic) you must first prove evidently, that
she is fallible, and subject to Error. O (replies the Doctor) we suppose that
to be most certainly true, and without all dispute. Risum teneatis amici!

Yet Mr. Hammond has involved another Error in the same passage more
unpardonable (if possible) then the former, so fruitful is his Logic of
inconsequent absurdities. For what man ever arrived to that height of mistake,
as to endeavor to manifest his innocence by the voluntary confession of a
crime, which implies the objected fault, and much more to boot; or to allege
for his plea against the accusation of his adversary, that which more deeply
condemns, and is objected to him as a far more heinous crime by the same
adversary? Yet such is this Doctors acuteness. He is accused by us of Schism,
and lays for the ground of his excuse, That he acknowledges not our Churches
infallibility, which is charged upon him, not only to be both Schism and
Heresy, but as the very sink of all Infidelity. For what man of Reason, but
stands in an hovering disposition of mind to embrace any Religion, or rather
Irreligion, nay even Turcism it self (as your best Champion, the Lord
Faulkland, professes he In his Reply, p. 241.
would) when a stronger blast of a more probable Reason, shall turn the sail of
his Windmill Judgment; knowing and acknowledging (as he must, and does) That
neither his own private interpretation of Scripture, nor the Church he is in,
is infallible, or secured from Error by any promise of Christ.

The denying this Infallibility therefore, (Mr. Doctor) is the greatest crime
we charge you with; but you (free of your Suppositions) suppose it your chief
virtue, and put it for the ground of all your excuse. In this Infallibility is
founded all the power of the Church obliging to belief, the inviolableness of
her Government, the unjustifiableness of any Schism, the firm security, that
Faith is certain, and lastly, whatever in the Church is sacred. The Doctor
therefore in clearing himself, by denying the Infallibility of the Church, does
the self-same, as if some discontented subject having first outlawed himself,
by denying the Laws, and rejecting the Government of England, and afterward
becoming obnoxious to those Laws by Robbing, Murdering, etc. should endeavot
to plead, Not guilty; by alleging, That though indeed the English Subjects,
who accept the Laws, and allow the Government of England, are liable to
punishment, if they offend against them: Yet I (says he) who suppose this
Government Tyrannical, and these Laws unjust, especially, having a present
persuasion, and thinking in my Conscience they are so, cannot be obliged to
keep them; and therefore must not be accounted a factious man, nor be liable to
punishment, if I break them.

What will become of this malefactor, Master Doctor? your Logic clears him:
But, the Reader, and I am persuaded, wiser judgments will think him more highly
deserving the Gallows, for refusing subjection to the Laws and Government, and
you more deeply meriting Excommunication for rejecting the Churches
Infallibility, the only ground of her Authority, then for all the rest of your
particular faults which issue from that false principle. But it is pretty to
observe, how the Doctor never clears himself from Schism, upon any other
grounds then those, which, if admitted, would prove all the Malefactors in the
World innocent; and make it lawful, nay, an obligation in Conscience to
dissolve the whole Fabric of the Worlds Government. So true it is, That the
very position of a Fallibility of Faith first lays, and in time hatches the
Cockatrice Eggs of both Atheism and Anarchy.

SECT. 5.
Containing some Observations upon Mr. Hammonds third Chapter, of the Division
of Schism.

WHen I had perused his third Chapter, with intent to see what it might contain
worth the answering, finding scarce any thing which made either against us, or
for him, I thought I had mistaken the Title of his Book; but looking back, I
found it to have indeed this Inscription; OF SCHISM. A DEFENSE OF THE CHVRCH OF
ENGLAND, AGAINST THE EXCEPTIONS OF THE ROMANISTS; BY H. HAMMOND, D. D. So that
now I remained satisfied what was the Title, but much more unsatisfied to find
my expectation so totally deluded; and that in a large Chapter containing
thirty six pages (almost a full quarter of the Book) not five words were found
which touched the question directly, nor could in any way be a preparative to
it. So as we have here 66 pages of 182. well toward half the Book) premised by
the Doctor to introduce the Question; like the Mindian Gate, too large an
entrance for so narrow a Corporation.

Frivolous then had been the long Preamble of this Chapter, had it been to the
purpose, and tended to the Question; but if it be found nothing at all to the
Question, but to wave and conceal the main, and indeed sole matter which
concerns it; nay more, to have prevaricated from the very scope for which he
would seem to intend it; then I will leave it to the Reader to imagine what
commendations this Chapter and its Author does deserve.

Our Question is of Schism: In this Chapter he undertakes to show the several
sorts of it; which therefore he divides into Schism against C. 2. S. 3* 4 5.
Fraternal Charity, and Schism against some one particular Governor; as in the
People against a Priest or Deacon; in those against a Bishop, in Bishops
against their Archbishops; in Archbishops against their Primate or Patriarch;
and there he stops; lest, if he had ascended a step higher to the Authority of
the Pope, he should have said more truth then will serve his turn. For you must
know he has a deep design against Antichrist; and is resolved that half a score
odd stories, or some few words and unwarrantable practices of discontented
persons (especially, being cited in Greek) shall utterly overthrow him; in
despite of manifest practice of Antiquity, clouds of testimonies from Fathers,
and the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, of whose fallibility he is far from
even pretending to any infallible Evidence.

But that we may manifest what we laid to his charge, that all this long
Chapter is but wastepaper, the Reader may please to take notice that the Schism
we charge the Protestants with, is not of the peoples Schism against a Deacon
or Presbyter; nor of a Deacon or Presbyters Schism against a Bishop, nor any
link in that chain of Schisms which he there enumerates; but we accuse them and
their Forefathers, the first Reformers.

First, of a Breach or Schism from the whole Catholic Church. This is without
controversy the Schism of Schisms; and which in the first hearing of the word
( Schism) objects it self to our understanding, as being simply, properly, and
(...) such; whereas the other are nothing but particular refractory
diso^^diences in comparison of this; and may well consist with your obedience
to the Universal Church. This, this, I say, is the chief and main Schism we
impute to his fellow Protestants; yet the Doctor in his present Book entitled,
Their Defense from Schism, takes no notice of the chief thing he ought to clear
them of; will not have it come into play, nor allow it a place in his Division,
as if it were either none at all, or else such a slight one as was not worth
taking notice of. Strange! that he could use such prolixity in trifling Schisms
impertinent to the present discourse, and not afford the least mention to the
greatest Schism of all, when the scope and aim of his Chapter necessarily
required it, and the Question forcibly exacted it. Strange! that he could
remember even the peoples Schism against a Deacon or Presbyter, and forget that
which breaks from the whole body of the Universal Church. But the Doctor is
more careful to preserve his own Copyhold then the Churches Free hold; for,
according to his division and Doctrine in this Chapter, his Parishoners would
be Schismatics for disobeying him, or a puny Deacon; but neither he, nor the
Deacon Schismatics at all for disobeying the whole Church. And thus the Dr.
has established his own Authority to be more inviolable then the Popes, and by
this one Division, has quite conquered and got the upper-hand of Antichrist.

Secondly, What is become of General Councils all this while? Have not they as
great an Authority as any private Patriarch, Primate, Archbishop, Bishop, Dr.
Hammond, or a Deacon? Far gr^^ter sure, if I be not mistaken. Doubtless then a
Schismatical rejecting their Decrees and Authority, is more heinous, grievous,
and more worthy to be ranked amongst his fellow-Schisms then any of the others.
Yet of this, in this Chapter where he expressly undertakes and prosesses to
enumerate all the several sorts of Schism, we hear not a syllable.

Thirdly, What is become of Schism against the Head of the Church? Is not the
Papal Authority greater then the Authority of any Patriarch, Primate,
Archbishop, Bishop, Dr. Hammond, or a Deacon? Surely all imagine so, but Dr.
Hammond and his fellows; why is this over-slipt then, as if it were a matter of
nothing? But Dr. Hammond will answer, That the Popes is not indeed an
Authority, but an Usurpation, and therefore there can be no Schism against it:
To which I reply, That I expect not that he should grant it here, but since he
knows very well and grants that the Papal Authority was in a long possession of
this Island, held and acknowledged then, and still pretended to be sacred, and
of divine institution; nay more, since it is confessed by them, that they
rejected this Authority, and that this rejection of it is objected to them by
us, as a far greater Schism than any of the other he mentious, he ought at
least have taken notice of it, and shown in what degree of Schism the casting
off such an Authority was to be reputed (as being Chief, and instituted by
Christ) unless he could manifest the pretended Authority of the Hope to be
null, and an Usurpation. Moreover, since it is the use of the multitude, which
makes words signify; and that three parts of four of those who bear the name
of Christians (if taken in the double extent or space, both of time and place)
have acknowledged, and called it a main Schism, and greater then any the Doctor
here reckons up, to reject the Supreme Authority of the Bishop of Rome, the
Doctor could not in reason avoid the mention of this so-commonly-called Schism,
unless he had first manifested that it was none. Again, to state the matter
indifferently to both sides, let us take the word, Head of the Church, as
abstracted from an Ecclesiastical or Secular Governor, that is from both Pope,
and Emperor or King; nay, if he pleases, let us take it only in the later
sense, which is his; I desire to know, since the Emperor or King, is (according
to him) Supreme in Ecclesiastical affairs, Head of the Church or Churches in
his Dominions, above Patriarchs* and Primates, etc. why is not the denying this
Authority a greater Schism even in his own grounds, than a Schism against a
Patriarch, Deacon? etc. For, the Authority of the Head rejected, what means
possible remain to reconcile and unite the members. In omitting this therefore,
the Doctor has neither been true to our Question, nor his own Grounds. In sum,
So wise a Logician is this Doctor of Divinity; That whereas the Members of the
division should adequately comprehend all the several sorts of the thing
divided; he has only omitted the three principal Schisms against Government,
and those not only principal in themselves, but also solely importing the
present Controversy; and only mentioned those, which were not objected, and
so nothing at all concerning our Question.

Where, I desire the Doctor to remember, That all those Testimonies he has
huddled here together out of the Fathers against Petty-Schismaticks, will light
far heavier upon him, and his fellows, if they be found to have separated from
the incomparably greater Authority of the whole Church; and that not only by a
bare Schism, but also (which you here acknowledge to add very much to the
guilt of S. 9.
the former,) by an open and most manifest Sedition.

The rest of your Chapter is taken up is things which tend not at all to the
Matter you purposed to handle, that is, To defend your Church against the
Schisms we object; which makes you also so ample, and large in handling them.
You C. 3. S. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24.
show therefore with a great deal of pains, the particular dignities of
Deacons, Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs; you tell us many
things of the C. 3. S. 15, 16, 17.
Seven Churches of Asia, etc. I will only glean what may seem worth
Animadversion, treating it briefly, because you speak it (as you say) by the
way, in passing, and the question is not much concerned in it* and omiting
those Testimonies which are slightly objected here, and come over and over
again afterward.

First then you affirm, That the Roman Patriarchy extended not it self to all
Italy; which, S. 17.
though a known untruth, and which I have heard learned, and unpassionate men
of your own side acknowledge; yet you will needs evince out of the obscure
Testimony of one Ruffinus, a discontented, ^illy, and barbarons Writer; and if
you blame me for excepting against him, one of your late most extolled Mr.
Daille, l. 2. c. 4.
Writers, Monsieur Daille shall defend me; who characters Ruffinus to be An
arrant Wooden statue, a pitiful thing; one that had scarce any reason in what
he said, and yet much less dexterity in defending himself; yet you account here
his Testimony very competent. But how small soever the Popes Patriarchy be,
what is this to his Papal Authority, since even we our selves acknowledge him a
Private Bishop of Rome, which yet prejudices not his Public Authority, as the
Churches Universal Governor.

Your Testimony alleged out of the Council C. 3. S. 22. See afterward Part.
2. C. 3. S. 25 C. 3. S 22
of Chalcedon, shall be answered hereafter, when we come to discuss the
Question of the Popes Authority; as also your other out of the Council of
Ephesus in its proper place, where it is repeated.

Your other claw against the Pope, is, That these was none anciently above the
Patriarchs, but the Emperor, which you think to evince, because the Emperor
made use of his secular Authority in gathering Councils. And who denies, but
however the intention and ordering that great Affair belonged to the Popes, yet
the Emperors, as being Lords of the world, were fittest to command the
execution of it. But ere you can conclude hence against the Popes Authority
over the Church, you must first evince, That the Emperors (and the like may be
said of Kings) did this without the Popes signifying such their desires to
them. Next, That, if they did it sometimes against the Popes will, or
pretending it their proper power, such an action or pretense of theirs was
lawful. And thirdly, had it belonged to the Emperors (which yet none grants
you) yet how will your consequence hold good, That therefore the Pope has no
Authority over the Universal Church? As if there were no other acts of an
Universal Authority, but to gather Councils; which is all one as to say, That
the Kings of England could have no Universal Temporal Command or Jurisdiction
in England, but only to call a Parliament. All your Marginal Testimonies
therefore, which you here bring (signifying no more to us, But that the Emperor
executed that business) are far from making good the Position you allege them
for: to wit, That the Emperors did it by their own proper Power.

SECT. 7.
Of Doctor Hammond's advance toward the Question, in the beginning of his
Fourth Chapter.

THe Doctor having so wisely and securely laid his Grounds, that is, Having
omited all Grounds that might either prejudice his Cause, or touch the
Question, advances at length toward the Controversy it self; but with the
same reeling-pace as formerly: In which, he continues throughout the whole
progress of this Chapter with such a rambling career, as if what he had said
hitherto, were but preparatives to absurdness, or but nonsense in jest; which
here, being come to the point, he more exactly performs in earnest. Which, if
my Answer to this Chapter do not plainly demonstrate, I will submit my self
willingly to be branded by the Readers censure for a most unjust Calumniator:
But if it do, then let him think of Mr. Hammonds manner of proceeding, and his
cause, as they shall be found to deserve.

And first, stumbling at the Threshold, he C. 4. S. 1.
expects that the Church should produce evidence for her own, or her supreme
Head's Authority in England. Which, since it is confessed by all sides, That
the Pope was in quiet possession of such a Primacy, it no more belongs to us to
prove just, then it does to the Emperor, who had derived the succession of his
right from a long train of Ancestors, to evidence his title to the Kingdom ere
he can punish a Rebel. It is wonderful the Doctor should be ignorant of that
which all the world knows and acknowledges, to wit, That a long-setled
possession is of it self a proof, until the contrary be evinced; so as he who
should deny the Authority of such an Emperor, were truly and properly a
seditious person; and you, for the same Reasons, truly and properly
Schismatics, unless he can produce sufficient, that is, evident Causes and
Reasons, why he refused obedience to that Emperor; and you, why you denied
subjection to the Pope; who (as you were told before) was not less found in a
quiet and long-acknowledged possession of Primacy in England, nay, much more
then any Emperor or King in Christendom was of his Crown; to wit, even by your
own grants, for the space of eight or nine hundred years. Neither imagine that
the Modern Protestants, who find the Pope outed from his Jurisdiction in
England, are therefore excusable from their Forefathers Schism: For, however
changeableness of humane affairs, and pretense, that Temporal Laws were
constituted, and are disannulable by men, may render such rights and titles
obnoxious to alienation or alteration; and so cause a deseazance of any
obedience formerly due to a secular Governor: Yet, if Christ himself has
constituted any Authority, and enjoined obedience to it, no length of time, no
vicissitude of secular Affairs, nor intercession of humane Laws can ever
disoblige from this duty. So that, it lies still as freshly as at the first
breach encharg'd upon the Protestants, under the penalty of Schism, to manifest
with most convincing and undeniable Arguments, that the Pope could never claim
any such Authority from Christ.

Which claim of ours, and (as the Doctor C. 4: S. 2.
will have it) our first evidence, he goes about to confute in this Chapter.
But, first, in big terms he lays out an ample Narration, how King Henry the
Eighth, the Universities, and Parliament, not only said, but testified under
their Hands and Seals, nay, more (says the Doctor) took their Corporal Oaths
on it, that the Pope was not Head of the Church; and, All this (says Mr.
Hammond) is look^ on and condemned as an act of Schism in this Church and
Nation. What a piece of wit is here! This is the very thing for which we accuse
your Church and Nation of Schism; and you, by a bare Narration that it was
done, think (it seems) to have half proved it was lawfully done. And all this,
said, sealed, and sworn by a King, Parliament, and Universities, is enough to
amaze a vulgar-headed Reader into a belief, That their Votes could not be other
then true. And I doubt not, but the Doctor himself wonders, That the whole
Catholic Church should be so unreasonable, as not to grant and think her self
ever to have taught, and the whole world ever to have believed a lie, rather
then to judge so uncharitably, That a lustful and tyrannical King, with some
number of his Subjects, partly out of flattery, partly out of fear, adhearing
to him (though these not a handful in comparison of the even-then-present
Christian World) should say, seal and swear a falsehood: Especially, the cause
of the breach being most notorious to the whole world, not to have been
Conscience, but vicious and unlawful pretenses: And, on the other side,
multitudes of conscientious and learned men opposing it; and many laying down
their dearest lives in testimony of the contrary truth; whose taking the
Affirmative upon their deaths, is more to be believed, then the other true,
taking it upon their Corporal Oaths. Among those who died in defense of the
Popes Supremacy, was our renowned and worthy Countryman, Sir Thomas More; whose
esteem for Piety, Learning, and Prudence, as the King professed, was so
eminent, That his subscription alone, if it could be procured, was worth half
the Realms. Yet this so notorious acting and commencing of Schism (though
sprung from unlawful lust, and managed with most cruel tyranny) the Doctor
seems to think so laudable, that the very mentioning it will something conduce
to justify a Schismatic. All this (says he) is looked on and condemned, as
an act of Schism in this Church and Nation!

Next he proceeds to state the Question, by C. 4. S. 3.
branching the Objection into many parts; which the Doctor will needs have
belong to us to manifest ere the Objection will have any force. So as,
possession beyond memory is of no force with him, which yet is the basis of all
the firm peace this poor world enjoys, and the ground upon which every man
remains quietly instated in his own. When such a possession is once settled, all
Controversies are silenced; when it is questioned, a gap is opened to all
litigiousness. Necessity therefore, and evidence, must both be pleaded, ere any
one can justly quarrel with this Nurse of Peace. Yet the Church must plead her
Evidence (says the Doctor,) that is, Seem to bring in question her own
longpossessed Title; and at whose Bar (think you) must she plead it? At no
other then that of her quondam Sons and Subjects; and now, Rebels and Enemies.

But the Doctor, most unfortunately accurate in his Divisions, tells us, That
we must manifest first, the matter of fact, that thus it was in England.
Secondly, The consequence of that fact, that it were Schism, supposing those
Successors of Saint Peter were thus set over all Christians by Christ. As for
the first, The Reader, I doubt not, will smile at the Doctors folly, in telling
us, we are to manifest that which no man living ever denied; and which himself
immediately before, and far more largely hereafter, relates and acknowledges.
For, who ever imagined it a matter of Controversy, needing to be manifested,
Whether or no King Henry the Eighth denied the Popes Supremacy. The second is
yet more ridiculous then the former; since not even the most impudent Heretic
in the World ever had the face to deny, but that, if the Popes Universal
Authority was constituted by Christ, the consequence was inevitable, That it
was both Schism and Heresy to reject and condem it, C. 7. S. 5.
as he confesses they did. Yet is this the second thing (says he) which we
must manifest ere the Objection will be of any force. But, to make the jest
complete, after telling us, That we are to manifest them; he, out of his
courtesy, and to expedite the matter, is pleased to grant them, not requiring
the pretenders farther to prove them. As if he could have resisted them, but
had done us a great favor, in saving us from a most disgraceful foil we should
have sustained, in maintaining, That a fact was done, which himself and all the
world acknowledges; and in being puzzled with proving, that what Christ bid us
do, was to be done, and the Authority instituted by God himself, to be obeyed.
To what purpose was it to bring such unnecessary and frivolous distinctions,
and afterward wave them? But the Doctor (as I have shown before, and shall
demonstrate more largely hereafter) has a most special gift of his own, in
dividing his Text; and he must upon all, or rather no occasion, show it. Which
trick of his, though it counterfeit an order, and breed an apprehension of a
methodical exactness in discourse to ordinary Readers; yet when it shall be
discovered to tend to no solidity, being like the Philosophers dividing of
Spatium imaginarium; all men will see plainly it is but a mere knack to
be-wonder Children and Ignorants.

SECT. 7.
Of Doctor Hammonds first Evidence against St. Peter's Universal Pastorship.

BUt now the Question is stated; this Chapter is to prove no Donation of any
Primacy to St. Peter by Christ; the next, That no such Authority is devolved
upon the Pope, his Successor, in the Sea of Rome. And now the long-expected
time of the Doctors Evidences is come: I told you he had a horrible design in
Lavander against the Pope; now truth is come to light. This, this is the fatal
time that the Horns of the Beast in the Apocalypse must be broken, and the
Walls of that Whorish-Babylon thrown down by the inevitable and unresistable
Evidences of Dr. Hammond. But, to be serious, the Doctor and I jointly request
the ingenuous Reader, to bestow more attentive and deliberate diligence, in
examining and weighing well this part of the Controversy, then what has gone
before. The important weight of the truth in question, now hot in pursuit, and
the very sound of Evidence, now mainly pretended, do both invite to a more
particular attention. The Doctor especially granting, that C. 4. S. 4.
the Question must be managed with Evidences, and so concluded, either on the
one side, or the other. If the Doctors proofs conclude and manifest themselves
to be indeed, what they are pretended, that is, Evidences, then I will grant
the truth on his side, and the controversy at an end. But if all the Evidence
they bring, be only, that they are most evidently repugnant and most injurious
to Gods Word, to all Ancient Histories, and to themselves; that they are open
Forgeries, and most absurd Deductions, shamefully abusing the Readers judgment,
and even his very eyes; then I hope, the Reader will pardon me, if I seem to
bear less respect to him, in telling him plainly of his faul^s, who manifests
himself to have quite cast off all respect to Truth, Gods Word, Antiquity, his
Readers, and even to his own Conscience. But the Doctor begins to argue, have
at Saint Peter then in this Chapter, have at the Pope in the next.

His first Evidence then (as he calls it) is from Scripture, That St. Peter was
the Apostle of the Circumcision, or Jews, exclusively to the Uncircumcision, or
Gentiles. Whence he insers, that St. Peter's authority, being restrained to the
Jews only, could not be Universal to the whole Church. So that all his first
Evidence is to evince the No-authority that Apostle had over the Gentiles, or
the Exclusiveness of any Apostleship in respect of them. But first Mr. Hammond
C. 4. S. 5.
tells us, what he means by an Apostle, to wit, A Commissioner of Christ,
endued with authority by him; and this Commission given to him, as to all the
other Apostles, indefinitely and unlimitedly; not restrained by Christ's words
to any particular Province, but equally extending to the whole World. Where,
since he would go about to define an Apostle, he might have done well to show
in what he is distinguished from a Disciple. However, all he there says, is
true; only we add, That neither by any subsequent act of theirs (as the
Doctor imagines) was this illimited Commission given to each by Christ,
restrained to particular sorts of men, or several large Diocesses or Provinces,
so as to make them lose thereby their jurisdiction over other persons or
places: However they might agree for the better propagating the Gospel, to
disperse themselves into several Nations; or by the provident cooperation of
Gods Spirit, have a more especial gift in converting some sorts of people, then
others; and so applying more their industry, where they experienced more fruit
of their Preaching, got thence by their particular addiction to that sort of
people, or that Nation, the appellation of their Apostle or Doctor. No
Exclusiveness therefore of their ample Authority and Apostolical Jurisdiction
from any Sect or Nation; no hedging or fencing in the unbounded vastness of
their universally-extended Mission and Commission within the Verge of any
particular Province or People.

Yet Mr. Hammond will needs have all their Authorities limited, for fear St.
Peter's should prove unlimited; and therefore lays for his ground, to conclude
St. Peter Apostle of the Jews only, That they distributed their Universal C.
4. S. 5.
great Province into several lesser ones. This he evidences (for you must
conceive, that all these Chapters are perfectly connected discourses, that is,
manifest and noonday Evidences) out of two places in the Sacred Scripture, in
explicating which also his chief talent-lies. These therefore we must endeavor
to clear as far as our abilities will give us leave; For the Reader can imagine
no less, but that these two places, being the foundation of the Doctors future
discourse, must be most unconfutable Evidences; and consequently must needs
cost as much toil and labor in the answering.

The first place he alleges to prove, That the Apostles had especial and
peculiar Provinces exclusively to one another, is that of Acts 1. 25. where the
Apostles pray God to show, Whether of the two proposed ( justus and Matthias)
he had chosen, that he might receive the lot of that Ministry and Apostleship,
(...), whence ^udas strayed to go to his own place; where he will needs have
(...), etc. to signify a lesser Province. Whereas first it is evident to
common sense, that the lot of an Apostleship is nothing but the charge and
office of an Apostle.

Secondly, It is most manifestly shown to be nothing else, by the whole intent
and transaction of the business; which was not, to allot one of them a lesser
Province, but to choose a twelfth Apostle.

Thirdly, The subsequent effect of the casting lots no less manifests it,
delivered us in this tenor of words, The lot fell on Matthias; and, he was
numbered with the eleven Apostles; nor, and thereupon he got the Government of a
lesser Province.

Fourthly, It is most plainly opposite to Scripture; for in the seventeenth
verse of this very Chapter, St. Peter uses the self-same phrase (...), etc.
(which the Doctor makes here stand for lesser Provinces) to express Judas his
dignity whence he fell; and in which, (as the very place cited by the Doctor,
manifests) the Apostles desired another should succeed, but no man ever dreamed
that Judas had a lesser Province assigned him: It is therefore pointblank
opposite to Scripture, to writh the words to this Interpretation.

Fifthly, This supposed, the Doctor is contradictory to himself, to imagine
that, in which St. Matthias succeeded Judas, a lesser Province; since he
acknowledged before, That this division of Provinces was made after our
Saviors Ascension; and consequently Judas, who was dead ere his Resurrection,
had no such Province in which another might succeed him.

Sixthly, It is most notoriously contrary to all Antiquity; and consequently,
either manifesting a most shameful ignorance, or wilful malice in so mistaking
it: For whosoever gave but a glance into those studies, will plainly discern,
That the Apostles distributing themselves into several Provinces, was done a
long time after the coming of the Holy Ghost; whereas this installing of St.
Matthias into his (...), which he will have lesser Provinces, was manifestly
before the coming of the Holy Ghost, as whosoever reads the end of this Chapter,
and the beginning of the next, will clearly discover.

Lastly, It is against your own translation, which expresses that, The room of
this Ministration and Apostleship, from which Judas has gone astray; which
your special gift of interpreting Scripture makes signify, St. Matthias his
lesser Province. So that, all accounts made up concerning this place alleged,
the result is, That this first Evidence, or rather the Ground of Dr. Hammonds
future Evidences, is so strong and unmovable, that it alone resists the whole
World; being evidently opposite to common sense, repugnant expressly to
Scripture, injuriously contrary to all Antiquity, prevaricating from the
translation of their own Church, and lastly, contradictory to the Doctor
himself. But, Humanum est errare, No man but is subject to Error; he will make
amends (doubtless) for this mistake in the next Testimony.

SECT: 8.
The Examination of Doctor Hammonds second Evidence, That the Apostles had
distinct Provinces, so to prejudice St. Peter's Universal Pastorship.

HIs next Ground from Scripture (to put it out of doubt, that the Apostles had
even then particular Provinces exclusively to one another) That St. Peter calls
the going to those C. 4. S. 5.
lesser Provinces, (...), to go to his proper place or assignation. Good
Reader, view but the place alleged and wonder. St. Peter speaks there of Judas
his prevaricating from the Apostleship, and going to Hell (which is there called
his proper place) to receive his eternal damnation; and the Doctor calls it,
Going to his proper place, or assignation for the witnessing Ibid.
the Resurrection, and proclaiming the Faith or Doctrine of Christ to the
World. So as now the Doctor has found Judas a Diocese amongst the Devils; and
by his blasphemous interpretation would have St. Matthias succeed him. So
blind is Schism, when it is grown to an inveterateness, that a proof of
Quidlibet e quolibet, is a sufficient Argument, nay an Evidence to legitimate
disobedience; of which, these two Testimonies the Ground of this Chapter, are
most pitiful proofs.

And now can any man, that entitles himself a Preacher of Gods Word, have the
face to appear in the Pulpit, to interpret those Sacred Oracles, after he has
been challenged and discovered to have so wilfully, and shamefully abused and
corrupted them. And, alas, kind Readers, and dear Countrymen, how tender a
sense of your misery it must forcibly breed in any charitable heart, to think
upon what slender reeds your present Faith, by which alone you hope for
salvation, depends and relies. These are the men (for no privilege is annexed
to your first Reformers and Teachers, more then to Mr. Hammond;) these, I say,
are they, to believe whose interpretations of Scripture you have left, the
sense and faith of the whole world; to follow whose false call, you have
abandoned, and forsaken the cherishing and gathering wings of your tenderest
Mother, the Catholic Church, to stray up and down in a disordered wilderness
of distractions. That Church, under whose care, your prudent and pious
Ancestors for so many hundreds of years were brought up in a secure unanimity
and settledness of belief: That Church, in whose bosom they died, and from
whose holy Arms they quietly delivered their happy Souls into the hands of
their Redeemer, her ever-blessed Spouse. That Church whose Authority was
under-propt with the strongest supports which can possibly be imagined to
strengthen the frailty, and settle the fickleness of humane belief, in a most
firm and constant adherence to supernatural truths; such as are the Motives of
a never-interrupted Apostolical Succession, Universality, Sanctity, Unity in
Faith, Uniformity in Practice, the ever-constantly-self-like Order in
Hierarchical Government; the exactness in Discipline; the Possession of, and
Skill in the Sacred Writ; the Conversion of all Nations, and ours amongst the
rest; the Splendour and Reverence she observes in her Ceremonies, and
Administering the Sacraments; the longenjoy'd continuance of the Belief of
Infallibility; the learning and multitude of her Doctors and Fathers; the
unmoved constancy of her Martyrs; the Angelical Purity, and Seraphical devotion
of her religious Sons and Daughters; the higher and more elevated strain of
piety in those Cherubins in flesh, her sublime and Heaven-soaring
Contemplatives; the eminently good and charitable acts (proper fruits of that
Tree) many remainders whereof our thankless and ungrateful Country still
enjoys: And lastly, all these, with many more, by a conspicuous visibleness to
the eye, easy to be known, and most of them actually acknowledged by our very
enemies.

This Church, I say, and all those pregnant Motives, greater then which, the
world cannot afford, nor man's wit invent to oblige to a secure belief, you have
slighted; and suffer your dear Souls to lie at stake, under the most dangerous
accusation of a grievous Schism, without having any better game to play, or any
other excuse to allege in counterpoize of so many weighty Motives, then only
the bare fidelity and skilfulness of some few private men (such as is this
Doctor) who pretend to be wiser in interpreting Scripture, then all the world
besides; and who will not stick, when they want better shifts, to delude your
eyes with obtruding their own forgeries and sillilycritical explications (as
does this Doctor) for most absolute EVIDENCES. Awake then, as you tender your
Souls endless good or misery, awake; and let these gross-absurdities, with
which they impose upon you, rouse you from the Lethargy of such an easy
credulity. Wisely bethink your selves in time, how unsafe it is to rely on the
bare Authority of their slippery interpretations, and relinquish the sense of
the whole Catholic world: Which both possesses a thousand Motives they dare
not lay claim to, and even in their own pretense, which is the right
interpreting of Scripture, ought in all reason to have infinite advantages. Of
this, dear Reader, I thought good to admonish thee by the way; in which, if I
may seem to have said too much, the Doctor will make my words good in the
process of this work; and if I have now complained for nothing, he will give me
cause, ere he ends this Chapter, to complain for something.

But ere I proceed, I desire the Reader to heed attentively what is in
question, and what is granted. It is granted, that Saint Peter preached to
those of the Circumcision or Jews; and for the more particular fruit, which by
Gods especial assistance he found, and the more pains he took amongst them, was
called their Apostle: As also, that St. Paul preached to the Gentiles; and for
the greater cooperation he experienced of Gods assistance in that work, which
made him more particularly addict himself to them, he thence had the
appellation of the Apostle of the Gentiles; as he himself clearly explicates
himself in the place the Doctor alleages, Gal. 2. 7, 8. where he gives the
reason why the Jews more particularly belonged to St. Peter, and the Gentiles
to him in these words, (...) For, he that wrought with Peter for the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, wrought with me also amongst the Gentiles.
Where the particle ( For^ manifestly renders the reason why these t^ Apostles
were more properly particularized (...) these two parts of the world; to wit,
by (...) other designation, then the more especial c^^operation of Gods
efficacious assistance, as (...) yet more plainly shown in the ninth Verse
(...) the same Chapter. This therefore is evide^ and out of question, That St.
Peter more peculiarly applied himself to the Jews, and St. Paul to the
Gentiles, at least in the beginning of the Church. That which is in question,
the is, whether the Jews were so particularly St. Peter's Province, that his
Authority was limited to them; so that he neither did, nor could intermeddle in
the conversion of the Gentile^ that is, had no jurisdiction over them; an^ the
contrary of St. Paul. This is the Docto^ Position, from whence he takes his
first Evidence C. 4. S. 5, 6, 7.
against St. Peter's Universal Pastorship* That this Apostle was Apostles of the
Circumcisi^ or Jews, Exclusively to the Uncircumcision or Gentiles. Which
Assertion is so shamelesly false, s^ expresly-opposite to all Scripture, and
ancient History, that it was not possible for a man to invent a Paradox so
totally unwarrantable* and improbable as this. Nay more, I promis^ the Reader,
and Mr. Hammond too, That if amongst those many Testimonies he produces to
prove it, there be but found any one sentence* line, word, syllable, or letter,
which exclude^ St. Peter's Authority from the Gentiles, more then what this man
puts in his of own head, I will be content to yield him the whole Controversy.
And may not a Doctor of Divinity be ashamed such a proffer should be made him
in those very proofs of his, which he would bear the Reader in hand are most
perfect Evidences.

And first his pretended place of Scripture, C. 4. S. 7.
^al. ^. 7. (which we have before explicated) ^nely says, That the Apostleship
of the Jews or Circumcision was committed to St. Peter; but that it was of the
Jews only, or none but them, ^o as by the particular Commission to convert
^^em, he lost or was excluded from any jurisdiction over the Gentiles (which is
the Doctors ^ffertion, and can only advantage his cause,) ^ere is neither in
that place, nor any where ^se, the least syllable. Whereas it is impossible
(...) should not see that the contrary (to wit, that (...). Peter both had
Authority, and did preach (...) the Gentiles) was as manifest in Scripture as
(...) Sun at Noonday; half the eleventh Chap^ of the Acts being employed in a
most ex^ss Narration of St. Peter's vision, exhor^ing Acts 10. 34
^n to preach to the Gentiles, which he accordingly did, and went immediately
by an espe^ Mission of God to convert Cornelius a Gen^, where he preached to
him, and his whole ^se. As also St. Peter in the Council at Ieru^m affirmed
saying, (...). Acts 15. 7.
God has chosen amongst us, that the Gentiles should hear the ^d of the Gospel
by my mouth, and believe. What (...) we think now of this Doctor, who puts,
^vident out of Scripture, that St. Peter had no authority to preach to the
Gentiles, where as the Scripture expressly says, He was chose out of the rest,
and particularly authorized so that end? Is this man fit to be accounted (...)
expounder of Gods Word, who thus wilful perverts, and purposely contradicts it?

Besides, if St. Peter were made Apostle (...) the Jews Exclusively to the
Gentiles, by the same reason St. Paul was made Apostle of (...) Gentiles
Exclusively to the Jews. For the wo^ alleged ( Gal. 2. 7.) The Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel of (...) Circumcision was to
Peter, (upon which on^ C. 4. S. 7.
the Doctor builds this Tenet) equally inser^ Exclusiveness of jurisdiction in
one, as in (...) other, over his fellow Apostles Province) as (...) Particle (
As) signifies, and the Doctor him^ confesses Section seven, unless the word (
peculiar) must lose its signification. Yet it is (...) evident that St. Paul,
where ever he ca^ preached first to the Jews, as appears most evidently, Acts
13. 5. and 14. 1. and 17. 1, 2, 3. wh^ it is said, That it was St. Paul's manner
or c^ to go into the Jews Synagogue, and preach Ch^ Faith. Also Acts 20. 18,
21. where St. Paul s^ of himself, That ever since he came into Asia, witnessed
both to the Jews and Grecians, the (...) pentance toward God, and Faith
toward Ch^ Likewise Acts 19. 8. and 21. 21. where the formation against St.
Paul, was, That he t^ all the Jews, such and such things that foll^ there. So
Acts 22. the whole Chapter al^ being a Sermon of his to the Jews. Again (...)
24. 24. and 28. 23. where we find, that, (...) at Rome, St. Paul preached to
the Jews, (...) And now let the Reader judge if this be ^ most steeled
impudence, thus point blank, and diametrically opposite to the whole stream of
Scripture, and only upon his bare word to impale and confine the Authority of
the Apostles, to mutually-exclusive and contradistinct Jurisdictions; and all
this, merely out of malice (forsooth) against the Pope, to cut short his
Authority, as he is Successor of St. Peter. These are the Evidences, dear
Countrymen, your Doctors bring you to secure your Souls from the most dangerous
sin of Schism.

SECT. 9.
Some Consequences out of the Doctors former Grounds, and his further Process
in Evidencing.

YEt let us see, at least, what work the Doctor will make of it, if we let him
alone to run blindly forwards upon his own grounds. He will have all the
Apostles to have several Provinces limiting their jurisdictions, (...) or (...)
(as the Doctor misfortunately called them) which must be peculiar to each, and
exclusive of one another right, else this preparative ground will make nothing
to the Doctor's purpose. Consequently to this foundation laid in the fifth
Paragraph, he begins the sixth thus, If the Circumcision or Jewish Christians
were peculiarly St. Peter's Province; and (Section seven) the Gentile
Christians, peculiarly St. Paul's, etc.

Now if this Doctor will stand to these grounds thus laid, I would gladly ask,
What becomes of the rest of the Apostles? Must they stand by, and look on while
St. Paul converts all the Gentiles, and St. Peter all the Jews? You dare not
say, That they were subordinate to St. Peter and St. Paul; that would endanger
a kind of primacy in jurisdiction: Will you say then, they only help^ them?
That sounds dangerously still, and intimates some principality in the others;
allowing them no jurisdiction at all, but as far as the others please to accept
of their aid. You must say, then that these Provinces of St. Peter and St. Paul
were promiscuously, and indifferently given to the rest. But the main Pillars
of your Evidences, I mean your (...), and your (...) which you say all the
Apostles had, and which applied to St. Peter and St. Paul, you will have to
signify peculiar and exclusively-proper Provinces, will not bear, applied to
the rest of the Apostles, the sense of a promiscuous authority. It only
remains then, that they have no (...), that is no exclusive jurisdiction or
peculiar Province at all, and therefore nothing at all to do. Thus this
courteous Doctor has by his acute way of reasoning, infinitely obliged the
rest of the Apostles in freeing them from the hard and laborious task their
Master enjoined them, and getting them all leave to play. Nor has he less
obliged the Pope, if it proceeded from good will in him, and not from malice
and ignorance; for indistributing between St. Peter and St. Paul the Diocese of
the whole world, he has at unawares confirmed the Pope, their Successor, to be
the Universal Pastor of the whole Christian world; since it is most certain;
and by the Doctor acknowledged, C. 4. S. 11.
That the Bishops of Rome (beginning with Clemens) succeeded them both in that
Chair and See. But is it not a pretty thing, that in his Section six, contrary
to the grounds he had laid himself; and having no other reason, but his own
conjecture, he cramps the vast jurisdiction of that Bishop, Apostle, and our
Saviors Mark 16. 15.
large Commission of Euntes in universum mundum praedicate Evangelium omni
creaturae. Going into the whole world, Preach the Gospel to every creature;
given to each Apostle, into those few pitiful Parishes of the Jews of the
dispersion. And yet afterward, repenting he had granted C. 4. S. 14.
him so much, he balks his former too liberal donation to St. Peter, of the
Lydian Asia, and bestows it on St. John.

But me thinks I hear the Doctors Evidences call aloud upon us to lend them a
due consideration; which therefore, especially the world, being now adays so
scant of demonstrations, it were an infinite wrong to the advancement of
Sciences, carelessly to omit.

And first he evidences, That St. Peter had no C. 4. S. 6.
Primacy at Jerusalem where St. James sat; or, as he terms it, Singular
Supremacy. By which expression, if he would say, St. Peter was not particular
Bishop of that place, it needs no evidencing: But if he intends such a Primacy
as is pretended St. Peter had, what means the word Singular? or how does the
Doctor so quite take off all pretensions of St. Peter to such a Supremacy, as
he brags, page 73? Because (forsooth) Ibid.
not Peter alone, but James and John entrusted that charge to him: What a
miserable Doctor is this? who makes account Saint Peter could not be chiefer in
Authority than the rest of the Apostles, unless he did all things alone by
himself. And how can it invalidate St. Peter's greater Authority that he took
other two with him; since it is well known an Archbishop going to consecrate a
Bishop, takes two other Bishops with him, and yet it follows not hence, that an
Archbishop has no higher degree of Authority than the Bishops. O, but he
finds St. James named before St. Peter, Gal. 2. 9. and Ibid.
that (doubtless) he fancies to be an invincible Evidence; not considering that
if that argument were allowed any weight, his cause were lost; since in most,
if not all other places in the Scripture, St. Peter is constantly named first
of all the Apostles. Lastly, he tells us that Ibid.
St. James had the Principal place in the Council of Jerusalem, where St. Peter
is present; and ACCORDINGLY gives the sentence, Acts 15 19. upon which, the
Rescript is grounded. Where first, that St. James had the principal place, is a
pitiful guessing Assertion of his own, without the least pretense of a
Testimony; and yet he puts the word Principal in other letters, as a main
business. Next, whereas he alleages that St. James gave the Sentence, and then
quotes Acts 15. 19. I find only that St. James, after he had produced his
Reasons, says, Wherefore my sentence is, etc. But the Doctor turns my sentence
which can only signify his opinion or judgment in the matter, into the
sentence, which sounds a conclusive definition and decision of a business under
debate.

No wiser nor honester is his next Assertion, that the Rescript is grounded
upon St. James his sentence in particular, citing for it, Ver. 22. of the same
Chapter; but there is nothing there particularizing St. James, but only that,
Then (to wit, after St. Peter, St. Paul, Barnabas, and St. James, had spoken)
it seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, etc. And upon
what grounds can this demonstrative Doctor affirm, That the Rescript was
grounded particularly upon St. James his sentence, and thence deduce his
priority of dignity, when as it is manifest to any one that shall read the
Chapter, that St. Peter's sentence was the same with St. James, in the main
matter controverted; both concurring, that the Gentiles should be freed from
the grievous burden of Circumcision: And although the abstaining from
Fornication, things strangled, and blood, be found in St. James his sentence
only, yet how can this argue a greater Authority in James? did St. Peter vote
the contrary, and St. James his sentence oversway? or would not the advice of
commanding them to abstain from the things there prohibited, have been voted
and accepted of by the Council, though the proposition had been made by one of
inferior dignity? unless, perhaps the Doctor imagines the Apostles and Elders
of the Church, assembled in the Council, were such weak, passionate and partial
men, that they did not decree things because they were reason and fitting, but
because St. James spoke them, whose greater Authority (the Doctor seating him
in the principal place) they were, you must think, somewhat afraid of.

But any thing serves this Doctor for an Evidence. His all* swallowing faith
makes that seem a demonstration against the Pope, which to us poor men, because
of our unbelief, bears not so much as the least show of a probability. And, he
imagines (from the particle Then) in the two and twentieth verse, which he
misunderstands) that he who gives his sentence after another, has an Authority
above him. Though in reason one should rather think, after such debate as had
been concerning this matter, Verse 7. it argued some greater Authority in him
who should first break the Ice, and interpose his judgment in such a
solemnly-pronounced Oration, as did St. Peter. But the Doctor will have the
contrary a demonstration, and who can help it? The up*shot then of this
Paragraph is, that the Doctors concluding against St. Peter's Primacy from St.
James his being first named, is a prejudice to his own cause; from his
principal place in the Council, the Doctors own fiction; from his giving the
sentence, and on it grounding the Rescript, two fine little diminutive frauds
and abuses of Scripture; from his instalment, a frivolous piece of affected
ignorance; and thus you have a perfect account cast up of the Doctors sixth
Paragraph in his fourth Chapter of Evidences.

Ere I remove to another, I desire the Reader whose little curiosity has not
invited him to look into languages, not to be amazed at the large Greek
citations, which here swell the Margin: I can assure him they are nothing at
all to the Question, but of indifferent matters acknowledged by our selves: And
I will be bound, both at this time, and hereafter for the Doctors innocence in
this point, That he is never tedious, nor over large, either in Citations or
Reasons, which tend directly to the thing in controversy; as has heretofore
in part been declared, and shall more particularly be manifested hereafter.

In the seventh Paragraph, to omit what has been answered already, he tells
us, That St. Paul had no Commission received from, nor dependence on St. Peter,
citing for it Gal. 1. 12, 17. Which words may import a double sense; either,
that the manner of conferring upon him the power of an Apostle, was not by
means or dependence on St. Peter; and so far indeed the Scripture is clear, and
we acknowledge it; or else, that this power given him was not dependent on or
subject to St. Peter, as the chief of the Apostles; which is the question here
treated; denied by us, nor contradicted at all by the place alleged. But he
proceeds in his fundamental absurdity, that those two great Apostles wherever
they came, the one constantly applied himself to the Jews, the other to the
Gentiles, Where if by, ( constantly) he means most commonly or even always, yet
so as they retained jurisdiction over the others Province, then (to omit, that
it has been shown contrary to Scripture) it makes nothing against us. But if
it signify exclusively, or so, That neither had any Authority over the others
Province, (in which sense only it can limit St. Peter's Universal Authority,
which as he expresses Section six, is his aim) then I refer the Reader to my
eighth Section of this Chapter, where he shall see the contrary manifested to
the eye by nine or ten most express places of Scripture; yet the Doctor goes on
to evidence it by Testimonies, which obliges us to address our selves with new
vigor to bear the shock of so terrible an encounter.

His first testimony is his own knowledge. C: 4. S. 8.
Thus we know (says he) it was at Antioch, where St. Peter converted the Jews,
and St. Paul the Gentiles: But puts down no testimony at all to confirm the
weaker ones of his own, We know; which yet had been requisite, that we might
have known it too. But he tells us, that certainly St. Paul was no ways
subordinate to St. Peter, as appears by his behavior toward him avowed, Gal.
2. 11. that is, From his withstanding him to the face. Yet wiser men then Mr.
Hammond, to wit, St. Cyprian and St. Austin thought otherwise, who interpreted
St. Peter's bearing it so patiently, not as an argument of his less or equal
Authority, but of his greater humility; that, being higher in dignity, he
should suffer so mildly the reprehensions of an inferior, Quem (says St.
Cyprian) quamvis Primum Dominus Cyp. epist. 71. ad Quint. Aug. 2. de Bapt.
contra Donatistas.
elegerit, and super eum aedificaverit Ecclesiam suam, tamen cum secum Paulus
disceptavit, non vindicavit ^ibi aliquid insolenter aut arroganter assumpsit,
ut diceret se Primatum tenere, and obtemperari a novellis and posteris sibi
potius oportere; nec despexit Paulum quod Ecclesiae prius persecutor fuisset
sed consilium veritatis admisit, etc. Whom, though our Lord chose to be the
first of the Apostles, and upon him built his Church; yet when Paul contended
with him, be did not challenge and assume to himself any thing in an insolent
and proud manner, as to say, That he had the Primacy, and so should rather be
obeyed by newer and later Apostles; neither did he despise Paul, because he had
formerly been a persecutor of the Church, but admitted the council of Truth.
Thus that ancient, learned and holy Father St. Cyprian; yet Mr. Hammond has
certainty of the contrary.

SECT. 10.
The Examination of ten dumb Testimonies, which Dr. Hammond brings to plead for
him.

THe next Testimony begins thus, ACCORDINGLY C. 4. S. 8.
(that is, to the Doctors own WE KNOW) in Ignatius his Epistle to the
Magnesians, We read that the Church of Antioch was founded by St. Peter and St.
Paul. After which follows another of the same Author in his Epistle to the
Antiochians, (...), You have been the Disciples of Peter and Paul. What then?
These Testimonies are stark dumb in what concerns the Doctors purpose; for the
founding the Antiochians Church and teaching them, might have been done by the
promiscuous endeavors of those Apostles. Here is not the least news of
distinction, much less exclusion of Authority and Jurisdiction* True indeed,
the Testimonies are defective, and to blame; but the Doctor knows how to mend
them by his Interpretation. (...), You have been the Disciples of Peter and
Paul. ID EST (says the Doctor) converted and ruled by them; the Jewish part by
one, and the Gentile by the other. Was ever such an ID EST heard off? to infer
an exclusive distinction and limitation of Authority from terms plainly
promiscuous, and from which a confusion of jurisdiction might more properly be
deduced. So as not a letter of the question is found in the testimony, but what
Mr. Hammond with a blind Id est, adds of his own: Insomuch as it is left a
drawn match, whether his ID EST or WE KNOW be the better Testimony: However,
this is certain, that in the Doctors apprehension they are both of them most
absolute EVIDENCES, because it is most evident, he says them both without
either Authority or Reason.

He labors in the next place to found a distinction Ibid.
of the Jewish and Gentile Church at Antioch; which, though it be not a jot to
his purpose had he demonstrated it, yet it is pity to see what shifts he is put
to in proving it. Necessity makes many a man forfeit his honesty, a^ this
Doctor has also done too plainly here. Where he abuses most grossly St. Peter
with his Jewish Proselytes, and the sacred Scripture too, citing Gal. 2. 11.
That they withdrew from all communion and society with the Gentile Christians.
Whereas, in the Text, there is no such word as ALL, in which alone he can found
the distinction of the Jewish and Gentile Church. Neither (as the place
alleged manifests) did they any otherwise withdraw from them, tha^ in refusing
only to eat the Gentile diet; yet this he calls, withdrawing from ALL
COMMUNION; as if the Doctor made account there were no other Communion, but in
eating and drinking* Moreover, since to withdraw from all Communion with
another Church, is against fraternal Charity, and according to his formerlylaid
grounds, a Schism, (a sin inexcusable by such light trifles as were then
between them) it follows most necessarily, that while he goes about to prove a
perfect distinction of the two Churches at Antioch, he has consequently made
the Jewish Church, for withdrawing from all Communion with the Gentiles,
Schismatical; and blessed St. Peter himself, a Schismatic, nay, a ringleader
of Schismatics: But, God be praised, the place is proved to be falsified, and
so good St. Peter is vindicated.

His fourth Testimony or EVIDENCE of the C. 4. S. 8.
mutually-exclusive Jurisdictions of these two Apostles, is taken from the
writer of the Apostolical Constitutions, who (as the Doctor says page 75.)
ACCORDINGLY tells us that Evodius and Ignatius at the same time sat Bishops of
Antioch, one succeeding St. Peter, the other St. Paul, one in the Jewish, the
other in the Gentile Congregation. Whereas the place alleged in the Author
(which I will put down, because he slubberingly omits it) is only this, ( Lib.
7. cap. 46.) Antiochiae Evodius ordinatus est a me Petro, Ignatius a Paulo: At
Antioch Evodius was ordained by me Peter, Ignatius by Paul. This is all; there
being neither before nor after, a syllable more concerning that matter. Where
(besides that, the Doctor will, I am sure, acknowledge the Book of no sound
Authority) you see the Testimony produced, expresses only their Ordination by
the Apostles; but says nothing of their sitting together, nor succeeding the
Apostles; much less talks of the distinction of the Jewish or Gentile
Congregation; least of all, of any mutual Exclusiveness of St. Peter and St.
Paul's Jurisdiction there; but all these, (which are indeed all that is to the
purpose) are either voluntarily added by the Doctor, or groundlesly supposed,
or else must be pretended as deducible thence by Mr. Hammonds all-proving ID
EST. However the story goes (for it matters not much whether it be true or no)
it is manifest first that the Doctor has not brought a syllable of a proof to
serve his turn, were it granted: Next, that the Testimonies by himself alleged
here out of Eusebius and Origin, calling Ignatius the second, and out of St.
Ierom, calling him the third, make much against the sitting of two together:
Neither will he find St. Paul was ever accounted a Parcel-Bishop in Antioch
with St. Peter, that he should have a properly-call'd Successor there: However
he might perhaps ordain some Bishop to assist there after his departure.
Lastly, ere he sees what he does, he blindly sweeps down all his own laborious
Cobweb-work with a Testimony out of Theodoret, which affirms, that Ignatius
received the Archisacerdotal honor (...) from the hand of that great Apostle
St. Peter, where the Doctor leaves out the word Great, Jest St. Peter should
have too much. Now then, The Apostolical Constitutions being a Book which is
excepted against by all sides, and Theodoret being an Author beyond exception,
we have far more reason to judge by these Testimonies, that Great St. Peter
ordained Ignatius also, rather then Euodius only; so as the Doctor is far from
gaining, nay even comes off with no small loss from his own Testimonies,
notwithstanding the faithful endeavors of his ID EST to the contrary.

His fifth Testimony is out of St. Irenaeus, C. 4. S. 9.
which affirms, that the Apostles founded and built the Church at Rome. The
sixth, (which the Doctor praises for more express) is of St. Epiphanius, who
testifies, That Peter and Paul were Apostles and Bishops in Rome. The seventh
from Eusebius, who tells us, That the Inscriptions on the Apostles Tombs
mentions them as Founders of that Church. The eighth is from Gaius, an ancient
writer, who calls their Monuments, The Monuments of them that founded that
Church. The ninth is out of Dionysius of Corinth, who affirms both of the
Church of Rome and Corinth, That each of them was the foundation of Peter and
Paul. The tenth out of St. Prosper, who witnesses, That Peter and Paul, the
Apostles, consecrated or constituted a Church in the City of Rome.

These are six Testimonies of his, which I have put down in order as they lay,
and fully as he cited them, not omitting a syllable. And now tell me, I beseech
thee, good Reader, (for it may be thou have better eyes then I) can thou
discern any the least word in any of these six Testimonies, which even seems
afar off to limit St. Peter's authority to the Jews, and St. Paul's to the
Gentiles, which is the point in question? Is there any thing spoken here more
than in a general and promiscuous sense, That they builded, founded a Church,
were Bishops, etc. Do they ^ound any distinction or exclusiveness of
Jurisdiction? When thou have well examined thi^; next, please to consider that
to evidence by Testimonies, cannot be done otherwise than by expressing the
thing to be evidenced: Which thing in our present case, being the restriction,
limitation, exception, and exclusion of St. Peter's jurisdiction (which, as
given to our Savior, to him, and the other Apostles, was, without
controversy, Universal) this cannot be expressed, nor consequently evidenced
by Testimonies, otherwise then by restrictive, limitative, exceptive, and
exclusive terms; such as are Only, solely, alone, to none else, etc. This once
understood and applied to the present occasion, and the Doctors manner of
proceeding, whosoever thou art that read this Answer, whether thou be'st
Catholic, Protestant, Puritan, nay, even the Doctor himself, it is impossible
but thou should manifestly see that the Doctor has not said one syllable to
the purpose; there being neither in any of the former, nor following
Testimonies, either out of Scriptures, Fathers, or Histories, any the least
restrictive or exclusive sentence, particle or syllable for him: To say
nothing, that all, both Scriptures, Fathers, and ancient Histories are most
expressly against him. What a most unfortunate man is this Doctor to vent these
for EVIDENCES; and how unfortunate they, who hazard the eternal loss of their
Souls upon such men's writings.

But, to return to our six Testimonies: By what means, think you, does he make
them speak to his purpose? Not by torturing and screwing the words, to confess
what they never intended; that were impossible in such stubborn allegations,
and perfectly-silent in what concerns him: Nor by intermingling words of his
own to prompt them, and make them speak out, which is the old and
often-discover'd trick of his fellows; nor by criticizing, his former
unsuccessful art; but by pinning a Paper of his own forging to the Testimony
alleged, and gulling the Reader to his face, that the Author says it. So as
the device is the same, only the method altered; for the said necessary
Paper-which he used to pin behind the Testimony, now he pastes before it,
beginning the ninth Paragraph, which introduces the formerly-recited
Testimonies, thus; The same is as EVIDENT at Rome, where these two great
Apostles met again, and each of them erected and managed a Church, St. Peter of
Jews, and St. Paul of Gentiles. (Hold Doctor, the Testimonies should have told
us that; why do you forestal them?) And then, as in the eight Section, after
his own bare WE KNOW, he used the transition of ACCORDINGLY to bring in his
Authors: So now after he had straw'd the way with his own evident, as he
pleased himself, he ushers in the modest Testimonies with so many Soes: So
Irenaeus, so Epiphanius, so the Inscription, so Gaius, etc; whereas indeed the
following Testimonies are no more So, or like his Preface to them, and to the
question they are produced for, then (as the Proverb says) the running of the
Wheel-barrow is to the owing of six pence. The Doctor shall put the Similitude
in form, and the Reader shall judge: Just as I say (says the Doctor) That St.
Peter, and St. C. 4. S. 8.
Paul, each of them erected and managed a Church, one of Jews, the other of
Gentiles, with exclusion of St. Paul's authority over St. Peter's, and St. C. 4.
S. 7. C. 4. S. 5.
Peter's over St. Paul's Congregation: Even SO St. Irenaeus says, That they built
the Church there; St. Epiphanius, That they were Apostles and Bishops there,
etc. The Reader may perceive the fitness of the rest, by applying them at his
leisure. Only, ere I take my leave of these Testimonies, I would gladly learn
of the Doctor, why, in his preamble to them, he maintains a distinction of
Churches belonging to St. Peter and St. Paul, and, then brings in St. Prosper
with a So, to witness it; whereas himself in the nineteenth Section of this
very Chapter makes the same St. Prosper testify the quite contrary, and a
promiscuous Jurisdiction over the Gentiles, saying expressly, That Peter and
Paul at Rome, Gentium Ecclesiam Sacrarunt, consecrated the Church of the
Gentiles.

Were ever such mistakes incident to any other man, as are natural to this
Doctor? But it seems he wants a good memory, a necessary qualification for him
that says any thing at random, without ground, authority, or reason, to
maintain a false cause; or rather, indeed foreseeing the danger, he made the
Testimony whisper softly in English, lest it might be taken notice of;
translating Ecclesia Gentium, The Church of the Nations; because the word (
Gentiles) would be too much reflected on, being that which throughout this
whole Chapter he has absolutely interdicted St. Peter to have any thing to do
with. Alas poor man!

SECT* 11:
The Examination of Dr. Hammonds Irrefragable Evidence, and other silent
Testimonies produced by him.

BUt now we are come to his EVIDENCE of EVIDENCES, the Seals of the Popes, C.
4: S. 10:
which the Doctor* here calls an IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE. I know, the Reader will
expect some most express and unavoidable Testimony out of some ancient Writer,
beyond all exception, and of the first Class, witnessing, as the Faith of that
Age, the contradistinction and contralimitation of St. Peter and St. Paul's
Jurisdiction. The Testimony is out of Matthew Paris, which I will transcribe
word by word, together with the Doctors Comment upon it. In the Bull of the
Pope stands the Image of St. Paul on the right hand of the Cross, which is
graven in the midst of the Seal, and the Image of St. Peter on the left. And
this only account (says the Doctor) given for St. Paul's having the nobler
place, Quia, etc. because he believed in Christ, without seeing him. (Here on
Earth) adds the Doctor, in a Parenthesis. Here is all that belongs to this
Testimony, transcribed to a word; without any more, either Explication or
Application to the matter before or after, than is here put down.

And now, for Gods sake, Reader, tell me what can thou discern here of St.
Peter's being C. 4. S. 5.
Apostle of the Jews only, and exclusively to the Gentiles, which may deserve
it should be called an IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE.

My eyes are dazel'd, it seems, with striving to see a thing at such an
unproportionable distance; for I can epsy nothing at all in it: Had the
Question between us been, Whether St. Paul believed on Christ without seeing
him, or no, it might have served to some purpose; but to our case it has no
imaginable relation. Yet this Eagle-ey'd Doctor, in the bare pictures of St.
Peter and St. Paul on a Seal, can discern clearly an IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE,
that their Authorities are exclusively-limited, St. Peter's to the Jews, St.
Paul's to the Gentiles; which none living could see without his colored and
insincere spectacles, to wit, blackest hatred and rancor against the Pope:
While he looks through these, any thing appears an IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE, which
may seem possible in his perverse imagination, to be detorted to the Popes
prejudice, and to wound him, though through the sides of St. Peter.

After this Testimony or IRREFRAGABLE C. 4. S. 10.
EVIDENCE follows immediately in the Doctor, And all this very agreeable to
Scripture, which only sets down St. Peter to be the Apostle of Circumcision,
(and of his being so at Rome (says he) we make no question.) What means his
All this? For neither in any Testimony, nor yet in the Popes Seal, is there any
the least expression of St. Peter's being only the Apostle of the Circumcision,
save in his own words only; yet he says, that all this, is in that point
agreeable to Scripture; it is then of his own words he means, which how
disconformable, and totally repugnant they are to Scripture, has already been
shown. Nor are they less dissonant in this very place to Sacred Writ; for
neither does the Scripture only set down Saint Peter, as Apostle of the
Circumcision, but James and John also. Gal. 2. 9. Nor is St. Peter any where
expressed as Apostle of only the Circumcision, but expressly particularized the
contrary, as has been manifested out of Acts the fifteenth and seventh. So as
that ONLY is your own forgery pined here to the Scripture, as before to your
too sober Testimonies. Neither your Authors then, nor Scripture, speak a word
of Saint Peter being at Rome the Apostle of the Jews only; The only proof of
it is your own unquestionable certainty of it expressed here, that of C. 4. S. 10.
his being at Rome you make no question; So that your only grounds and proofs
of your position is, WE MAKE NO QUESTION, and WE KNOW: And I here again confirm
my former promise to you, That if you can show me the least syllable, either in
Scripture or your other Testimonies, expressly and without the help of your ID
ESTS, and scruing deductions, restraining St. Peter's Jurisdiction to the Jews
only, and exclusively to the Gentiles, I will yield you the Laurel, and quit
the Controversy.

His twelfth Testimony (for his IRREFRAGABLE Ibid.
EVIDENCE from the Popes Seal, was the Eleventh) is brought in with another So.
So the Scripture affirms of St. Paul, that he preached at Rome in his own hired
house, receiving them which came unto him, Acts 28. 30. which the Doctor most
fitly applies to the Gentiles of the City, the Jews having solemnly (says he)
departe^ from him, Verse. 29. But looking into the Te^ I find no such word as
solemnly, which he, after his accustomed manner, pin^ to the Testimony nor any
sign of a solemnity of departure, bu^ rather the contrary, there being in that
plac^ no expressions, either of absolute relinquishing him, nor pertinacity,
nor contempt; but only that after he had spoken, They departed and h^ much
discourse or debate amongst themselves; which is rather a sign of hoveringness
and unsetledness in the business, not indisposing them t^ a return, then of a
fixed and solemn rejectio^ of his society; and rather a solemn dispute^ whether
they should return or no, than so solemn a departure as Master Hammond imagin^
Next, the Doctor might have seen in Acts 13* 46. both Paul and Barnabas tell
the Jews boldly* (says the Text) That they would turn to the Gentiles, and
depart more solemnly, shaking off the dust of their feet against them, Verse.
51. Another manner of parting then this was, and yet many times afterward did
they preach to the Jews, notwithstanding their so solemn departure. Lastly,
What became of the Jews which (a^ is manifest in this eight and twentieth
Chapter and twenty fourth verse) were converted by St. Paul? Must they
necessarily quite fall ou^ with St. Paul, and never see him more, because he
had persuaded them to believe in Christ. Yet the Doctor upon authority only of
the word solemnly, which was of his own coining, thinks he has evidenced that
St. Paul at Rome treated with none but Gentiles; the Text it self not admitting
so much as a probability of it. But all is good Corn that the Doctors Mill
grinds.

His fourteenth Testimony is out of St. Ignatius; I will first cite the words
as I find them in the Author, in the place quoted by him, and then let you
hear the Doctors Comment upon them. (...) (says St. Ignatius) (...) Ignat. ep.
ad Trall.
(...). What are Deacons, but imitators of the Heavenly Powers, exhibiting to
him (the Bishop) a pure and blameless Ministry; as holy Stephen did to blessed
James; Timothy and Linus to Paul; Anacletus and Clement to Peter. This is all.

And now, good Reader, (pardon me, that I am forced to trouble thee so often,)
I entreat thee, as thou love truth and honesty, to take this Testimony and
sift it well over and over, and then give in thy verdict, what thou can
discover in it, which, in the most far fetched construction, can be said to
evidence, That St. Peter was only over the Jews, and St. Paul over the
Gentiles. Here to an ordinary eye, nothing seems to be said, but only that St.
Peter had such two Deacons, and St. Paul other two, which are there named;
wherefore, I say, sift it well, and that with the disquisitive exactness as men
do Riddles; and when thou have spent all thy industry in vain, I will bring
thee Doctor Hammond, who will cure both thine and my blindness by his
Exposition; beginning his eleventh Section thus, ACCORDINGLY (observe C. 4: S.
11.
the old transition) in Ignatius Ep. ad Trall. we read of Linus and Clement,
that one was St. Paul's, the other St. Peter's Deacon, both which* afterward
succeeded them in the Episcopal Chair; Linus being constituted Bishop of the
Gentile, Clement of the Jewish Christians there. And there he stops. Where all
that any way makes to the purpose, is subjoyned by the Doctor out of his own
head. There is no dealing with such a terrible adversary; who though he should
choose out his Testimonies blindfold, and at all-adventures, yet has such a
perilous faculty, that nothing can come wrong to him, but he will, ere he has
done with it, make it speak pat to his purpose.

What follows in this Section, is only a vainglorious conceit, that he has
found out a way to enucleate a difficulty in History concerning Linus and
Cletus, which all the Historians in the world never dreamed on before; and this
only (forsooth) out of his own wrong*laid erroneous grounds. But because the
Doctor says that this rare and unheard of discovery, or as he calls it, his
Scholion, is UNQUESTIONABLY true; as also because it is built only upon the
slippery sand of his own saying, already proved to be false, I will forbear to
vex him, or trouble my self unnecessarily by vouchsasing it any farther confute.

His twelfth Section proceeding upon the C. 4. S. 12.
grounds of his own Scholion, lately brought to light, to teach the world new
History, never heard of before, tells us, That in Pope Clemens the Union of the
Jewish and Gentile Congregations was first made, and not in St. Peter. So that
the Doctor first, upon his own giddy imagination, ^ancied them distinct, and
now (because he saw no more but one Bishop succeed in the Roman Chair) fancies
them united, without any word from History to countenance the former, or any
thing but his own Scholion to make good the latter. And surely it were very
strange that whereas the difficulty about the succession of Clemens, Ignat.
Epist. ad Mariam Cassobil. Tert. l. 3. carm. in Marc. Hieron. in Isa. 52. and
l. de Script. Eccles. in Clem.
was so ventilated, and the opinions so various amongst the ancient Fathers,
Ignatius, Tertullian, Jerome, etc. no man could ever understand the business
aright, till this happy age in which Dr. Hammond was born; whose Glowworm
fancy evidenced more then all the former lights of the Church could discover.
Many evasions they found out to solve the difficulty; As that Anacletus and
Cletus were the same; that Clemens (who (as Tertullian says) ^ate Tert-de
Praescript. c. 32. Epiph. Haer. 27. Ruffin. Praef. lib. Praecognit.
the fourth, and yet was ordained by St. Peter) refused the Office till the
successive death of Linus and Cletus: to which solution recur S. Epiphanius,
Ruffinus, etc. but none ever dreamed of Dr. Hammonds facile all-solving
Scholion, C. 4. S. 11.
That Linus was the first Bishop of the Gentile-Christians after S. Paul;
Clemens the first of the Jewish after St. Peter; which had been very obvious to
those that lived so near those times; but the reason why they did not, is
evident, because they never dreamed of a distinction of Jewish and Gentile
Church and Bishops, whereas the Doctor dreams of nothing else. The Fathers and
ancient Writers were (alas) in a great mistake, imagining, that all the
endeavors of the Apostles (as far as they could without scandalizing either
part) tended to reduce both the Jews and Gentiles to Unity and Uniformity in
one Church, and to unite them in him whom they taught and preached to be the
Head* Cornerstone Christ Jesus, in whom is no distinction of Jews and Gentiles,
till one Mr. Hammond, a Protestant Minister, came with his Scholions and Id
ests, to teach them contrary doctrine.

In the beginning of the thirteenth Section, C. 4. S. 13.
he affirms stoutly, That for another great part of the world it is manifest,
that St. Peter had never to do, either mediately or immediately in the planting
and governing of it. If it be so manifest (Master Hammond) it had been easier
for you to make it manifest to us; and was requisite you should, it being your
proper task; otherwise to cry it is manifest, and yet bring nothing to prove
it, is as much as to say, It is manifest, because I fancy it so. But as before
you brought the invincible Testimonies of WE KNOW and WE MAKE NO QUESTION, for
EVIDENCES, so now only with an authentic IT IS MANIFEST, you think the deed
done, and your cause evinced.

In his fourteenth Section, he tells us, That St. John had the dignity of place
before all others in Christ's life time, even before St. Peter himself. This he
proves plainly (he says) from his style of beloved Disciple, and leaning on
Christ's breast at Supper. As if, because Jacob loved Joseph more then all his
other Brethren, and therefore out of particular favor might have let him lean
on his breast at Supper, it must needs mean plainly, that young Joseph was the
highest of his Brethren in dignity, had due to him the birthright and
inheritance, etc. And who sees not, that the posture of leaning on Christ's
breast at Supper, was not an orderly and ordinary manner of sitting, but only a
peculiar grace and familiarity used toward him by his Lord; yet the Doctor is
certain of it, and for more security gives us a gallant instance, That leaning
on Christ's breast, signifies the first place next to Christ, as being in
Abraham's bosom, plainly signifies (says this All-explaining Doctor) being in
dignity of place next to the Father of the Faithful: From which instance of
his, if true, it follows, that Lazarus, who was in Abraham's bosom, was above
all the Patriarchs and Prophets except Abraham; as also, that none was in
Abraham's bosom except Lazarus only; since there can be no more NEXTS but one.
But it is no wonder to see the Doctor trip now, who has stumbled, nay fallen
down flat on all-four so often.

In the rest of this Paragraph, he tells us, That the Jews in the Lydian Asia
were St. John's peculiar Province; in the next, that the Gentiles there were St.
Paul's; and when he has done, destroys both the one, and the other, with a
Testimony out of St. Chrysostom concerning St. C. 4. S. 15.
Paul, which says that (...); A whole entire Nation, that of Asia was entrusted
to him. To which join what is manifest all over in the Acts that St. Paul
preached to the Jews in Asia, it is palpable that this Testimony affirms St.
Paul to have had Jurisdiction over all in Asia, both Jews and Gentiles.

Again, since the Doctors ground^ make the Jurisdictions of the Apostles
exclusive to one C* 4. S* 5.
another, and this place tells us, that the whole entire Nation of Asia was
under St. Paul, it must follow out of his doctrine of Exclusive Jurisdiction,
that poor St. John had not so much as the place of a Parish Priest allowed him
of his own, but what he was beholding to St. Paul for. What an unpardonable
blindness was this to prove St. Paul over the Gentiles only, by a Testimony
which entitles him to the whole entire Nation?

SECT. 12.
Another dumb show of Dr. Hammonds Testimonies, to prove St. Peter over the
Jews only.

AFter such invincible Testimonies alleged* C. 4. S. 16.
the Doctor begins to triumph, and tells us, That we cannot say any thing in
any degree probable for St. Peter's Universal Pastorship over the Churches in
the Lydian Asia. And the reason he gives, is because they were so early famous,
as that Christ honored them with an Epistle in the Revelations. It must be a
wonderful acuteness in Logic, which can make this conclude; Christ wrote an
Epistle to those Churches, therefore St. Peter had nothing to do with them: As
if the same reason did not as well exclude all the rest of the Apostles as St.
Peter from their Jurisdiction. But the Doctor says they were early famous; I
ask him, were they earlier than our Saviors choosing twelve Apostles, and Simon
Peter the first? if not, their earliness will not hurt us, nor help you.

His next two demands concerning St. John's and St. Paul's Jurisdiction there,
are already answered out of his own Testimony from St. Chrysostom. It follows,
Does not ^t. Paul give him (meaning Timothy) full instructions, and such as no
other Apostle could countermand or interpose in them, leaving no other Appeal,
nor place of Application for farther directions, save Only to himself, when he
shall come to him. And then to make the Reader believe, that all this is
Scripture, he quotes for it immediately, 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15.

Doctor, Doctor, play fair above board. In the place you quote, there is not
one word of all this long rabble, but the bare word Come, as is evident even in
your own translation, where I find it thus. These things write I unto thee,
hoping to come unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou may know,
how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God, the pillar and ground
of truth. Where, in the fifteenth Verse there is nothing at all of this
rambling story, which the Doctor talks of; in the fourteenth Verse, only the
word Come: So as out of this seemingly-barren Monosyllable Come, the Doctor
has miraculously caused a fruitful harvest of Testimonies arise for his
purpose; to wit, That St. Paul gave him such instructions, as NO OTHER APOSTLE
COULD COUNTERMAND OR INTERPOSE IN THEM, that he left NO APPEAL or place of
Application for further directions, save ONLY TO HIMSELF, etc. Where are all
those quarrelling and exceptive terms? But the Doctor seems willing not only
to limit the Apostles Jurisdictions, but also to set them together by the ears;
as if they were jealous, that their fellow Apostles, like usurping competitors,
would intrude into their right, and therefore give express charge to debar
their ambition from putting their Sickl^ into another man's Harvest. Good Mr.
Hammond, let us have no more of these insincere dealings. Let the restrictive
and exclusive words, which only make for your purpose, be the witnesses, not
yours; at least put them down with that distinction, as may easily be
discerned; and do not, after a company of your own expressions, mainly
prejudicial to the Controversy, immediately cite a place of Sacred Writ,
without producing the words, and so gull the Reader to to believe, That all
which went before, is perfect and pure Scripture. Whereas, indeed scarce so
much as a blank Monosyllable is found in the Testimony to countenance your
alleging it. But this is your solemn method all over your Book.

His next Argument is, that St. Paul gave C. 4. S. 16.
Commission to Timothy without St. Peter. And who doubts, but that each Apostle
might by his own single power, delegate and constitute whom he pleased, and
where he pleased in any place of the world. I perceive by this whole Chapter,
that the Doctor understands not the question, or at least could not have made a
Book, without counterfeiting, not to understand it. We voluntarily yield him,
that each Apostle had an Apostolical Commission over the whole world; and yet
fear no prejudice should hence arise to St. Peter's Primacy, amongst the rest of
the Apostles. Had Master Hammond known this, it might have saved him all that
pitiful puzzle in making good his first Evidence, That St. Peter was over the
Jews only, by patching those old garments of ancient Testimonies with the new
pieces of his self-woven Additions.

This Concession of ours, and mistake of his; shows the next Paragraph, which
harps upon the same string, to wit, That St. Paul constituted C. 4. S. 17.
Titus Primate in Creet, to be nothing to the purpose: And I observe, That the
Doctor (to give him his due) has very good luck in this, That he proves those
things pretty plainly, which none ever denied.

After this he tells us, That Simeon Metaphrastes C. 4. S. 18*
affirms St. Peter to have been in Britanny sometime, and baptized many into
the Faith of Christ, and constituted Churches, ordaining Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons in the twelfth year of Nero. How now, Doctor, what will become of
your excluding St. Peter from any Authority over the Gentiles, if this
Testimony be true; were not all the ancient Britains, at that time Heathens or
Gentiles? Alas no; we and all antiquity were mistaken, the Doctor tells us.
That in all reason it must be extended no farther then St. Peter's line, as he
was Apostle of the Circumcision, ID EST, (says he) to the Jews which might at
that time ^e dispersed here* So as though the story were true, yet the Doctor
has ever a help at maw; and rather then St. Peter shall touch a Gentile, he
will fancy strongly, that there were I cannot tell, how many Diocesses of Jews
in England (since there must be several Diocesses, where there are several
Bishops) for St. Peter to convert and govern. So that Britain must swarm with
Jews, Which might have been (says this evidencing Doctor) dispersed there; and
this without any authority, or likelihood, but only because Master Hammond and
his ID ESTS say it.

In the last place, the Doctor concludes out C. 4. S. 19.
of his former laid grounds, that is, out of his (...), Judas his going to
Hell, out of his own ID ESTS, WE KNOW, IT IS MANIFEST, WE MAKE NO QUESTION; out
of his clasping together very unlike, and disaccording Testimonies to his own
voluntary Assertions with the Hooks and Eyes of SO, and ACCORDINGLY; but most
of all out of the Papers of his own Additions, pined before and behind the
too-bashful proofs. Out of these grounds, I say, without so much as one word in
any Testimony, either out of Scripture, Fathers, or History, restraining the
Commission of St. Peter to the Jews only, he concludes, That that Apostle
could not be Universal Pastor of the Church. This done, he hooks in with
another ACCORDINGLY a Testimony of St. Prospers, which calls them Heretics,
who depart from the Communion of Christ, and his Apostles (in the plural) says
the Doctor; and then reckons up promiscuously such and such Apostles, founding
such and such Churches. What follows hence against St. Peter's authority? This
Testimony seems also something aenigmatical, and requires Lynxe's eyes, or the
Doctors far-seeing and allpenetrating Optic to look through the thick rind of
it; which he willingly lends you in these words. Where, as the Church had the
several Apostles for their Founders (and those Independent one from the other)
so the unity from which Heretics and Schismatics are said to depart, IS SAID
to have been founded EQUALLY in each of them, in John, James, and Andrew as
well as in St. Peter. The word where, and is said, would almost persuade the
Reader, that all that follows is in the Testimony, but nothing is there, or any
where else, That the Apostles were independent of each other; nor, that this
unity was founded equally in each of them; nor in the rest as well as St.
Peter: But all these his Doctorship huddles together of his own head. All the
shadow of proof, one can have a glimpse of from this place, is, That the
Apostles are here named promiscuously, and without distinction, and that
therefore all were equal: Which, as it is only a Negative and nonconcluding
Argument to say, That no distinction is here mentioned, therefore there was
none; so, were the Conclusion admitted as Consequent, it makes as much against
Christ, as against St. Peter: For he is also named jointly with his Apostles,
as those whose joynt-communion Heretics leave. So as if the mentioning of
several persons indifferently together without distinction of superiority,
argue an equality in their Authorities, the Doctors Logic may with the same
reason infer, That Christ and his Apostles were independent of one another;
that the unity from which Schismatics depart is founded EQUALLY in them, in
John, James, Andrew, AS WELL as Christ, etc.

And this may serve for a sample of the Doctors solidness in reasoning.

Yet, it is some sign of wit, if one can do himself no good, at least to do
himself no hurt; but the Doctor by this very Testimony, which made nothing at
all for him, has most expressly undone all his former work, even beyond the help
of an ID EST; that is, beyond all hopes of remedy. For whereas he had bent all
his endeavors to prove, that some Apostles had the Jews only for their
Province, and had more especially insisted for nine whole Paragraphs together,
in limiting St. Peter's authority to the Jews, no body knows where; as likewise
St. James his to the Jews in Judea, Section six, and St. John's to the Jews of
Asia, Section fourteen.

This Testimony by himself here alleged, expressly manifests a jurisdiction
over the Gentiles, in all the before-limited Apostles; nay, even in all the
rest* The words are these, as himself cites them. In ipsa Jerusalem Jacobus,
Joannes apud Ephesum, Andraeas and caeteri per totam Asiam, Petrus and Paulus
Apostoli in urbe Roma GENTIUM ECCLESIAM pacatam unamque posteris tradentes, ex
Dominica pactione sacrarunt. James in Jerusalem, John at Ephesus, Andrew and
the rest of the Apostles throughout all Asia, Peter and Paul at Rome
consecrated the Church of the GENTILES, etc. Where, though the Doctor would
blind the Reader with Englishing GENTIUM ECCLESIAM, The Church of the Nations;
yet it is most notorious, That that word in the plural, denotes particularly
the Gentiles in opposition and contradistinction to the Jews; as is evident,
Matthew. 10. 5. In viam Gentium ne abieritis, etc. Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, but rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. The same is
manifest, Matthew. 1. 4, 15. and 6. 32. and 10. 18. and 12. 21. Mark 10. 33. Luke
2. 32. Acts 1. 4, 25. and 11. 1. and in almost innumerable other places, both
in the Old and New Testament. Thus the Doctor by this his strongest Testimony
which he had laid up in store to conclude with a plaudite his foregoing proofs,
has quite invalidated all the rest; and so ha^ brought his EVIDENCES at length
to a fair market, which as before they were shown to be but feeble props to
support his partition wall of Schism, which he is about repairing, and daubing,
or playstering over; so now by an unluckily-lavish Testimony of St. Prospers,
which told more then he would have had it, he has made clean-work, and quite
razed down his former crazy tottering structure; and that from, the very
foundation, ID ESTS, and all.

SECT. 13.
Doctor Hammonds second General Evidence against St. Peter's Supremacy, from the
Donation of the Keys, found to be obscurer then the former.

THe second quarrel the Doctor has against C. 4. S. 20:
St. Peter, which he calls his second Evidence is, That no power of the Keys
was given especially to St. Peter, and therefore no Supremacy. But before we
come to scan the Doctors pretended Evidences, it were not amiss to advertise
the Reader first, what an Evidence is; that this notion being set, as it were,
in the confines and midway between the past and following proofs, he may at
once, and with a readier glance of his judgment, examine the strength and
validity, both of those the Doctor has already produced, and those he shall
produce for the future. An EVIDENCE therefore, is that which is so clear and
manifest a representation of a thing to the eye of Reason, as unless we should
with a wilful blindness shut those discerning powers, it is impossible not to
see it. This clear and undeniable manifestation in Arguments drawn from Reason,
must be both of the verity of the promises in themselves, and also of the
necessary and immediate sequel of the Conclusion out of the Premises, thus
evidenced; and if Evidence in either of these be wanting, then that Argument
cannot in true Reason be styled an EVIDENCE. But now a proof from Authority is
then called an Evidence, when both the Testimony it self is authentic beyond
dispute, and also the words alleged so directly expressing the thing to be
proved, that they need no Additions, nor Explications to bring them home to the
matter, but are of themselves full, ample, and clear, nor possible without
manifest wresting to bear any other interpretation; and, in a word, such as the
alleager himself (were he to express his own thoughts in the present
Controversy) would make choice of to use. This presupposed as a certain rule
(as no man of Reason can or will deny it) both to judge the Doctors former
Evidences by, and also these in question, we will now fall to examine them.

But first we charge the Doctor with prevaricating against his pretended
promise: For whereas he begins as bearing us in hand he would bring Evidence,
that St. Peter had not the Keys given to him in particular, he brings not one
express proof for the Negative, but goes about only to solve our Testimonies
for the Affirmative; which is not to produce Evidences of his own, but to
endeavor an answer to our strong Allegations for it: And this is a quite
different thing; for he who undertakes to Evidence, sustains the part of the
Opponent; but he who strives to evade another objected Testimonies, manages
the part of the Defendant; whose offices (as appears) are opposite and
contradistinct. Neither indeed is this to bring Evidence, but rather Obscurity;
for though he should obtain his purpose, he can only show by this means, that
such or such Arguments do not conclude, but not that the thing it self is
untrue; the evidence of which must depend on the strength of the grounds and
goodness of the deductions, out of which and by which, the contrary is inferred.

Secondly, We charge him with a palpable injuriousness in making the answering
our Testimonies out of Scripture, the sum of his first proofs, and yet omitting
our chiefest, strongest, and most important place of all, John 21. 15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, We charge him with manifest calumniating, in saying, We pretend this
Donation of the Keys, as a peculiarity, and enclosure of St. Peter, and
impugning it accordingly; whereas he cannot be ignorant, that the Catholic
Church holds no such thing, but that each Apostle enjoyed an Universal
Commission of Jurisdiction, and Power to bind and loose; which yet debars not
St. Peter from being the Head of them, and having an especial Authority or
Primacy. These things premised, to show the Doctors false manner of proceeding,
we buckle close to the Question.

The first place which the Doctor cites, as alleged C. 4. S. 20.
by us for the particular Donation of the Keys to St. Peter in particular, is
Matthew. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven. Which the
Doctor acknowledges a promise to St. Peter; yet thinks to defeat it with other
two places, John 20. 21. and Matthew. 28. 19. where they are delivered in common,
and in the plural to them all. Indeed, if we pretended out of the former
Testimony a peculiarity and enclosure of St. Peter, so that he only, and not
the others, had power to bind and loose, then the Doctor had by the following
places extending it to all, concluded strongly against us. But we never
pretended any such thing; so that the Doctors own calumny is the only ground
of inferring his Conclusion, and solving the objected Testimony.

All therefore that we intend to deduce out of this place in St. Matthew, is,
That (whether those words* be the Instrument of Christ's Donation, as the Doctor
calls it, or no, yet) something was said to St. Peter, in particular, and by
name, which was not said to any other Apostle in particular, and by name, as is
most undeniably evident: For it was never said to James, John, Philip, etc. in
particular by name, and in the singular, I will give thee the Keys, much less
after such a solemn manner, as was to St. Peter.

First, With a particular blessing and encomium of him, Blessed art thou (in
the singular) Simon Bar*jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. Then, alluding to his name in
particular: And I say unto thee (again the singular) that Tu es Petrus, etc:
Thou art Peter, and, super hanc Petram, upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Then follows, And I will
give unto thee (still in the singular) the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
Necessarily therefore it must be granted, That something was said to St. Peter
in particular, and that solemnly and upon particular occasion sprung from St.
Peter's own person, Verse. 16. which was not said to any other Apostle in
particular.

And, since this saying was a promise, it follows, That a promise of some thing
was made to St. Peter in particular: Wherefore, seeing this thing promised was
the giving the Keys of Heaven, it follows, that the promise of giving the Keys
of Heaven was made to St. Peter in particular: Neither will the Doctors
proving, that they were given afterward in common to the rest, prejudice this
at all; for there is no difficulty, but the same thing may be given to many in
common, and yet to some one of those many in a more particular manner.

Now then, this promise being made not only to all the Apostles in general,
but also to St. Peter in particular; it is most consonant to reason, and worthy
our Savior, not only to perform his promise, but also to perform it according
to the tenor and manner in which he promised: But the Doctor cannot or will not
find any performance in particular, but wholly omits it (and indeed it was
dangerous, for it was our best and most express Testimony) and instead of it,
produces only a performance to them all in general. Whereas John 21. 15, 16,
17. he might have seen it expressly recommended and encharged upon St. Peter
particularly and by name once, twice, thrice; with as many repetitions of his
name particularizing him over and over Feed my Lambs; Feed my sheep, feed my
sheep. And least such an one as Mr. Hammond should after so many
expresly-peculiar designations, doubt yet there might be an equality, our B.
Savior asks St. Peter, Amas me plus his, Do thou love me more then these;
which manifestly puts a particularity, comparison, and inequality in Saint
Peter from and above the rest of the Apostles in the interrogatory; and
therefore the inference upon its resolution ( Feed my sheep) encharged upon him
as an argument of this greater love, and the cause of this trust, must in good
consequence of reason be unequal, and particular in Saint Peter, in comparison
of the other Apostles.

These and some others are the Testimonies from Scripture, which (to speak with
the least) every impartial man will see, that even taken in themselves they
sound much to our advantage, and the prejudice of our Adversaries; but
interpreted by the Catholic Church, according to her never-erring rule of
Faith, give us an infallible certainty, that they express a Primacy in St.
Peter, whatever the Doctors private judgment imagines or ghesses to the
contrary. In a word, the result of all Dr. Hammonds Answer is, That our Savior
promised indeed in particular, but did not perform as he had promised, that is
particularly, but in common only: That is, by such a solemn and singularly
applied promise, he made good St. Peter expect great matters, (as any man in
reason would, by such a carriage) and then, when it came to performance, quite
deluded his expectation, giving him no more then the rest of his fellows*

It follows in the Doctor. The applying the C. 4. S. 21.
words particularly to Saint Peter has one special energy in it, and
concludes, That the Ecclesiastical power of Economy or Stewardship in Christ's
house (of which the Keys are the token, Isa. 22. 21.) belongs to single
persons, such as St. Peter was, and not to Consistories or Assemblies, That
whatsoever St. Peter acted by virtue of Christ's power thus promised, he should
be fully able to act himself, without the conjunction of any other; and that
what he thus did (clave non errante) no one or more men on Earth could rescind
without him* which is a just ground of placing the power Ecclesiastical in the
Prelate, not in the Presbytery, etc. This is Master Hammonds Corollary out of
the former Texts, out of which (ploughing with our Heiser) he concludes against
the Presbyterians.

But first since those words are particularly applied to St. Peter, all that is
implied in those words are particularly also appliable to him; and this being
the Donation of the Keys; it follows, That the Donation of the Keys, and
whatever is consequent out of that Donation, or signified by those Keys, is
particularly applied to him; but the Keys are the token (says the Doctor) of
Ecclesiastical Economy or Stewardship in Christ's house. This Office therefore
must be particularly applied to St. Peter; and seeing those words were no
otherwise particularly applied to St. Peter, then by our Saviors speaking them
to him in the singular, and in a singular manner, (as he did) it follows, That
our Savior told St. Peter in the singular, and in a singular manner that he
should be steward of his house. Also, since all particularizing is a kind of
exception from an universality or community, and the universality or community
before whom our Savior spoke it, and from whom any kind of exception could be
imagined to be there made, was the other Apostles, it follows, That St. Peter
was particularized out of that community for the office of Steward in Christ's
house.

Again, since the Keys are the token (as the Doctor proves) of the
Ecclesiastical Economy and Stewardship in Christ's house, and, however we read
that the effect of the Keys, that is, power of binding and loosing, was given
to others, yet it is no where expressed in Scripture, that the Keys themselves,
the badge of that Office, were given to the rest even in common, (for its no
where read ^^bis dabo claves) it follows manifestly, That if our Savior kept
his word to St. Peter, since he promised him the signal token of that Office of
Steward, he performed it to him making him Steward of his house, and by the
delivery of the Keys* installing him in that charge; so as only St. Peter was
installed; and if the Doctor will needs contend the rest were, he must confess
withal, that he has no ground for it, since he will never read either of such
a promise or performance made by our Savior, that he would give the Keys
themselves, which only are the badge of that Function to any of the rest.

Thirdly, Since the giving the Keys is particularly applied to St. Peter, and
that those Keys are a token of an Economy or Stewardship in Christ's house, it
follows, the Apostles being a part of Christ's house, or his Church, that Saint
Peter was constituted Ecclesiastical Steward over them.

Fourthly, The Doctors inference from the particular Application of these words
to St. Peter, That the Stewardship belongs to single persons, and not to
Consistories and Assemblies. If he intend to deduce hence a power in all the
rest of the Apostles, and all other Prelates, superior to their Assemblies or
Consistories, is something scrued and far-fetched; whereas if the words be
applied to infer, That one was made Steward or Superior in the Consistory or
Assembly of the Apostles, they are plain and obvious, the present circumstances
making that Explication natural.

Lastly, Saint Peter being thus constituted Steward in Christ's house, all that
follows in the Doctor (though otherwise meant) runs on very currantly, and upon
his grounds; to wit, That whatsoever St. Peter acted by virtue of Christ's power
thus promised, he should be fully able to act himself without the conjunction
of any other, and that what he thus did (clave non errante) no one or more men
on Earth could rescind without him. Thus has Doctor Hammond, while he disputes
against his Brother Presbyters, fallen into a sudden fit of Popery, and at
unawares laid grounds for a greater Authority in the Pope, then many Papists
will grant him. But it is only a fit; he will recover, I doubt not speed^ly,
as soon he begins to combat us afresh.

But now (as I said) the Scene is changed; The Presbyterian being routed by our
weapons, that the words were spoken particularly to St. Peter, he throws them
away; affirming here page 88. most shamelesly and expressly against Scripture,
alleged by himself, (which named St. Peter in particular, and no other in
particular) That this power was as distinctly promised to each single Apostle,
as to St. Peter, alleages for his first Evidence the words of Scripture, Matthew.
18. 18. which he says are most clear for that purpose. But looking into the
Text, I find it only spoken in common, and general to all the Apostles; not a
word particularizing each single Apostle* and distinctly (as the Doctor would
have it) which yet was done to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16. 19.

His second most clear proof, is introduced with the old ACCORDINGLY thus; And
ACCORDINGLY, Matthew. 19. the promise is again made of twelve Thrones for each to
sit on to judge, ID EST, (says the Doctor) to rule or preside in the Church.
Well done, Doctor; give you but your own proper weapon of ID EST, in weilding
which you have a mavelous dexterity* and I Will lay an hundred crowns on your
head against the best disputant in Christendom. All the world (as far as I ever
heard) except this Doctor, understands the place as meant of our Saviors
coming to judgment at the Resurrection, and the Apostles sitting with him to
judge. But the Doctor with the help of an ID EST, has made the day of Judgment
come in the Apostles time, turned judge into preside; and (...), a Throne, or
Judgment seat into Cathedra, an Episcepal Chair or See.

His third proof is a dumb Negative, That the Holy Ghost descended on all the
Apostles in fire, without any peculiar mark allowed* to St. Peter. Which
reduced into form, mutters out thus much, That St. Peter had no peculiar mark
of fire, Ergo, (concludes the Doctor) He was not head of the Apostles. Where
first I would ask the Doctor, how he knows there was no peculiar mark allowed
St. Peter. He was not there, I suppose, to see, and there is no History, either
sacred or profane, that expresses the contrary. Next, if we may judge by
exterior actions, and may believe, That out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, then perhaps the Doctor may receive some satisfaction in this
point also, that St. Peter had in a more peculiar manner the Holy Ghost: For it
was he that first burst out into that Heavenly Sermon which converted three
thousand. But nothing will serve the Doctors curiosity, except a greater tongue
of fire; if he have not that, it is most clear, he is no head of the Apostles.
What a wise man is he to think St. Peter could not be chief Pastor of the
Church, but God must needs be bound to watch all occasions, to manifest it by a
particular miracle.

His fourth is from these words, And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
In the name of Wonder, what can be deduced from this place against St. Peter's
Primacy! The Doctor will manifest it plainly; And so (says he) the promise of
the spirit EQUALLY performed to all. Suppose it were equally; what follows
thence? Therefore St. Peter not chief of the Apostles? As if none could be
higher in dignity, but he must necessarily have more of the Holy Ghost in him.
This Reason then, you see, is so shallow, that even a child may foard it; but
his consequence is still shallower, inferring from their being full of the Holy
Ghost, that they had it equally. As if each could not be full according to
their diverse capacities, and yet receive it in a very unequal degree. Our
Savior ( Luke 4. 1*) is said to be full of the Holy Ghost, so is Barnabas,
Acts 11. 24. yet* as I hope, the Doctor will not say, Barnabas had the Holy
Ghost equally with our Savior; So, all the Saints in Heaven are full of Glory,
yet differ as one Star from another in the degrees of that Glory, distributed
to them according to the measure of their several capacities. Which puts me in
mind of a story of a Plough-man, who dining with his fellowrusticks, when his
companions strove to get the bigger Eggs, he indifferently chose the lesser;
affirming, That all were equal: For which, when he was laughed at, he defended
himself with this (as he thought) serious Reason, That the little Eggs had as
much meat in them, as they could hold, and the great ones had no more; and
therefore there was no difference between them. Surely the Doctor heard this
dispute, stole the Argument; and now infers here from all, being full of the
Holy Ghost, that all had it equally.

The Testimonies you allege out of the Fathers, C. 4. S. 21.
That the power of the Keys was conforred on all the Apostles; that from the
giving St. Peter tho Keys, the continual successions of Bishops flows; that the
Church is built upon the Bishops, etc. We allow of to a tittle, and charge it
upon you, at either a pitiful ignorance, or a malicious calumny, to pretend by
objecting those, that we build not the Church upon Bishops in the plural, nor
allow any authority to them, but to the Pope only; whereas you cannot but know
how great Authority we give to Councils (consisting of Bishops) insomuch, as it
is a Schooldispute amongst our Writers, Whether the Pope or the Council be of
higher Authority. Neither do the Testimonies of Bishops ( in the plural) in the
least manner touch us; there being not one word in them, excluding the Pope.
Nay, rather they make for us; for the Church being founded on Apostles and
Bishops, prejudices not St. Peter and his Successors to be the chiefest: And if
so, then the Church is built most chiefly, and especially on St. Peter and his
Successors, which is all we Catholics say; and not on them only; which he
first calumniates us with, and then dreamingly impugns; ending his two and
twentieth Paragraph with a Testimony out of St. Basil, who calls Episcopacy,
The Presidency of the Apostles; the very same (adds the Doctor) That Christ
bestowed upon all, and not only on one of them; as if we held there were but
one Apostle, or else that those Bishops who succeeded the rest of the Apostles,
and were constituted by them, were not truly and properly Bishops.

It follows in the next Section. By all which, that is, by your omitting our
best proof from Scripture, and answering the weakest; by supposing a calumny;
by your mistake of twelve Thrones; by St. Peter's having no greater a tongue of
fire, and all the Apostles being full of the Holy Ghost; by the Testimonies of
Fathers, naming Bishops and Apostles in the plural, our of which mere
plurality, he infers an equality of Authority. By all this, the Doctor says it
is evident again, That the Power which Christ's Commission instated on St.
Peter, was in like manner entrusted to every other single Apostle, as well as
to him, etc. Whereas he has not produced one syllable, expressing any
singularity used to any other single Apostle, as was to St. Peter; nor one
equalizing term, of as well, equally, etc. but what he adds himself: Though
these be the only expressions can serve him, and which he pretends to here, as
already produced; and by producing them to have made the matter Evident.

But the Doctor being by this time pumped dry of his own Evidences, betakes
himself to his former method of answering our Arguments, or (as he calls it) to
evacuate them. And what Argument think you will he choose to evacuate; but that
which is drawn from the word (...); and how will he evacuate it, but first from
Homers Iliads, next from the Revelations. But indeed he puts our Argument so
weakly, or rather not at all; that is, he swallows our proof so glibly, and yet
evacuates it so groaningly, that it were charity in some good body to ease him
in this his greatest extremity. The sum of his solution of I cannot tell what
(for he urges no Argument of ours, but only puts down the bare word (...),)
seems to be this, That (...) is the same with (...), and therefore signifies
vulgarly a Stone, and in Homers Iliads is applied to denote an huge loggerly
Stone like a Millstone ((...):) Next, this Stone by the Scripture must needs
be a foundation Stone; and there being Twelve foundation-stones named in the
Apocalypse, called there (...), it must follow, that (...) (which before was a
vulgar-stone) is now advanced to be (...), or a precious stone. Now follows his
first inference (as well as I can gather it) That all the twelve Apostles being
in like manner (and not St. Peter only and above the rest) styled
Foundation-stones; it is consequent hence, that all were equal. Where first the
Argument is again only Negative, to wit, that no distinction is there put,
therefore there was none: To make which inference good, he must first show
that, if there were any distinction, it must necessarily be expressed upon all
occasions. Next, it is a most pitiful piece of reason to persuade the Reader
from only a plurality, and naming twelve Apostles, that all were equal: As if
out of the very naming in the plural twelve Signs, Shires, Cities, or
Magistrates, it must necessarily follow out of the bare common name of Sign,
Magistrate, etc. given to each of them, that all were equal. Again, the Doctor
has quite overthrown his cause by arguing, That not only St. Peter, but the
rest also were called Foundation-stones; and therefore they were all equal:
Since, granting (as he does) that a Foundation-stone, and (...) being the same,
and only St. Peter having the name of (...), it follows in the Doctors
grounds, That he only, and, in good reason, that he more particularly should
be a Rock or Foundation-stone. Where note, that the Doctor would have all the
Apostles call Peter; for the name of (...) being given St. Peter, by our
Savior, for no other end but to signify he was a Rock, or (as the Doctor will
have it) a Foundation-stone, and every Apostle being according to Master
Hammond equally such, it follows, That they have all as good title to be called
Peter, as that Apostle, who alone (till Master Hammond writ,) had that
appellation.

It follows (to strengthen his former weak reason) And it being there in vision
APPARENT, that the wall of the City, Id est, of the Church, being measured
exactly, and found to be an hundred forty four, Id est, (says he) Twelve times
twelve cubits, It is evident, That that mensuration assigns an equal
proportion, whether of Power or Province, to all and every of the Apostles;
which is again a prejudice to the Universal Pastorship of any one of them. Thus
the Doctor, intends for an up-shot-Argument to evidence an equality in all the
Apostles by the equal division of this Wall. But I crave leave to ask the
Doctor, whether he be certain, that none of those precious Stones, which
equally made up this Wall, is richer then the rest. For the richness in things
of this nature, being more considerable, and more enhancing their value, then
the bulk and quantity; it follows* That the greater preciousness and luster
which manifests it self in one above another, may better claim a signification,
That that Apostle, who is represented by it, had an authority above the rest,
then the equal measure of the Wall can infer an equality; nay more, if there be
an equality in the bigness, and an inequality in the worth, there is no
evasion, but it must resemble a worthier person. In order to which, there comes
a congruous Argument to my mind; such, as if it were on the Doctors side, and
he had the managing of it, I know he would make it a MOST IRREFRAGABLE, and
UNQUESTIONABLE EVIDENCE: And, though Catholics* who understand the grounds of
their Faith, ^light such poor supports as a self-fancied Explication of the
obscurest part of Scripture (in which chiefly consists the Doctors talent in
evidencing) yet because perhaps he may fancy it stronger then twenty
demonstrations, and so it may come to do him much good, he shall have it very
willingly. Amongst these twelve precious Foundation-stones, denoting the twelve
Apostles, the Doctor will not deny the first to signify St. Peter, to whom, he
and his fellows, are content C. 8. S. 5.
at least, to grant from our Saviors words a priority of Order. This first
foundation then shadowing to us St. Peter, is here Chap. 21. 19. said to be a
Jasper; the self-same Stone whose luster shined in our Savior, Apoc. 4. 3. and
also in his Church, Apoc. 21. 11. Whence follows (would the Doctor triumphantly
cry out) as an IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE, that St. Peter only having the same
luster with our Savior, is like him in representation, and so only he
resembles him as his Vicegerent or Vicar: As also, that being the same Stone
the Church is made of, and the first of all the rest, it is unquestionably true
(would he say) that he is the first part of the Church, that is, her Head.
Under what luckless Constellation was Mr. Hammond born, to meddle with the
Foundation-stones in the Apocalypse, and not fore see this dangerous rub; which
makes him so far from evidencing against us thence, that the very place
objected, happens to be an Evidence against himself; I mean, such a kind of
proof, as he would call an Evidence.

And thus he concludes his fourth Chapter, containing the first substantial
part of his Book. In which, as I sincerely profess I have not found one word to
the purpose, that is, not one restrictive word of St. Peter's Universal
Pastorship, nor one express equalizing term of his power of the Keys to the
rest of the Apostles; so, I must confess withal, that I have both wearied my
own patience, in laying open such a gallimaufry of shallow impertinences; and,
I fear, my Reader also, who may think his time ill-employ'd in perusing the
confutation of so weak a Writer.

The Second Part.
Comprehending the Answers of the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Chapters.

SECT. 1.
Of the pretended Primogeniture of Antioch, and the Doctors mistake of the
Council of Chalcedon.

THis Champion of Schism having (as he thought) empal'd the Universal
Jurisdiction of St. Peter to the dispersed Jews only; proceeds, laying first
his own mistakes for his grounds, in this fifth Chapter to depose the Pope,
which he entitles thus, The Evidences from the Bishop of Romes succeeding Saint
Peter, examined; as he did the foregoing Chapter, The pretended Evidences of
the Romanists, etc. Where, first, he would persuade many good honest Readers,
that he had urged our Evidences home, and afterward salved them; whereas
indeed he only puts down a word or two of our bare tenet, and that not even as
we explicate it, much less as we evidence it.

Secondly, He would seem to intimate again, that, it belongs to us to evidence;
Let the Doctor know, the Churches Evidence is her long-and-quietly enjoyed
possession of the belief of Infallibility; in which, she was actually found
when his upstart and disobedient Forefathers, the first Reformers, went out
from her-Communion. POSSIDEO, QUIA POSSIDEO; OLIM POSSIDEO, PRIOR POSSIDEO, is
all the Evidence, and all the reason she is bound to give to her rebel-sons and
outlawed Subjects. So as it is your part to evidence, hers to hold and possess
her own, till you sufficiently, that is, demonstrably, evidence her title to be
unjust.

Thirdly, The Doctor is here also, as indeed generally every where, contrary to
himself, inscribing the Chapters, as answers to our Evidences, yet spending
almost the whole Chapters in producing pretended Evidences of his own; so
performing the quite contrary to what he promised. But this is nothing with him.

His first Paragraph says only, That St. Peter C. 5. S. 1.
having no Primacy, the Bishop of Rome his Successor, could consequently have
none. But because his Antecedent has already been dashed in pieces by my
Answer to his former Chapter, no Consequence can be built upon it, till he have
repaired his groundwork by a stronger Reply. Yet Mr. Hammond is so
self-conceitedly confident of the invincibleness of his former Chapter, that he
accounts this a work of Supererogation. Whereas, if to prove his first
Evidence, he has produced any one express Testimony, That St. Peter's
Jurisdiction was limited to the Jews only, which only was the thing in
question; or if to prove his second EVIDENCE, he has produced any one express
place to prove, That the Keys (though given to all) yet were not more
particularly given to St. Peter (which only is there the thing in question,) I
will quit the field, and yield, though not my cause, yet my own particular
conquered. But if he have not, what a vanity is it to brag, when he had said
nothing at all to the Controversy, that he has said all that is necessary,
nay, even supererogated, and said more then needs.

In this second Paragraph, the Doctor would evidence, That the Privileges
attending St. Peter's succession, belong rather to the Bishop of Antioch, then
of Rome. And this he endeavors by asking three Questions, to which I shall
answer in order.

First, he asks, Whether St. Peter did not as C. 5. S. 2.
truly plant a Church of Jewish believers at Antioch, and leave a Successor
Bishop there, as at Rome he is supposed to have done.

I answer, If you mean he planted a Church there of Jewish believers only, so
as he had no power over the Gentiles also, I absolutely deny it; and in your
last Chapter, your proper place to prove it in, you had not one word to bless
your self with, but what you added of your own. That he left a Successor Bishop
there. If you mean such an improperly called Successor, as both himself and St.
Paul left in many other places, that is, made some one a Bishop, and left him
to overlook and govern that Church, I easily grant; but if you mean such a
Successor as should succeed in the amplitude of Saint Peter's authority, so as
St. Peter should divest himself of his Primacy, and give it him, not carrying
it along with him to Rome, I deny he left there any such kind of Successor,
neither can there be the least shadow of Reason, why he should; nor is there
any Testimony or Ground that he did.

Your second Quere is, Whether this were not done by him, before ever he came
to Rome?

I answer, in the manner I have declared, doubtless he did.

Your third Quere is, Whether these two Concessions do not devolve all power
and jurisdiction on the Bishop of Antioch, St. Peter's Successor there, which by
that tenure and claim of Succession from St. Peter, can be pretended to by the
Bishop of Rome?

I answer, the first is not a Concession, unless first distinguished, as I
showed before; and the distinction given, intercepts the passage to his
Conclusion.

To manifest which the better, we may distinguish in St. Peter, resident at
Antioch, two diverse qualities of dignity: First, his particular care of that
Church, as private Bishop in that See: Secondly, his public office of Head of
the Church, in which, consists his Primacy. Now when he left that City and went
to Rome, he divested himself of the private care of that Church, and so it was
necessary he should substitute another in the charge of that private
Bishopric; but did not divest himself of the dignity of chief of the Apostles;
and so no pretense can be competent to his substitute in Antioch. This dignity
annexed to his person by our B. Savior, went along with him, whithersoever he
went, and remained with him living; so that only he who succeeded him dying
(the Bishop of Rome) could claim the inheritance of that sacred Dignity, which
nothing but his blessed Predecessors death could delegate unto him. At Rome he
died, and was by dying divested; where he was divested, there was necessary a
succession into the dignity, which he left, and was wanting by his death to the
whole Church: This was his Primacy. This therefore must be the title of his
truly called Successor there, and no pretense left for his substitute at
Antioch made in his life time.

Most vain then is the Doctors conceit of the primogeniture in Antioch, unless
he could prove St. Peter died there; in vain are his self-affirmed, and
onely-self-proved positions in his third Section, to this purpose. In vain his
assertion in the beginning of the fourth, That if Rome derived any authority
from the succession of St. Peter. Antioch, must for the same reason be
preferred before Alexandria; since St. Peter only constituted there a
Successor to himself in the dignity which he then stripped himself of, that is,
of the private charge of that Church; which being only an ordinary office, and
no particularity resulting from St. Peter's personal authority; it had
consequently from the force of such a substitute instalment, nothing to elevate
it beyond the pitch of an ordinary Bishopric; and so it remained* liable upon
convenient Reasons afterward ensuing, to be ranked after Alexandria.

This bolt then falling short of the mark, he C. 5. S. 4.
is resolved at length to shoot home, and for his better advantages, stalks
under the patronage of the Council of Chalcedon; citing a Canon thereof, That
the Sea of Constantinople shall have (...), equal privileges, dignities, and
advantages with Rome, upon this account, That Constantinople was new Rome, and
the seat of the Empire at that time; which, say they, was the reason, that Rome
enjoyed such privileges; and therefore (...). The Fathers at Constantinople
being moved with the same Reasons, had rightly judged, That now the same
privileges should belong to that Church or City. (...), And that this being
next to old Rome, should in all Ecclesiastical affairs have the same dignity or
greatness that old Rome had. Thus far the Doctor.

Where, first, I would ask him how he knows that (...), signifies the Primacy;
are there no kind of privileges, but of equality in Jurisdiction.

Next, I would know why (...), can exact no other interpretation but AS SHE,
must needs be interpreted, as much as she, or have the same dignity or
greatness; deducing an equality or identity from the particle (...), which
only denotes a similitude or likeness.

Thirdly, I must chide Mr. Doctor, (and with very good reason too) for
Englishing (...), in ALL Ecclesiastic businesses, whereas there is no such
word as All in the Council; and in this word All, purposely added by the
Doctor, consists the most efficacious part of the Testimony. For the wor^ ALL
may include possibly the authority o^ Primacy it self, which no other word
there alleged, can in any way signify. But the Doctors Pen is still very free
to let down Ink, when any thing of importance is to be added to a Testimony.

Fourthly, (...) signifying nothing but certain honorary, pompous, or
ceremonious privileges, which might have accrued to some Church, by the
residence of the supreme Secular power there. I see no necessity why the Popes
Legates might not omit to oppose the reason there given, for the collation of
these (...); whereas had the word signified Primacy, which was then as strongly
and expressly pretended to come from Christ's donation to St. Peter (as is
evident in Pope Leo's Epistles, whose Legates presided in this Council) as it
is now by these present Popes, then we should have heard another story.

Fifthly, The Doctor grants, that this Decree C. 5. S. 5.
was as derogatory to the dignity of Antioch as Rome; but it is evident, that
Antioch pretended to no Primacy over the whole Church: Evident therefore it is
from the Doctors own Concession, That (...) could not signify Primacy of
Jurisdiction, neither consequently was that struck at by the tumultuous
Constantinopolitans

Sixthly, The very Council where this was handled, calls and acknowledges Rome
the first; which the Doctor will interpret a precedence of order only, and
this he will grant she retained notwithstanding these equal privileges
arrogated to Constantinople, if then (...) equal privileges, may be supposed
to be given to another, Romes precedence and priority in order remaining
untouched; why should we think, or indeed, how can we think that that word
meant the Primacy, or that this was concerned in the Decree, being much higher
then the former; since this was sacred, the other complementary; this ever held
as not possible to come otherwise then from Christ's especial donation, whereas
that might have probably proceeded from Ecclesiastical Constitution.

Seventhly, The Doctor (only proceeding upon a whimsie born and bred in his
own brain) tells us, page 99. that (...) signifies a Patriarchate, and the
pomps attending it, and that Canstantinople wanted only the dignity of a
Patriarchate to be equal to Rome. Which is a most gross mistake, and plainly
demonstrating, That the Doctor took this Testimony, as he found it dropped from
the Pen of some petty Writer, and never ^etcht it from the Fountains of ancient
History it self: For it is certain, and by all acknowledged, That
Constantinople was a Patriarchate before, but the fourth; and now pretended to
be the second, and so make Alexandria the third, and Antioch the fourth. Yet
the Doctor runs on upon this ground, and ignorant of the truth of the history,
winks and fights most cruelly; paying the Primacy of Rome with his own sayings,
even to utter desolation, till he comes to the end of the Paragraph.

Eighthly, It is manifest by the History and Acts of the Council it self, That
this was no free Act, nor ever came off clear: The ambition of the Clergy of
Constantinople, extorting it with a tumultuous importunity; it being voted
after most of the Fathers were departed, and only those of the party of
Constantinople left to determine in their own behalf, what they or their
instigators pleased; whereupon it was contradicted and exclaimed against
vehemently the next day, by the Western Church, in the Popes Legates; disavowed
and rejected by the Patriarch of Antioch, and those under him. No Patriarch of
Alexandria was there; and all the Metropolitans and Bishops under him, refused
to subscribe. The Act it self, not numbered amongst the Acts of the Council;
till ambition, which, at first, receiving such a check from so grave Authority,
was modest, growing more impudent, when the reprehending and curbing power was
absent, legitimated that bastardissue, and pined it to the end of the Council,
as Dr. Hammond does his own sayings to the end of his Testimonies.

Yet the Doctor tells us, He could vindicate the C. 9. S. 9.
validity of this Canon, but that he means not to go out of his way. Is it out
of your way, Mr. Doctor, to vindicate that Testimony to be valid, which you
object for a strong proof against us, and we reject as of insufficient
Authority and illegitimate. In my poor judgment, it lies so directly in your
way, that you cannot possibly do your cause better service, then to clear this
point; else why did you produce a Testimony lying under a just Exception,
unless you would stick to it, and maintain it. It lay in your way, it seems, to
put that large-senc'd monosyllable ALL into the Testimony, that was just in
your way, but to make good your own weak Allegation, was quite out of your way.
Yet you were something excusable from under-propping your Testimony, if you had
been better employed in the mean time; but I find the whole fifth Paragraph,
in which you wave it, from the beginning to the end, made up only of your own
sayings, and some of those too false; upon which (as upon grounds) you proceed
with an unresistable career. So as your proofs are perfect Cobwebs; both the
ground and the work upon it, being spun out of your own bowels.

But instead of vindicating it, you first quarrel C. 5. S. 5.
with us for strange dealing in not admitting any Testimony against us, but
wherein we have given our own suffrage, which you call A method of security,
beyond all amulets, etc. Thus the Doctor, plausibly indeed, if his Readers were
fools, otherwise nothing can sound more unconsonantly. For either the Pope is
head of the Church, or no: If he suppose negatively, then he plainly begs the
Question which hangs yet in dispute; and then, upon this supposition, I will
grant it is not only strange dealing, but injustice, usurpation, tyranny,
impiety, or whatever he will; or else the Pope was and is Head of the Church;
and then, the Doctors words may be objected as well to any Governor, or any man
living, as to the Pope; and it is not strange dealling, but very good reason,
That he should refuse to subscribe to an Act, endamaging the Canons of the
Church, it being his duty and obligation to keep them inviolate. And if Pope
Leo could in reason reject it then, when one siding and self-interessed part of
the Council had voted it; we can with as good reason reject it now, when Dr.
Hammond alleages it.

SECT. 2.
THe Doctors next EVIDENCE, that the Pope is not Head of the Church, is from a
Canon in the Council of Ephesus; where (says Mr. Hammond) the independency of
Cyprus, not only from the Patriarch of Antioch, but from all others whomsoever
was contested then, as from the Apostles times, etc. Thus the Doctor desirous
to make the Reader believe that Cyprus had no kind of Dependency on any one
whomsoever. Though the Testimony it self contests no more, but that from the
Apostles time they could never show, That the Bishop of Antioch was there, Et
ordinaverit vel communicaverit unquam Insulae ordination is gratiam, neque
alius quisquam, that is, And ordained or conferred the grace of Ordination upon
that I^and, nor any other. The Testimony speaks only, That neither the
Patriarch, nor any other ordained there, the Doctor interprets it, That Cyprus
was independent on the Patriarch of Antioch, or any one whomsoever. Which is
not ingenuously done; for there may be a dependency of subjection to the
Jurisdiction of another, though they never received from that other their
Ordination. Thus you see, the Doctor seldom brings us an account of any
Testimony, but less or more he will be sure to inflame the reckoning.

But the Council exempted Cyprus from the peculiar subjection to a private
Patriarch in particular: True, but is there any thing expressed there, That
either Cyprus or the Patriarch of Antioch himself, were exempted from the
Obedience or Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, as Public Head of the Church,
or was the Popes Primacy there called in question. This should have been
expressed to make good your inference. But of this, we have not so much as a
syllable, nor any thing that can deduce it; since the I Will of Cyprus might well
have been exempted from the obedience of any particular Patriarch, and yet both
it, and the Patriarchs themselves subjected to one Chief or Head of the Church:
As there may be some free State or City in Europe independent of any particular
Kingdom or Province, and yet both that State, and all the Kingdoms and
Provinces in Europe, dependent or subject to the Universal Rule of an Emperor,
who is Lord of the whole.

Yet the Doctor has not done with us thus, C. 5. S. 6.
he has another fling at us out of this Council of Ephesus, which determined
(says the Doctor) That no Bishop shall encroach upon another Province, or
usurp a power, where from the Apostles times he had not enjoyed it. Which how
directly (adds the Doctor) it prejudgeth the pretensions of Rome, is so
manifest, that it cannot need farther demonstrating. This therefore being Dr.
Hammonds, PRIMUM PRINCIPIUM, first Principle, which is so evident by the light
of nature, and cannot need farther demonstrating, it were not amiss, if we put
it in a Syllogism; to let the Reader see how unavoidably the Doctor deduces a
break-neck conclusion to the cause of Rome out of it. The Argument then stands
thus.

The Canon of Ephesus constitutes, That n^ Bishop shall encroach upon another
Province, o^ usurp a power, where from the Apostles time h^ had not enjoyed it:
But the Pope ( must Dr. Hammond subsume) has encroacht upon another Province,
and usurpt a power, where from the Apostles times he had not enjoyed it.

Therefore, his pretensions are prejudiced by this Canon of Ephesus.

Where, as every child may see, nothing follows out of the words of the
Council against the Pope (which are the Major) until the Doctor makes good his
Minor, That the Pope has thus encroached, etc. Yet this (being all that
belongs to him to prove) he either supposes as a first principle, though it be
the only thing in controversy, or else begs of us to grant him gratis; and
then tells us the Conclusion is so manifest, it cannot need farther
demonstrating,

Surely he was afraid here also to go out of his way; and with good reason, for
had he gone about to evidence his Minor, he would never have arrived at his
Conclusion.

After this most palpable and evident demonstration, C. 5. S. 7.
he gives us two instances of the same alloy: One of the Archbishop of
Carthage, whom the Emperor Justinian made equal in privileges to the Bishop of
Iustiniana Prima* the other of this last named Bishop himself, to whom the
Constitution grants, Omnem censuram Ecclesiasticam, summum Sacerdotium, summum
fastigium, summam dignitatem: All Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the supreme
Priesthood, supreme Dignity. These words sound high, and (as the Doctor thinks)
terribly to us: But first he must consider, that Justinians Constitution is no
Decree of a Council, nor his fact (in case he had pretended it) able to
invalidate that sacred dignity of Head of the Church, had any such been
constituted by our Savior. Next he never intended any such matter as to crop
the aspiring growth of Rome, (as the Doctor imagines) which is manifest by his
sending to Pope Vigilius (as strong a pretender of the Primacy as any of his
Successors) to bestow a Pall upon his new Archbishop of Iustiniana prima; nor
would Pope Vigilius have consecrated him Bishop (as the Doctor shufflingly
grants he did) upon these terms; neither was it Justinians pretense, who only
meant to exempt him from the Jurisdictions of them, whose Patriarchates
heretofore extended to that Province.

But let us come to the Testimony it self; either the words, All Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, supreme Priesthood, and supreme Honor, must mean a supremacy over
the whole Church, or in his own particular Diocese. If over the whole Church.
Justinian constituted him Pope; which no man in his wits will say, If over his
own Diocese only, he might be supreme there, and yet subject to the Pope too,
as is visible de facto, even nowadays*

The next Testimony is from an old mouseeaten Manuscript, concerning the
Authority of the said Archbishop, forbidding Appeals to any other, in these
words, Tu and omnes Justinianae primae Antistites, quicquid oriatur inter e^s
discrimen, ipsi hoc dirimant and finem eis imponant and nec ad alium quendam
eatur, sed suum agnoscant Archiepiscopum omnes praedictae Provinciae. What
Authority this Manuscript is of (for the Latin shows, is to be of no Antiquity
nor Humanity) I know not, having not seen the Book, it being hard to be found,
and therefore a fit ground for an invisible doctrine. But this I know, it was
pat for the Doctors Logic, which was to be besides the purpose. For here is
nothing said, which was not common to the Patriarch, and such Metropolitans as
Cyprus was, to wit, That they had no ordinary Appeal farther, as generally was
none from any other Patriarch, unless peradventure Jerusalem, which was only
an honorary Patriarchate. Yet this no ways hinders, but that extraordinary
cases, which could not be ended among themselves, should be carried to Rome,
such as are controversies betwixt the Metropolitan himself, and the Bishops his
subjects, or betwixt him and some stranger Bishop or Patriarch: So that all
this Testimony is quite different from the case we handle, and leaves this
Bishop as subject to the Pope, as any of the Patriarchs, or any out of the
Patriarchate of the West was.

But our kind Doctor is so free-hearted, he would not part without shaking
hands, and doing us some good turn, and so was pleased to determine the
question for us, in his next Citation* which is out of the 131 of Novel, of
Justinian, c. 3. and the sense of it is, That he should be in all that Diocese,
the Popes Legate, which now we call to be Legatus Natus; and in Catholic
times, was a thing annexed to the Bishopric of Canterbury: Wherein two things
are clear, one, that his Diocese remained notwithstanding all these
privileges, subject to the Pope; and that to magnify his dignity, this was
necessary to make him the Popes Delegate, as it was also diverse times used to
the very Patriarchs; to whose dignity all these privileges did not elevate
Iustiniana prima, though they exempted it from them. Justinians words are, that
in all that Diocese he shall have Locum Apostolicae sedis; which the Doctor,
(not to seem an open prevaricator against his own party) translates the place
or dignity of an Apostolical Seat; whereas he should have said, the place or
lieu of the Apostolical Seat; that is, should be the Popes substitute. And I
pray (good Doctor) where did you read the Greek (...) explicated for honor or
dignity? And in what History do you find such a dignity, as an Apostolical
Seat in common? What dignity had Ephesus for St. Iohus sitting in it, that the
like should be given to Iustiniana?

He goes on and tells us this was the occasion, why Nicephorus said the Emperor
had made it a free City, and (...), which to make more efficacious, he
explicates with full power, independent from all others. We shall never out of
the old Proverb, The properer man, the worse luck; He must needs be doing
against himself, for this word convinces all the Doctors process of nullity:
For since Nicephorus speaks not of the City only as an Ecclesiastical State,
but also as a Temporal one, and that by being made free and self headed, he
exempted it not from the Emperor by parity; these words do not exempt it in
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from the Pope, whose power is as Universal as the
Emperors, and extends it self much farther.

The Doctor was not so blind, but he saw the Consecration of the first
Metropolitan by the Pope, did stand in his way: Therefore to leap over this
block, he tells us, it was necessary he should be consecrated by some body; and
that it is evident, being consecrated, he was independent, and his Successors
to be ordained by his Council of Metropolitans. It is a hard case, that this
good Doctor cannot speak three words, but one must unravel what the other knit.
His excuse, why the Pope consecrated the first Bishop, was, Because some body
must do it; and presently after, he tells us, Not the Pope, but the Suffragans
were to consecrate his Successor. I pray then Master Doctor, why could not the
Metropolitans have consecrated the first, as well as the others, if that
signify independency? But that is not our Argument, nor do we think
Consecration implies dependency. But the Argument we make from Vigilius his
consecrating him, is from two heads which the Doctor either saw not, or thought
not fitting his Reader should see. The first is, That it draws a main
consequence of the Popes consenting to this erection, and so absolutely
evacuates the Doctors Argument. The other is, That he did not only consecrate
him, but give him a Pall, which act was a sign of Superiority, and a kind of
Benediction, and at least an Honor, if not a Jurisdiction. True it is, all this
is nothing, if it be evident, that after Consecration he was absolute, as the
Doctor affirms, and all are to believe, who will take his word for their faith.

In the next Paragraph, he tells us, That this particularity that his
Successors were to be consecrated by their Council of Metropolitans, is a
second instance of the point in hand; and I do not deny, but sometimes to be
subject for Ordination, was sign of subjection, but not always. The Bishop of
Ostia has the privilege to consecrate the Pope, yet the Pope is not to be his
subject: The Council of Sardica ordains, That the next Province shall give
Bishops to a Province that wants, yet makes not that Province subject to it:
The Patriarch of Alexandria gave the Indians Bishops, yet claimed no
jurisdiction over them; and consecrated the Patriarch of Constantinople, yet
was not Constantinople in his Territories. Therefore this is no rule of
Subjection, and if it were, the Doctor must say this Primate was subject to his
own Suffragans. Neither did ever Popes or Patriarchs in ancient times, demand
the Ordination of all the Bishops in their Patriarchates; nor does the Pope at
this day, demand it in other Patriarchates, though he claim jurisdiction over
them.

But now, who can tell us what the Doctor means, when he says the Emperor did
all this only by making it a Primates, or chief Metropolitans See; and that
Carthages being the prime Metropolis of Africa, is expressed by having the same
privileges with Prima Iustiniana. Can any man think he intends other then to
mock his Auditory? For as far as I understand, these words signify, that the
Emperor said only, Be thou a chief Metropolis; and in so saying, gave all
these Privileges: Whereas all the Doctors labor hitherto, and the Texts by him
cited, wherein every privilege is set down so particularly, make it manifest,
there were none or not eminent examples of any such Cities or Bishoprics; and
therefore so many particularities were necessary to be expressed, and it be
made an example to others: Yet upon this relieth the Doctors main evidence, and
demonstration. Though, if you will believe him* The conclusion of it self is
most certain, and might otherwise be testified by innumerable Evidences; which
we ought to suppose the Doctor omits for brevities sake, and contents himself
with this riff-raff, and his Readers with bold promises and solemn affirmations.

In his tenth Section, immediately following, he draws out of his so strong
discourse, a consequence able to make any sensible man understand the former
discourses, were all vain and wicked: For says he, If from the Apostles time
there has been an independent power vested in each Primate, or chief
Metropolitan; then how can it be necessary to the being of a Member of the
Catholic Church, to be subject to that one Primate. Worthy Doctor, your
inference is very strong and good. But I pray consider what is the consequent:
Surely this* If there be no Catholic Church, the obedience to the Pope, is not
necessary to be a member of it. A very learned conclusion, and worthy of so
long a discourse to introduce it; yet see whether it be yours or no. You say,
every chief Metropolitan was independent from all others, they made therefore
so many absolute Churches; therefore made not any one Church. Where then is the
Catholic Church, of which we ought to be members? Many houses to be one house,
is as fairly contradictory, as many men, or horses to be one horse; and so of
many Churches, to be one Church. A Church (says St. Cyprian) is a people
united to their Bishop. If then there be a Catholic Church, there must be a
Catholic Bishop; and taking away the obedience to one Bishop, you cannot save
one Church. I know you can talk like a Saint, That Christ is the Head in which
all Churches are united: But the Church is a Government upon Earth, and as an
Army with its General, or a Commonwealth with its chief Magistrate in Heaven;
were no Army, nor Commonwealth: So without subjection to a visible supreme
Pastor, there will be no Church on Earth left us, whereof we ought to be
Members; which is the true Protestant Tenet, whatsoever they may shuffle in
words, an art wherein they are the most eminent of all Modern Heretics.
Therefore he had reason to enlarge himself no farther, but conclude with the
Authority of his Convocation, An. 1537. To which, I confess my self unable to
answer; for it is a pregnant and unavoidable Testimony: Only I may remember
our old English Proverb, Ask my fellow, whether I am a Thief; or ask Caiphas,
whether Pilates sentence against our Savior, was not just. You know it was a
Convocation of Bishops, who for fear, renounced their Oaths taken in their
Consecration; and therefore men of no credit, upon their pure words in this
case. Now their Arguments are no other, then what are already discussed, that
is, mere Cobwebs woven out of a tainted heart: Besides, those who supervived
that wicked King, for the most part, with hearty penance, washed away that
crime; and with their tears blotted out, as far as in them lay, the black
Indentures of that dismal Contract.

SECT. 3.
A Discovery of Dr. Hammonds Fundamental Error, which runs through this
Chapter, and his ingratitude for our Countries Conversion.

THe Doctor proceeding in his own mistaking method, which is, to produce
faintly, and then impugn our Pleas, in stead of pleading for himself, who
stands accused of Schism, entitles his sixth Chapter, THEIR THIRD PLEA FROM THE
BISHOP OF ROMES HAVING PLANTED CHRISTIANITY AMONG US: As if we pretended the
Conversion of this Nation, to have been the reason, why the Pope challenged
here the Supremacy; or, That his being Head of the Universal Church, depended
upon his private Apostleship, performed toward this Nation.

This is the ground of all his ensuing Chapter, which being absolutely false,
and forged upon us, it had been sufficient to have past it over with this civil
reproof, Doctor you mistake.

For what Catholic Author ever affirmed, the Pope is beholden to his Ancestors
care in bringing England to Christ's Faith, for his supreme jurisdiction there;
or that his title of Primacy had not been equal in this Country, in case it
had happened Constantinople or Alexandria had sent to convert it? We will
therefore free the Doctor from any obligation of Subjection to the Popes
Primacy, which he causlesly fears may come by this title* so he will acquit
himself, and the Church of England, of another which lies heavy on them, and
makes up the full measure of their Schism, unless they retract it. For if
greatest benefits, draw on greatest engagements; and no benefit be so great, as
that which rescues us from the Devils tyranny, the the bonds of Infidelity; and
brings us, by enlarging our hearts by Faith, into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God: Sure no Obligation can be conceived so indispensably-binding, as
that which is due to those who were Authors to us, of so inestimable a good.
This consideration should make the enjoyers of that benefit, while they were
sons to such a Mother, more humble and obedient, in an especial manner, and by
consequence in an high measure, aggravate the horrid sin of Schism, in not
only rebelliously, but most ingratefully abandoning the communion of so
tenderly beneficial a Parent. This should make them after the breach made
(though they cannot yet so overcome their proper-will, and proper-judgment, as
to return) at least, heartily to acknowledge the benefits received from her,
and to bear her a due respect; however* not to revile and reproach her. But
against all History, and only out of a few obscure and unauthentick sayings,
to disacknowledge your highest obligation to her; in stead of grateful
courtesy, to slight, and contemn her; to naturalize in the hearts of your poor
Auditors, an hatred against the very name of Rome, and the Pope (to which, Rome
and its Pope, you and they, are beholding, next, and immediately under God, for
all the knowledge you have of Christ, or his holy Word:) Lastly, To revile that
Church, which (till you broke from her) had ever the most sacred title of
Christ's only Spouse, with your scolding Sermon-invectives (grateful elegancies
to your applauding hearers) of Idolatrous, Antichristian, Strumpet, Whore of
Babylon, and all the venomous spiteful expressions, that ever were vomited from
a malice-imposthum'd heart: These things, I say, are they which brand you
beyond infamy in the judgment of prudent men, and double Die the dark-colored
sin of Schism, with the deepest tincture of the blackest ingratitude. Of this
ingratitude, Master Doctor, clear your selves, first in breaking, next in your
carriage and comportment ever since, and we will without much difficulty,
disoblige you from any other duty, which you seem afraid you ow us, upon only
that score of Conversion.

Yet you will needs have us hold, whether we will or no, That the Pope is Head
of the Church, because his Predecessor converted England: And this ground laid
in the air of your own fancy, you impugn as inconsequently, butting at us most
formidably with a Dilemma, or cornuted Syllogism; and telling us, That C. 6. S.
2, 3.
the Popes Primacy in this Island, is either from the Donation of Christ, or
Conversion by Austin the Monk: If the latter, then England was not subject to
the Pope before Austin' s coming: If the former, then is that other title of
the Conversion by Austin, a fallacious pretense, A NON CAUSA PRO CAUSA, etc.
This is the sum of his Dilemma.

In answer to which, I confess indeed, the latter title is, A fallacious
pretense, A NON CAUSA PRO CAUSA; but the fallacy is on the Doctors side, who
feigns us to pretend what we never thought on; to wit, That the Popes supremacy
is grounded on any such title. One of the horns then of his Dilemma, is a false
one, and so the danger of being caught between them, easily avoided.

Nor is his Dilemma it self, more solidly founded, were both the particular
pretenses true; for it wholly insists and leans upon this Position, That no man
can claim a possession upon two titles: On which ground (to let us see he is a
Lawyer, as well as a Divine) he descants in these words, He that claims a
reward, as of his C. 6. S. 2.
own labor and travail, must be supposed to disclaim Donation, which is
antecedent to, and exclusive of the former; as the title of descent is of that
of conquest. Thus this Doctor of Law. Whereas, what more ordinary then to plead
two titles at Law, (as for example, birthright, and a formerly-given judgment)
for the same thing? Or, what more unreasonable then to affirm, That Jacob who
wrought other seven years for Rachel, could not claim her as a reward of his
service for that time, unless he renounce his right to her due at the former
years end. Do not we see daily, That those who have palpable right to their
estate, when they cannot quietly enjoy it otherwise, by reason of the injustice
of a wrangling adversary, are forced to compound for, and buy their own,
without ^isclaiming their former title?

Neither is his last instance more solid, then its fellows, That the title of
descent is exclusive to that of conquest; since the titles of Donation and
Conquest, are as opposite as those he mentions, and yet it is well known, That
William the Conqueror pretended a right to the Kingdom upon both these titles;
and Henry the Seventh (if I mistake not) upon three. But the thing is so clear,
that it requires no further proof; save only to advertise the Reader, That Dr.
Hammond is the first Lawyer I ever heard of, who denied a possibility of a
double title to the same thing: Yet I am glad to see by the Doctors perfect
ignorance, and utter unacquaintance in Law, that he is, at least, a good,
honest, quiet, sober soul; not used much to trouble himself with Law, nor
wrangle with his Neighbors; which is a very great commendation, and better
beseeming his innocent Nature, which was never shaped to be a Controvertist.

Next, proceeding still on his own false grounds, he goes about, first,
ingratefully to deny, that St. Austin the Monk converted our Forefathers:
Secondly, After some acknowledgment, to prove very unmannerly and uncivilly, no
thanks due.

As for the first, he tells us, That this Island C. ^. S. 4.
was converted to the Faith of Christ, long before Augustines Preaching to the
Saxons; citing many Authors for it. Where if by the word Island, he mean the
Ilanders, as I suppose he must; I would then ask him, (though the former
Ilanders were before converted by the Missionaries of Pope Eleutherius, yet)
whether those that St. Augustine was sent to convert, that is, the Saxons were
reduced before that time to Christianity, or no; if they were not (as I am sure
he must, and will acknowledge) all the ancient Inhabitants, the Britains, being
driven by them into Wales; then what a perverseness and want of ingenuity is it
in Master Hammond, to wave so ungratefully, that incomparable benefit which we
Englishmen received in our Ancestors, by the Popes fatherly care, first
converted to Christ's Faith? and what a pitiful shift it is, to show a
willingness to put it off by quibbling in the words, this Island; as if they did
not signify these Ilanders, or the Ilanders of the same race; but these Trees,
Woods, and Mountains.

The next page goes on very currantly, and without any rub, proving, That the
formerlyplanted Faith of Christ, in this Island, was not totally extinguished by
the ancient persecutions; so to infer a less beholdingness of us Englishmen to
Rome, and Pope Gregory the Great for our Conversion; but all in vain* For
unless he proves, that they who had formerly embraced and retained that Faith,
propagated it to the after-comers, the Saxons, (who were Ancestors to us
Englishmen) or that St. Austin was not the first that preached to these, (which
he will never do) all the evidence he can bring from hence is, to prove himself
ungrateful.

Then he ends this Paragraph with a Testimony out of the old obscure Annals of
Gisburn, and brought to light by one of his own side, in which it is said, That
the Bishop of St. David's was consecrated by the Suffragan Bishops o^ that
Province, Nulla penitus professione vel subjectione facta alteri Ecclesiae. No
profession or subjection at all being made to another Church. Where first, I
would ask the Doctor in which of these words he places most force; in, Their
Consecration by their own Suffragans, and by no other? What difficulty in this?
As if the Pope could not be Head of the Church, but he must needs consecrate
all the Bishops in the World; yet more then once the Doctor has bob'd us with
this: Or is it in these words, Nulla penitus, etc. No profession, etc? As
little follows hence; for the custom of making a profession, or exhibiting
subjection to the Sea of Rome, when the Bishops were consecrated (expressed in
those words, facere subjectionem) was not then in use; and though it were not
now, it would not at all prejudice the amplitude of the Popes Jurisdiction, as
Head of the Church. Besides, the words being Alteri Ecclesiae, To another
Church; not specifying Rome in particular, it affords nothing express for the
Doctors purpose; but may well bear the interpretation of the Bishop of St.
David's being independent of any within that Continent, or (as before was said
of Cyprus) of any private Patriarch: With which, as is evident, may well
consist a subjection to the Pope, as the Churches chief and Universal Pastor.

To what follows in the fifth Section of the Abbot of Bangors answer, who
flatly denied subjection to the Pope of Rome: First, we reply, It matters not
much what the old Abbot said; for every one who has read those Histories,
knows the ill will of the Britains was so extreme against the Saxons, at St.
Austins coming; the apprehension of their tyrannous usurping their Country, and
driving them out of their own being, then ^lagrant and fresh in their memories,
That they refused to join with St* Austin for the salvation of their Souls. And
they might probably be afraid, lest admitting and coming under Saint Augustins
Jurisdiction, they might open a gap for the further encroachment of their late
cruel persecutors. Neither was it hard to imagine, seeing the Britains ever
since Aetius came to assist them, by reason of the turmoils of the Empire, and
several incursions of barbarous Nations, had little or no commerce with Rome: A
remote Abbot, whose office is to look to his own private Monastery, should be
ignorant of what was due to the chief Pastor of the Church, especially other as
great errors being crept in among that Nation. But what is all this to us?
unless the Doctor can prove that, whereas the whole Christian world held the
then Pope, Gregory the Great, Head of the Church, as appears by his Epistles to
all Churches. This Abbot did well in denying that Authority which all else
granted, and submitted to; or that this Abbot communicated with them, who
admitted and acknowledged it. For we do not undertake to defend, that there
could not be at any time two, three, or more persons, who either out of
disgust, ambition, interest, or ignorance, might speak or act against the Popes
Authority, but that it was the profession of the then Catholic Church*

The words therefore of this Abbot can make nothing against us, unless the
Doctor will undertake to vindicate him from ignorance and interest, and that
out of settled and imprejudiced Reason, he in so saying, pronounced the sense
of the whole Catholic Church.

Yet I have not done with this story of the Abbot thus; I allege moreover,
that it is either absolutely fa^ulous, or else, both all ancient Histories, and
(which is more) Doctor Hammond himself is mistaken; and therefore however it
may possibly be true, yet can claim no credit if it be once taken in a lie. It
makes the Abbot in the close of his blunt Speech, affirm, Nos sumus, etc. We
are under the rule of the C. 6. S. 5.
Bishop of Caerlegion upon Usk, who is to overlook and govern us under God.
Whereas it is manifest there was no such Bishopric at that time; it being
translated in King Arthurs days* which was fifty years before this, from
Caerusk to St. David's, as the Doctor himself grants in the foregoing Paragraph.

But for a more full and perfect answer to this upstart instance of that
ancient Nation (if what I have said, suffice not) I desire the Readers perusal
of the ingenuous and solid Appendix to that excellent Manual of Controversies,
lately composed by the Learned H. T. where I believe he will find this new
piece of Antiquity irrecoverably confuted.

What follows in the sixth Paragraph, is only a conclusion out of what he has
said, That the whole Island is not Schismatical, because St. Augustine converted
not the whole. Where first he only proves the Welshmen no Schismatics, but
still leaves himself and his Fellow-Englishmen (whom he ought to have cleared
first) in the suds. Nay, though the Britains were not then Schismatics upon
that account, not being converted by St. Augustine, yet now being subjected to
the English Bishops, and incorporated into their Church, if this Church be
proved Schismatical: The Welshmen, who are Sons, Subjects, depending on. and a
part of her must needs incur the same censure. Besides, his premises being all
invalidated, and his grounds wrongly laid, his conclusion must needs be weak
and ruinous: For we do not accuse him of the substance of Schism, for refusing
obedience to the Pope, as his Successor, who sent to convert England; but as
Successor to him, who had the Primacy by the Donation of Christ's own mouth:
However, the former may render the rupture more enormous, seeing that part of
Christ's Seamlesscoat was close knit to the whole, by such a near and firm
obligation.

SECT. 4.
His continuance of the same Fundamental Error, and some mistaking Proofs, That
Kings can erect Patriarchates.

BY this time the Doctor, through Gods assistance, C. 6. S. 7.
and his Readers Christian patience, is come to the second part of his Text;
which is, that even this part of the Island, which was converted by St. Austin,
cannot entitle the Pope to Supremacy over them. Where, to omit that his whole
grounds are erroneous (as I have before manifested) in supposing that to be our
Plea sor the Popes Primacy, let us see, at least, how consequently he handles
it. To prove his position, he tells us, The Nations converted by St. Ibid.
Paul, were not to be ever subject to that Chair, where St. Paul sat? Good Mr.
Doctor inform us what you intend by the Chair, where Saint Paul sat: Whether
in the Church of Antioch, or Rome, or the like, say you.

But first, it is merely a fiction that St. Paul ever sat in any Chair, or was
fixed Bishop in any place, but at Rome only with St. Peter* and to demand
whether all Countries converted by him, ought to be subject to his Successor
there (that is, to the Pope, who succeeded both him, and St. Peter) is only in
another phrase to ask over again the Question of the whole Book, and is the
same, as if he should ask whether the Pope be Head of the Church.

Next, you tell us, That Timothy and Titus were supreme in their Provinces, and
independent from any other See. This indeed the Doctor says, and we must
believe him, though he brings not a word of proof for it; which the second part
of his Assertion, concerning their independency, did necessarily require;
only, he says, the contrary has no degree of truth in it, which he makes
account will carry the business, without bringing the least degree of
probability for it. As for the first part, I would ask the Doctor, whether St.
Paul were supreme over them in his life time, or no; if he were, (as I suppose
both his Epistles to them, and the Doctors former large Testimony from the
monosyllable COME, will manifest) then their being supreme in their own
Provinces, consisting still with the superiority of St. Paul, may (for any
thing deducible from that reason alone) admit the Supremacy of the Head of the
Church, and their subjection to him: And the obligation lies yet upon the
Doctor to prove positively, That Timothy and Titus were totally exempt from St.
Peter's Jurisdiction; for which, Negative proofs are insufficient, or indeed for
any thing else. Yet the Doctors Quiver is full of such blunt shafts; and it is
an evidence with him to argue thus, I have not read it, or it is not expressed in
this Testimony; therefore there is no such thing, or, therefore it is false: As
has been often discovered in the process of this Answer.

That which follows, That it is the nature of Primates or Patriarchs, to have
no Superior to exercise Jurisdiction over them, is only his own saying; and so
with like facility denied, as asfirmed. The Ordination of them, by others, I
have already shown, not to prejudice the Universal Authority of the Head of the
Church; whose duty it is not to descend to otherwise suppliable actions, about
particular Members of that Body; but from the top of his Primacy, to govern and
overlook the whole, and to be conversant about that more Universal sort of
actions reserved, and proper to his larger power; to the managing of which, the
shorthanded Jurisdictions of particular Patriarchs, were not able to reach. C.
7. S. 9.


But now comes the most dangerous blow of all: The Doctor did but take his aim
all this while; now he is fetching the fatal stroke, and me thinks I see the Ax
even now falling upon the neck of Rome. He threatens in his ninth Section, To
put the whole matter out of controversy. And how, think you? he tells us, That
Kings could ever erect and translate Patriachates in their own Dominions; and
therefore that the Kings of England may freely remove that power from Rome to
Canterbury, and subject all this Island to that independent Archbishop or
Primate. There is a trick now for the Pope, which he never dreamed of: Where
first you see Mr* Hammond supposes, as granted, That the Popes power is but
merely Patriarchal, which is the chief, if not only thing in question between
us: So as his method to put the whole matter out of Controversy, is to beg the
supposal of the whole matter in Controversy. C. 6. S. 10.


This supposal laid for a ground, he repeats again for his first instance,
those two late answered Acts of Justinian, erecting Iustiniana Prima and
Carthage, two Arch-Bishopricks or Primacies: Though himself acknowledges, That
C. 6. S. 11.
Carthage was not originally dignified, but only restored to its Primacy by
the said Emperor, after the Wandals were driven our; which being only an Act
of preserving the former Canons of the Church inviolate, every good Christian
Emperor, and Prince, not only may, but also ought to do it; and when he does
it, it is by the power of the Canons of the Church.

As for the first instance concerning Iustiniana Prima, the Dr. thinks perhaps,
good man, that he does well; but put the proof in form, and he will, I am
confident, be ashamed of the consequence. Justinian erected Patriarchates
(says the History) therefore Kings have power to do such acts of themselves,
(infers the Doctor) where the force of the illation is the same, as if one
should say, The late Parliament took away Bishops; therefore Parliaments have a
power to take them away: That a particular matter of fact may conclude a
self-and-proper power in him that did it, you must first prove that power to be
originally his own, and not delegated to him by another, pretending to it
himself, who in our case is the Pope: Next you must prove, That if he did it
without that delegation, yet his action was lawful.

These, if you first prove, your instances will come to something; otherwise,
they are senceless, and infer less then nothing; wanting both the crutches
which may enable them to advance forwards to a conclusion.

Your next instance is, That the Emperor C. 6. S. 12.
Valentinian did by his Rescript constitute Ravenna a Patriarchal Seat, where
you quote no Author but Anno Dom. 432. And indeed you did well, for the
Rescript is accounted spurious, and to have been foisted into the Monuments of
that Church in the time of their Schism. Had you told us, how invalid the
Authority of it was, and how not only for that, but for many other things it
lay under just exceptions, you had been put to the puzzling task of defending
its authentickness.

The exceptions against it, are these: First, It begins in a different manner
from the constant tenor of all other Rescripts: Next, the decree is singular,
and consequently to be suspected in this; that all the other Rescripts made in
the reign of the two Emperors, though constituted by one of them only, yet
were ever authorized by both their names, whereas the name and Authority of the
Emperor Theodosius is wanting to this. Thirdly, the Inscription of Imperator
Major is new and unheard of; all the rest, entitling Valentinian, Imperator
Maximus. Fourthly, the Bishops of Rhegium, Placentia, and Brixillis, are in the
Rescript named, as under the Archbishop of Ravenna, which is a plain forgery;
since, not long afte^* Pope Leo commanding Eusebius, Archbishop of Millain, to
gather a Provincial Council of the Bishops subject to him; those three Bishops
met there, and subscribed to that Council, as appears by the Synodal Epistle
yet extant. Fifthly, The same Rescript which gives them Archiepiscopatum, an
Archbishopric, (which you make a Patriarchate) granted them also the use of
the Pall; which was never accustomed to be given by the Emperors, but by the
Popes only; as appears by the Epistles of Gregory the Great, to the then
Archbishops of Ravenna. This last rub so puzzled Hieronymus Rubens to smooth it
(who out of a preposterous love of his Country, cited this Rescript for its
privilege) that he was forced to explicate that Pall to be Caesarum
Paludamentum, such an Imperial Robe, as the Cesars used to wear; whereas,
besides the unlikeliness of the action, it is plainly contrary to the Rescript
it self, which grants them such a Pall, Sicut Caeteri sub nostra
Christianissima potestate saepe degentes fruuntur Metropolitae; As the rest of
the Metropolitans in his Dominions often wore: Which every one who has but
tasted of the study of ancient History, knows to have been another manner of
thing, then the Emperors Robe.

We cannot then in reason think other, but that either the Rescript is false,
and (because no new Bishop of Ravenna could use the Pall, without a new
Concession from the Pope, as appears in St. Greg. Lib. 5. Epist. 8.) forged in
the time of the Schism, that they might have some pretense to retain still the
use of the Pall, which they accounted honorable. Or, at least, it cannot be
imagined to have been made without the Popes consent; since the Pope in the
very next year after the making of this presumed Rescript, appointed and
constituted (even those of Ravenna at first, being unwilling) St. Peter
Chrysologus to succeed in that See, after the decease of John; as the same
Monuments affirm: Whence, the Doctor, but from a manifestly corrupted part of
them, picked out this Testimony.

That the after-Bishops of Ravenna were sometimes Schismatics, all the world
knows; none excusing them, much less bringing that action of theirs for a
Testimony, or example, till such as Mr. Hammond arose, who were involved in the
same crime: But that from Valenti^^ans time, Ravenna held the Patriarchate till
the time of Constantinus Pogonatus, without dependence on the Bishop of Rome
(as the Doctor tells us) is an intolerable mistake, as any one meanly versed in
History, knows; and as is manifest by Pope Gregory's Letters to the Bishops of
that place; who was made Pope in the year Five hundred and ninety, whereas
Pogonatus began his reign in the year Six hundred sixty and eight. Their sact
then, Master Doctor, can only stead or excuse you thus far, to show, that
others have been Schismatics as well as your selves; and therefore you are not
the first, nor only men that have fallen into a such a lapse: And thus far
indeed, we grant your consequence; but it will not serve, to show that you are
faultless, because they were faulty. You should have manifested first, the
justifiableness of their fact, and then proceed by applying it, to justify
your own. Or rather indeed it infers you are Schismatics, because you cling to
none but those, whom all the world esteemed to be such.

But me thinks, I hear the Doctor gravely complain, That I call all those
Schismatics, whom he alleages as Testimonies against me; and that this also
is, A method of security beyond all AMULETS. I answer, let it neither be as he,
nor I say, but what the whole Christian World, both then and ever since held;
none contradicting, but those who were accused of the same fault. Let us
therefore make plain Reason our Judge in this present Controversy.

The Popes, at the breach of the Ravennates from their subjection, made head
against them, and stood upon their Authority, as Universal Pastors of the
Church, (as the Doctor will grant.) Which therefore in all likelihood would
have been looked on by the rest of the Catholic Bishops, as a proud
usurpation, and being against their common interest, to let the Pope pretend to
an Universal Pastorship, ought in all reason to have engaged them in the
Ravennates quarrel: Is there any news of such an Universal siding? Not a word:
By which one may, at least, conjecture, That they thought the Popes pretense to
the Primacy, lawful.

How did the Ravennates behave themselves in the business? Did they stick close
to, and constantly claim their non subjection to the Pope, from Canons or
Scripture?

Nothing less: They recanted often and acknowledged subjection, as the Doctor
grants, and says they did it, sometimes out of fear of C. 5. S. 12.
other enemies, sometimes out of friendship, or despite to their own Clergy;
yet the people (adds the Doctor) thought themselves injured. Well, but what
said the Governors of the world all this while, to whom it appertained to see
Justice rightly administered: How did the Emperor Justinian, the then Head of
the Church (as the Doctor will have it) decide the Controversy, when he came
to conclude it? He vindicated the Pope, and punished most severely the people
of Ravenna; banished the Bishop, and in a judiciary manner put the ringleaders
of the Schism to death at Constantinople, whither they were carried bound. What
a pitiful Controvertist then, is this Doctor, to allege the bare fact of a
turbulent, rebellious, never-quiet City, against the justly-presumed
acknowledgment, and the unanimous belief both of the then-present, and future
Christian World: Lastly, against the decision of those who were their Temporal
Lords, and lawful Judges; and (according to the Doctors grounds) against the
verdict of the Head of the Church, to whom the rightful power in those matters
C. 7. S. 20. C. 6. S. 13.
legally pertained.

His fourth Instance is out of Balsamon (an enemy to the Sea of Rome, and a
writer for the Greeks against it) who says, That some Arch-Bishopricks had from
the Emperors Charter, that privilege, not to be subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Where, first, if we may trust Balsamon, who seems in this very
place and Treatise, to plead for the Greeks against the Bishop of Rome, then
Mr. Doctor, you know your double task, necessary to make good your premises,
ere you can conclude any thing; to wit, that the Emperors did it with order
from the Church; or, in case they did not, that it was done lawfully. Next,
does the Testimony say, That the Emperor privileged them from subjection to
the Pope, as Head of the Church? if not, there is no hurt at all done to our
question; if it did, there had not been much, since an enemies saying, is no
slander.

His fifth instance is, That under Phocas the Ibid.
Patriarchate of Grado, in Italy, was erected. Where first it seems, The
Testimony says not it was done by him, but under him, or, while he reigned; and
then, for any thing, you can conclude from hence, The Pope did it in Phocas his
reign. Secondly, since it was not indeed of new erected, but translated thither
from Aquileia, burned not long before by the Longobards; it was no sign of a
presumed Jurisdiction, but rather of a pious generosity (whether in Phocas or
Charles the Great) to bestow a new seat on the destitute Patriarch. To omit,
that in the Council of Grado, was read the Epistle of Pope Felagius the second,
granting to Elias of Grad^ the place of the Patriarch of Aquileia. The Doctor
did wisely then to put under Phocas, in stead of by Phocas, that so he might
seem to intimate by ambiguity, what he durst not speak out for want of evidence.

SECT. 5.
The Doctors Testimonies from Councils and Histories, found to be partly
against himself, partly frivolous, and to no purpose.

AFter his Evidence, from a forged Rescript C. 6. S. 14.
and a tumultuous rabble, That the right of erecting Patriarchates belongs to
the Secular Power; and that this in the Western part of Christianity, was an
ordinary custom; he proceeds to show, That this was a frequent usage in the
East also; citing for it, no less authority then that highest one of General
Councils. Sacred Witnesses! Whom to abuse, by imposing on them a false meaning,
borders upon Profaneness.

The first Testimony is, from the Twelfth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon,
where there is mention made of (...). Cities honored by Letters Patents from
the Kings or Emperors, with the name and dignities of Metropolisses; where
(says the Doctor) the Council represses the ambition of the Bishops, but not
cassates the Rescripts, nor withdraws the honor from the Metropolis so erected.
What cause the Doctor has to brag of those newly-erected Metropolitans, we
shall presently show. He proceeds, That Balsamon says, many Emperors had
erected many Metropolitans, and that they did (...), according to the power
that was given them. Thus far the Doctor; whereas,

First the Council says only that those Cities were honored with (...), the
Name alone, which the Doctor, fluent in his expressions, Englishes the Name and
Dignity; the later whereof they wanted, that which should dignifie them in a
degree of a Metropolitan, being absolutely interdicted them by this very Canon,
in these words, (...), let them enjoy only the honor. Secondly, what this
honor was, your friend Balsamon tells you; saying, Some desired to know what
that honor meant; (...), and received answer, (...), that except only that
this Bishopric was called a Metropolis, in all other things it was subject to
the former Metropolis. Thirdly, answerable to this are the very words in the
Council, calling the former Metropolis in contradistinction to this, (...)* the
true Metropolis, signifying the other to be merely titular. Fourthly, our
question being, whether the Emperor could give Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, not
whether he could name places as he pleases; and it being evident hence, that
either the Emperor never gave any Jurisdiction to the new Metropolis, or if he
did, it was cassated by the Council, nothing follows against us, but totally
against your self: now that they had no new Jurisdiction given them, is
manifest out of the former pla^^ in Balsamon, saying, the Episcopacy was only
called a Metropolis; to which he subjoyns, (...) (...). For the Bishop of it
(this new Metropolis) shall be ordained by the old Metropolitan, and shall be
judged by him, and in plain terms shall be subject to him. Fifthly, Balsamon
tells us, the Emperors did this according to the power that was given them,
which words the Doctor cites; but leaves out a thing called (...), rendered by
the Interpreter Olim, that is, once, formerly, or by some precedent Council;
which Balsamon in that very place, judges to have been the eight and thirtieth
Canon in Trullo; as shall be more clearly manifested hereafter. The sum then of
this first Testimony, is, That the Emperor conferred only a name or title, and
that not without power given by the Church in her Councils; both which are
perfectly innocent to our cause, and prejudicial to the Alleagers.

His first Observation hereupon, is, That this Ibid.
Council was within twenty years after that Grant of Valentinian; and
consequently (says the Doctor) if Balsamon say right, That at that time many
Emperors had erected many, there must needs be others before Valentinian. Where
the Observer is fallen into a great mistake. Balsamons words are these. (...),
etc. The Canon determining these things, may some one say, How then have diverse
Kings honored diverse Episcopacies to be Metropolitans: For now the Metropolis
of Lacedemonia was a Bishopric of the Metropolis of old PATRAE, Madita of
Heraclea, Abyous of Cyricum; and other Bishoprics also were honored. It ^^ems
therefore to me, from the eight and thirtieth Canon, etc. Where (to omit that
Balsamon in the first part of this Testimony, intimates, That Kings may be
checked in such things by Councils, and not freed from that check, but from some
Concession of another Council) the words are plain, That Balsamon speaks of his
own times, in which he lived, that is, Six hundred years after the Council; and
that then such and such Metropolitans were made, not of the time, when the
Council was held. But the Observation is not much worth arguing or clearing.

His second Observation, is, That the seventeenth Ibid.
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, does more expressly attribute this power to
the Prince, saying, (...). If any City be built or restored by the Kings power,
let the Ecclesiastical order follow the Political. Thus the Doctor walks up and
down, and yet at the same time disputes against motion: He is to prove, That it
is the Kings proper right, independent of the Church or her Canons, to transfer
the Ecclesiastical Dignities according to his political orders; and he brings
for proof, a Canon of a Council, or the Church constituting and ordaining it;
which shows that the matter depended upon the Ecclesiastical state: And he
calls that a more express attributing this power to the Prince, which is indeed
not attribuere but tribuere; not an acknowledgment of it, but a bestowing and
conferring it.

This is most evident to the eye of any one who can read Greek, out of the
Scholion of your Friend Balsamon upon the eight and thirtieth Canon in Trullo;
which Scholion you quote here, as if it were to your purpose, and which very
Canon you allege here for your self in these words, And the same power is
acknowledged to belong to the Prince by the Council in Trullo, Can. 38. Upon
which Canon, Balsamon says thus, (...), etc. But since the present Canon
defines that those Cities which are erected, or shall be erected by the
Emperor, be honored also by Churches conformably to the Emperors disposition,
(...). We say (says Balsamon) that also BY THE PRESENT CANON IT IS GIVEN TO
THE EMPEROR to make new Bishoprics, and raise others to the right of
Metropolitans; and to ordain concerning their election and administration, as
it shall seem good to him. And a little after he recites an Edict of the
Emperor to that purpose, in which are found these words, (...), etc. My
Imperial power not suffering THE PRIVILEGE WHICH IS GRANTED IT BY THE DIVINE
CANONS to be neglected, ordains, etc. Was ever good man so mistaken as to cite
such places, which, looked into, are as expressly against him, as if they were
coined purposely in defiance of his doctrine? Yet he, forgetting the question,
runs on with a long Testimony, That the Emperors could do it (...) and (...),
of his own motion, and without the ambitious solicitation of them that sought
it. Whereas the question is not upon what terms it was lawful, for the Emperor
to give it; but whether it were his own proper power annexed to him, as Head of
the Church, solicited or not solicited, to give it at all, and erect such
Metropolitans at pleasure; or rather, whether it were an indulgence or
privilege, granted and given him by the Church in her Canons: Which last is
our tenet, and most evidently visible in the very Testimonies alleged against
us.

His second Testimony (for the two last were Ibid.
only his over-sights or observations) begins after the old strain thus: And
ACCORDINGLY the same Balsamon (on Conc. Carthag. Can. 16.) does upon that Canon
professedly found the Authority of Princes (...) to advance an Episcopal See
into a Metropolis, and a new to constitute Bishops and Metropolitans. Thus far
the Doctor: Where he is over head and ears again in a grievous mistake; for
neither does Balsamon found the Authority of Princes to execute such Acts, as
of their own power, on that Canon, there being not a word in it to that
purpose: Neither does he PROFESSEDLY say any thing as of himself, but that you
are PROFESSEDLY mistaken: And had he said it, I conceive it no such strong
Argument, That a professed Adversary should speak so professedly against one.
But indeed, neither he nor the Canon say any such matter. The Canon not so much
as names, either Episcopal or Metropolical Se^s; but the main business there
treated, is, That Bishops and Priests should not live upon base occupations,
nor employ themselves in secular businesses: Which Balsamon in his Scholion or
Comment, more elucidates from like prohibitions of other Patriarchs; adding in
the end out of other men's opinions, and not his own profession, these words,
(...). -- But some say these Canons or Constitutions take place, when any one,
who has taken holy Orders, shall exercise a secular Ministry without the
command of the Emperor. -- (...), etc. And they add (says Balsamon) that the
King is neither under Laws nor Canons; and therefore he may securely make a
Bishopric a Metropolis, etc. -- and anew constitute Bishops and Metropolitans.
Where the Reader may see he introduces this as a deduction of others; and that
from no other grounds then this, A King is neither bound by Canons nor Laws;
that is, his Will is his Law, or he may do lawfully what he lists; and then
indeed (these grounds supposed) I blame not the inference that he should erect,
transplant, n^y, pull down, not only Bishops and Patriarchs, but the whole
Hierarchy it self (your present lot, consequent to these your grounds.)

Thus at length we have found the bottomstone of the Doctors grounds, Why Kings
may erect Patriarchates by their proper power, not to be Councils, as he
pretended; but their own all-lawful inerrableness to do what they please, let
Councils, Canons, Parliaments, and Laws say what they will to the contrary. A
foundation fitting indeed to build the Doctors Assertion upon, but in all other
respects, able to ruin and overthrow both Laws, Commonwealths, Canons, and
Church.

In his fifteenth Section, persisting still in his C. 6. S. 15, 16.
seigned supposal, That the Popes power is only Patriarchal; he goes on to
prove, that the antiquity of translating Patriarchs and Bishops belongs to
Kings, as well as of erecting. Of which he gives some instances in our Country
of England: By which, what he means to prove, I cannot easily conjecture. If he
intends that Kings did often do such things, I wonder who denies it; but if they
did it by their proper right, without the order or consent, either of the
Apostolical See, or the Ecclesiastical State of his own Bishops; he brings not
one word in proof, but rather expressly manifests the contrary from the carriage
of St. Anselm, then Archbishop of Canterbury, as learned and pious a Prelate as
that age produced; who (as the Doctor confesses) when the King would have cut
off as much from the Diocese of Lincoln, as would make a new Bishopric at Ely,
Anselm wrote to Pope Paschalis, desiring his consent to it; assuring him he
would not give his consent, but salva authoritate Papae, the authority of the
Pope being secured. Where you see plainly, the Archbishops consent was
necessary, and that without it, the Kings desire seemed controleable: Next,
that the Archbishop himself, even with the Kings authority to back him, would
not venture on it till the Pope's consent was asked.

Here then Mr. Doctor you have a positive Testimony of the gravest Prelate our
Country has ever been honored with, refusing the sufficiency of the Kings
sole authority to conclude such businesses, without his, and the Popes consent;
which therefore more justly challenges audience in the Court of Reason, then
all your dumb Negatives, though they were a thousand more.

To conclude, in what your Testimonies were Positive, to wit, that such things
were done de facto, so far we yield to them; in what they are Negative, tacitly
inferring, that because they were done, and no man's right named, therefore they
were done de jure, by the proper right of him that did them: So far we allow
them no credit at all.

First, Because they might have been performed by the secular Authorities,
either with consent of the Bishops, or some indulgent grant of the Church to
pious Princes; or, by order from the Pope; or else, Concession of some former
Council; an example of which, we had lately in the Council of Chalcedon.

Next, because Histories, intending only to relate matters of fact, mention
rather those that put things in execution, and more visibly appear in the
transacting them, such as are Secular Magistrates; and stand not scanning or
debating much, by whose right things were done; which belongs to Lawyers, and
would be but a bydiscourse hindering the orderly process of their Narrative
strain.

Thirdly, because every one who has the least smack of Logic knows, A
Negative Argument proves nothing, such as are all yours here alleged. For this
is the tenor of them, Historians say, Some Kings translated some Patriarchates,
and it is not mentioned, they did it by the Churches power; therefore they did
it by their own; which will be found in good Logic, to fall very far short of
concluding.

Lastly, because the Church ever challenged, as her own proper right, asserted
to her by the Canons, the jurisdiction and power, to intermeddle in businesses
purely Ecclesiastical.

In his seventeenth Paragraph he proposes C. 6. S. 17.
two other Objections of the same nature with the rest. The first, in common,
that the King could exempt from Episcopal Jurisdiction, which he says is
largely asserted and exemplified in Coudrayes case, 5 Report. 14. And truly the
Doctor is to be commended for his fair and sincere expression. For it is indeed
merely asserted and exemplified without the least shadow of proof.

In the first example there alleged, King Kenulphus is said to have exempted a
Monastery, Consilio and consensis Episcoporum and Senatorum Gentis suae, which
was no instance of power in him, unless it was also in the Bishops and Nobles,
That he could not, or would not do it without their agreement.

The exemption of Reading Abbey, by Henry the First, argues no authority, he
being the Founder of it, and not bound to give his goods to the Church, but
upon the conditions which pleases himself. Which answer likewise serves for all
Hospitals, and such like pious Houses founded by the King.

The third example of the Abbot of Buries exemption by the King, is Recorded
without particular circumstances, and so must stand for an example of the Kings
execution or command, to the secular Magistrate, to proceed accordingly, but
proves nothing, That the King did it without consent of the Bishop, under whom
it was.

These are all the cases of secular exemptions, produced by that learned
Lawyer, which you see are pure examples of the Kings exempting, either with the
Bishops consent, or by title of asking, what conditions he thought fit to annex
to his own Liberalities, as every private person may, or at most alleged so
abstractedly, that any of these, or many other causes, may justly be supposed
to have intervened. But I mistake, there is yet one more, to which the Doctor
thought good to give a particular efficacy, by citing the very words of the
Charter, which are these, Hoc regali authoritate and Episcoporum ac Baronum
attestatione constituo. I appoint this by my royal Authority with the
attestation of my Bishops and Barons. But had the Doctor remembered he had named
this King, before William the Conqueror, he would have understood that Regali
Authoritate, signified as much as in the first of Kings does that famous phrase
Ius Regis, that is, the power of the sword, the power of taking away any man's
goods, and giving them to another; the power of doing all wrong, as is not
only known of the Conquerors other proceedings, but even out of this fact,
taking the goods of a Bishop, and the provision ordained for Souls, and
attributing them to an Abbey: And this by the very words of the Charter,
without any course of Law or consent of any Justice, or power in the
Commonwealth: So that our Doctor has brought us in a very special example for
Henry the Eighth, the worst of his Successors to imitate, and justify his
Spiritual Authority by.

To that which he affirms of the Chatholick C. 6. S. 18.
German Emperors, the Kings of France and England; that they claimed to be
founders of all Bishoprics in their Dominions, and Patrons of them to bestow
them by investiture: I answer, they did very well to found as many as they
pleased, that is, to enrich and enlarge the Church with Episcopal Revenues by
their pious Donations; and when they have done, to claim deservedly the
Advowsons, and present whom they please to be invested by the Church; whom yet,
if they be found unworthy, the Church rejects, notwithstanding the Kings
presentation and authority, and consequently this is done by the consent of the
Church: Neither is this annexed to the Kingly dignity only, as a particular
badg of his Authority over the Church; but even private Subjects, when either
themselves or their Ancestors have founded some Ecclesiastical Benefice,
challenge to themselves the Advowsons, without any prejudice to the Church; who
allows it reasonable, that the Friends of the Donors should rather enjoy that
benefit, then others. Unless, perhaps, the persons be found unfit; which in
that case, obliges the Church to use her Authority, by interposing her resusal.
This therefore private persons can do, as well as Kings, and yet, I hope, the
Doctor will not say, That all those are Lords and Heads of the Church. Lastly,
he might as well have made mention of the Pope and Clergies ressistance to
Kings that usurped the investitures, as of the others claiming of them; both
being equally notorious in History, and the Princes in the end, having yielded
that their pretense was unjust.

Next he tells us, the Kings of France and Ibid.
England, claimed a just right, that no Legate from Rome could use Jurisdiction
here, without their leave. What a terrible business is this? Or, what follows
hence? None can imagine but the Dr. himself, who certainly had some meaning in
it, or other; They did so indeed, and so do Catholic Kings sometimes to this
day; who yet communicate with the Church, and are accounted obedient sons, as
long as they proceed with due moderation. But that they did it in
disacknowledgment of the Popes Supremacy; or, that the Legate brought not his
Jurisdiction with him from Rome, but was glad to receive it of the King, ere he
could use it, this the Doctor will never be able to make good. Nay, they were
so far from denying the Popes Authority even in this kind, That our Kings of
England procured of the Pope, that the Archbishop of Canterbury should be
Legatus Natus.

But now the Doctor has resolved me of my Ibid.
former doubt, which was, with what art possible he could make these imperfect
Testimonies serve his purpose; adding here immediately these words, All these
put together, are a foundation for this power of the Princes, to erect or
translate a Patriarchate. As if he should have said, Though there be not one
word in any single Testimony expressly manifesting, That it is principally the
Kings power, or excluding the Churches; yet I have produced many things little
to the purpose (if considered in their single selves) which, notwithstanding I
would entreat you to believe, that ALL THESE PUT TOGETHER ARE A FOUNDATION,
etc. Where note, that here again also he observes his former invincible method
of reserving his strongest Arguments till the last; putting immediately before
his Conclusion, That the Legates were often not admitted in England; so as out
of the very non-admission of the Legates, the Doctor infers an absolute power
in Princes, to erect and translate Patriarchates. Besides, were all this
granted, what is it to your, or our purpose; since we accuse you not of Schism,
for breaking from the Popes subjection, as a private Patriarch, but as the
chief Pastor and Head of the Church.

But, because the Doctor could not handsomely transfer this Primacy from Rome to
Canterbury, to secure him from the subjection to Antichrist; therefore he was
pleased to mistake it, all along this Chapter, for a Patriarchate; and then
undertakes to show from some few Testimonies de facto, That it was not the
Churches, but the Kings Authority to erect and translate them. Whereas (besides
the answers in particular already given) no prudent man can doubt, but in the
process of fifteen or sixteen hundred years, and in such a vast extent as the
Christian world, there may be found twenty or thirty matters of Fact (if one
will take Histories to collect them) either out of ambition, ignorance,
rebellion, or tyranny, against the most inviolable right that can be imagined.

Besides, many things might often be mentioned, by Historiographers, as done,
without particularizing the Authority, by which they were done. Especially in
our case; where, by reason of the connection between the Soul and Body of the
politic world; the Ecclesiastical and Secular State; they seem to act as one
thing: The Temporal Authority most commonly putting in execution the intentions
of the Church. And this also makes them appear more visibly to proceed from the
Temporal part, then from the Spiritual; as humane actions more apparently
spring from the Body, then from the Soul. But if the Doctor would have proved
sincerely, That Kings indeed had that pretended power, he should not have stood
piddling with half a dozen fag ends of History, to prove such a thing was
sometimes done de facto, but recurred to the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Canons, where such things are purposely treated, and there he should have found
another story. But he is wiser then to confine himself within the proper lists
of any question; he had rather be in the open field, where his little
fayeryreason may hop and skip from bough to bryar; and weary his adversary not
to combat, but to catch him.

SECT. 6.
The Examination of the Testimonies produced by Mr. Hammond to prove his
fundamental Position, that Kings are supreme in spiritual matters:

THe endeavors of Mr. Hammond in the foregoing C. 6. S. 19.
part of this Chapter was first, to suppose the Pope only a private Patriarch,
next, that the King can erect and translate Patriarchates; after which (though
other men of reason use to put their grounds, ere they deduce any thing from
them) he lays the grounds in this 19 Paragraph of his formerly built discourse,
saying, that the Reason of all is, the supreme power of Kings, even in
Ecclesiastical matters. Where, (to omit how he has mangled that one poor
Paragraph with ten parenthesisses, no more) he so intermingles and shuffles
together, in an equal tenor, truths with falsehoods, things dubious and
unprov'd, with things acknowledged, and that need no proof, things to the
purpose, with things to no purpose, that it would loath any well-ordered
Reason, to see in so little a room, so perfect a map of disorderly confusion.
But ere we come to answer that; his marginal testimonies which he huddles
together briefly of all sorts, would seem neglected, if we should not allow
them a cursory reflection.

First, what he objects out of Chomatenus, though his Author were of any
Authority, yet it makes nothing at all to his purpose; since the very words he
cites, that the King is as it were the common Director and Ruler of the Church,
signifies rather he was not so* then was so; unless he can prove that quasi, as
it were, can bear the sense of revera, indeed, or in reality. And then how
handsomely think you, would these words hang together, that the King is IN
REALITY AS IT WERE, the Ruler of the Church. Nay rather the words alleged
plainly signify the contrary: For, if there be a common Ruler of the Church,
and the King be only as it were that Ruler; it is plain, there is some other,
not, as it were, but truly and properly such.

The second is yet much more absurd; for never was there Testimony, nor can be
imagined in so little room, more expressly witnessing, that Kings have nothing
to do with Ecclesiastical affairs then this of Constantine; which the Doctor
brings to prove the contrary. I mean if we take the words as the Doctor cites
them* in Greek, without his can^ing translation of them. The words are these,
(...). In English thus, as near word by word as it can possibly be rendered.
You truly (speaking to the Bishops) are constituted Overseers (or Bishops) of
those affairs which are within the Church; but I am constituted under God
Overseer of those affairs which are without the Church. But the Doctor seems
willing to take there the word (...) or Church, for a material Church of stone,
and so* renders (...), those things which are celebrated within it; Yet is
pitifully puzzled notwithstanding, rendering (...) (which signifies things
without the Church) external things; because the right words would have
excluded the Emperors power over Ecclesiastical affairs; and yet even so it
will not serve his turn; for unless he can make his own words ( external
things) signify spiritual things, to which they will be very unwilling, the
Testimony is still expressly against him.

Besides, it is pretty sport to observe how sillily insincere the Doctor is,
telling us that Constantine the Great spoke those words in an Assembly of
Bishops; by which and the Doctors wrong Translation, the simple Reader would
judge that Constantine had told a General Council of Bishops to their face,
that he was Head of the Church: but when I came to find out the Author and the
place (both which the Doctor had prudently omitted) I found it was only spoken
when he was at dinner with some Bishops. The Author is Eusebius, de vita
Constantini, l. 4* c. 24. The title of the Chapter is this, as I find it in
the Translator, (for I had not the Greek) Quod externarum rerum quasi Episcopum
se quendam professus est, That he professed himself, as it were a kind of a
Bishop over external things. Then follows the Chapter in these words. Ex quo
etiam factum est, ut cum Episcopos nonnullos convivio excepisset, ipse se nobis
audientibus Episcopum appellaret, his fere verbis: Vos, (inquit) intra
Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo Episcopus constitutus sum. Itaque cum quae
loquebatur eadem secum mente cogitaret, animum in omnes qui ejus suberant
imperio intentum habuit, hortatus pro virili utpiam omnes vitam excolerent.
Whence it came to pass, that when he had entertained some Bishops at a feast
(or Banquet) he in our hearing, called himself a Bishop in those words: You
(says he) are constituted Bishops within the Church, I without the Church.
Wherefore since his thought went along with his words, he applied his mind to
those who were under his Empire, exhorting them, to his power, that they should
all lead a pious life. Where, besides what I formerly found the Doctor faulty
in, we see that the Author of this Testimony, who was present, when the Emperor
spoke these words, and so could best judge of his meaning by the circumstances,
deduced no more out of them, then that he called himself Bishop, because it
belonged to his Calling to exhort all his subjects to lead a pious life, and
administer rightly those things of which they were Overseers by God.

His third Testimony to prove the King Head of Ecclesiastical, as well as civil
affairs, is, that irreprehended saying of Leo Isaurus, who said to the Pope,
(...), I am a King and a Priest, which was indeed a saying worthy an
Anti-heretick, as Isaurus was; being a ring leader of the Iconoclasts. A wise
man would wonder what the Doctor intended by producing such a saying, which
himself must acknowledge extravagant: since none of the late Kings of England
ever assumed to themselves the title of a Priest, as did this infatuated
Emperor; who gave more credit to Soothsayers and fortune tellers, then to God
and his Church.

The third is from Socrates, who says, the affairs of the Church depended on
the Emperors. And who denies it? Therefore what? Ergo Kings are supreme in
Ecclesiastical affairs? How follows that? since the only word is wanting, to
wit, supreme, which can make good the inference. The affairs of the Head depend
on the Arms and Shoulders; therefore will the Doctor infer they are supreme or
highest? as though dependence could not be both mutual and unequal. It must
needs argue a Soul very empty of reason, to catch thus at every shadow of any
aerie word, and think to deduce thence a full sentence.

The fourth is from Optatus, noting it as a schismatical piece of language in
the Donatists to say, Quod Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do
with the Church, citing for it his second Book. But (though perhaps I may be
mistaken in not seeing so small a Testimony) I find no such thing in that
place he quotes. Indeed I find that ancient Father arguing like a present
Catholic, calling the Doctor Schismatic, and quite confuting and
contradicting all his book; saying, Negare non potes scire te in urbe Roma
PETRO PRIMO Cathedram Episcopalem esse collatam; in qua sederit omnium
APOSTOLORUM CAPUT PETRUS; Thou can not deny that in the City of Rome the
Episcopal Chair was given to PETER THE FIRST; in which sat PETER THE HEAD OF
ALL THE APOSTLES. Then he proceeds to reckon up all the Popes of Rome,
successors of S. Peter, till Pope Siricius, who lived in his days, Cum quo
nobis totus orbis in commercio Formatorum in una Communionis societate
concordat; -- With whom the whole world agrees in one society of Communion, by
correspondence of communicatory Letters. -- * And afterward, probatum est nos
esse in Ecclesia Sancta Catholica -- per Cathedram Petri, quae nostra est, and
per ipsam caeteras Dotes apud nos esse, etiam Sacerdotium. It is proved that we
are in the holy Catholic Church by the chair of Peter, which is ours: (what
will become of the Doctor, who can lay no claim, nor has any right to it, nay
has disclaimed its right, and who finds here a reason why we may justly be
called Roman Catholics) It follows, and by the chair of Peter, other gifts are
also with us, even Priesthood. Alas poor Doctor Hammond, who having lost
Communion with that Church, has lost also his Priesthood, Mission, and power
to preach, if this holy Father say true. What hard fortune it was that Optatus
lived not in the primitive times, for then the Doctor had believed him and
turned Papist; but in regard he wrote after the three hundredth year, (the fatal
period of any certain truth in Gods Church, as the Doctor afterward intimates)
he has quite lost his labor, and his Authority is invalid for writing Truth
so late. As for the Testimony it self, which probably is this Fathers in some
other place, I see no difficulty at all in it: For the Emperor being a nursing
Father to the Church, whose secular power she invoked to punish and repress
such as were the Donatists; none but Schismatics would deny that power so
granted to be sufficiently Authoritative to punish their pernicious Apostasy.

Then follow six Testimonies out of heathen writers all in a cluster, that
their Kings ought to be Priests and Augurs, etc. and the Doctor would have the
example transferred to Christianity. Indeed if Jesus Christ had not come from
heaven to found a Church, and (besides what has been said of St. Peter's
Primacy) left it under the Government of Ecclesiastical persons, the Apostles,
committing all jurisdiction in affairs of that nature to them, without
dependence of any secular superior; then, for any thing I know, we might have
come ere this to have been in statu quo prius, that is, Heathens again; and so
the Doctors Argument might have taken place* But if Christ founded a Church
upon Apostles, Ecclesiastical persons, without the help of secular supports,
leaving all power both of Ordination and Jurisdiction to it, the Doctor must
either prove no disparity between the sacred economy of Christ's House, and the
Babel of heathenism; or else grant his parity improper and absurd. I never
imagined there was any such extraordinary holiness in the heathenish Rites, but
a secular power might serve to perform and overlook them: And, as the reason
why they were used by the Emperors, was only because their mock-Religion was
nothing but a policy to delude and bridle the vulgar; so if Christian Religion
were nothing but a trick of State Policy, it would do very well indeed in a
secular Princes hands, to alter and fashion it to the mold of the peoples
humors. But our all-wise God has dealt more prudently with his Church;
encharging his sacred Mysteries and the Churches-Government to those persons,
whose very state of life being purely dependent on God and his service, secures
them from being cross-byass'd by worldly interests, and secular pretenses. Yet
the Doctor is so deeply immersed in Schism, that he relishes and fancies better
the Pope-destroying example of heathen policy, then the ever-sacred, and
heaven-instituted Government of Christianity.

His eleventh instance is from David who ordered the courses of the Priests,
and Solomon who consecrated the Temple; but the Doctor may consider, that David
and Solomon were Prophets as well as Kings, and so no wonder, if, according to
the more particular prudence given them by God, they did something
extraordinary. Neither doubt I, but if nowadays any King were both a Saint and
a Prophet, it were very convenient he should assist and instruct the Church in
a more particular way, and yet not thank his Kingly Dignity for that Authority
neither. But indeed, neither David nor Solomon showed any strain of a higher
Jurisdiction. Their greater zeal might invite them, and their exacter knowledge
make their assistance requisite to order the courses of the Priests. And as for
Solomon's Consecrating the Temple, it was performed by offering Sacrifice; which
he himself* offered not, but the Priests; so as his Consecrating it was nothing
else but his causing them to Consecrate it. A pitiful proof that Kings are
over the Church in Ecclesiastical affairs.

His twelfth Testimony is of Hezekiah and Josiah, who ordered many things
belonging to the Temple. So wonderfully acute is this Doctor, that no King can
do a pious deed, or even scarce say his Prayers, but his honor-dropping-pen,
straight way entitles him Head of the Church.

His thirteenth is of St. Paul, who (says he) Ibid.
appealed from the judgment of the chief Priests to the Tribunal of Caesar. So
as now Caesar, a Heathen Emperor, is become Head of the Church; nay of two
Churches (according to Master Hammond) the Heathenish, and the Christian. But
the good Doctor is most grievously mistaken here, as he has been almost in
every place of Scripture he has yet produced and I observe, that though he be
pretty good at mistaking all over his Book, yet when he omes to allege any
thing out of Gods Word, he errs far more accurately. For St. Paul appealed not
from the Tribunal of the Jews, much less their Synagogue (representing their
Church) as the Doctor would persuade us; but from the Tribunal of Portius
Festus, a Roman Governor under Caesar, to Caesar himself; I will only put down
the words as I find them in their own Translation, and so leave the Doctor to
the Readers Judgment, either to be accused for wilfully abusing, or
ignorantly mistaking them: But Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure,
answered Paul and said, will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these things before me: Then said Paul, I stand at Caesar's judgment seat where
I ought to be judged, etc. Act. 25. 9, 10, etc. And now is not this Doctor
think you the fittest man among all the sons of the Church of England to have a
Pension for writing Annotations in folio on the Bible.

His last proof is, that Justinians third Book is made up of Constitutions, de
Episcopis, Clericis, Laicis; Bishops, Priests, Laymen. First we answer, and the
same may be said of the Theodosian Code, that all the Laws found there must not
necessarily be Justinians; since the Keepers of the Laws use not only to put
in their Lawbooks those Constitutions, themselves made, but also those they are
to see observed; among which are the Canons and Laws of the Church, made before
by Councils and other Ecclesiastical Powers. Secondly, We grant Justinian may
make Constitutions of his own concerning Bishops, and Clergymen, in what
relates to temporal affairs, or as they are parts of the civil Commonwealth*
And lastly, If he shall be found to have made any Laws concerning them, and
without the Authority of the Church entrenching upon Ecclesiastical businesses,
let the Doctor prove he had power to make such, and he will in so doing, clear
him in that part, from that note of Tyranny, which is objected against him.

What you say concerning the Canons of Councils, that they have been mostly set
out by the Emperors; It is very certain, you might, if you had pleased, instead
of your Mostly have put Always, the causing them to be promulgated belonging to
the Office of the supreme secular Powers; whose obligation it is to see that
the Churches decrees be received and put in execution. What you clap in within
a Parenthesis (as your custom is to intermingle truth with falsehood) that
Canons of Councils received their Authority by the Emperor; In the sense you
take it is a great error. For never was it heard that an Emperor claimed a
negative voice in making a Canon of a Council valid, which concerned matters
purely Spiritual; nay, nor disaccepted them, decreed unanimously by the
Fathers, but all the world looked upon him as an unjust and tyrannical
incroacher. They receive indeed Authority from the Emperor in this sense, that
his subscription and command to proclaim them makes them have a more powerful
reception, and secures them from the obstacles of turbulent and rebellious
spirits; But this will not content you, your aim is, that they should not have
the Authority or validity of a Canon, without the last-life-giving-hand of the
Emperors vote, which is only a strain of your own liberality to him, or rather
of your envy toward the Church, without any ground of his rightful claim to
any such Jurisdiction over Councils.

SECT. 7.
Other empty Proofs of this pretended Right, confuted.

THese rubs being removed, it will be our next sport to address an answer to
his nineteenth Section it self; where omitting his ten Parenthesisses, which
contain nothing, but either sayings of his own, or Greek out of Strabo's
Geography, That the Romans kept their assizes at diverse places; or Testimonies
from the Council of Chalcedon, already answered; omitting these, I say, I will
briefly resume the whole sense of the Paragraph, as well as I can gather it out
of the some-thing-more- Lucid intervals of his mad Parenthesisses: And this I
take to be the sum of it, That Kings should, according to emergent
conveniences, change their Seats of Judicature; C. 6* S. 19.
and that the same reasons may require a removal of Ecclesiastical Seats;
wherefore, there being nothing to the contrary constituted, either by Christ or
his Apostles, it follows, That Kings may, when they please, erect, and
consequently remove Primacies and Metropolitans.

I answer, That Secular Courts may be removed upon good occasions, is so
evident to every Fool, that it needs neither Greek, nor Strabo to prove it.
That Ecclesiastical Seats, for greater conveniences of the Church, be also
subject to removal, is likewise evident and constituted by the Council of
Chalcedon, Can. 17. But his inference, That it belongs to the right of Kings to
erect and transfer them, is weaker then water; nor has the Doctor infused into
it, the least grain of Reason to strengthen it.

Yet first to prove it, he says, Nothing is found either by Christ, or his
Apostles ordered to the contrary. Which is a most pitiful Negative proof (as
indeed the greatest part of his Book i^) and supposes, to make it good, That
neither Christ, nor his Apostles, said, did, or ordered any thing but what is
expressed in Scripture; which is both expressly contrary to Scripture it self, and
to common reason also.

Besides, this wise proof is both most unjust toward us, and silly in him to
expect; unjust toward us, engaging us to prove out of Scripture, That Kings
cannot erect Primacies and Patriarchates, whereas there is no such word there,
as either Primate or Patriarchate, which he would have us show thence not
subject to Kings.

Nor is it less silly in him to expect, That the Scripture should make mention
of the erection, or not erection of Primacies and Patriarchates by Secular
Powers; since the Secular Powers, when the Scripture was written, being most
bloody Tyrants and Persecutors of the Church, were more likely to hang up all
Primates and Patriarchs, then either erect or remove their Seats to a more
convenient place. Yet if you would see something to the contrary, why Kings
should not use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, I can produce you the sense of the
Catholic Church, the best Testimony that can be alleged for the meaning of
Gods Spirit; but because this weighs little with you, I show you next, the
Testimony of common sense and reason, which tells you, Faber fabrilia tractet;
and that those, whose education, institute of life, particular designment to,
and total dependence on any course of life, makes them more strongly addict all
their thoughts to perfect themselves knowingly and magisterially in that their
proper profession, are fitter by far for such an employment, then those whose
diversly-distracted studies, render them half-knowing, or half-careful in such
performances.

How much then is it more convenient, that Ecclesiastical persons should manage
the affairs of the Church, then Secular Princes, whom partly their necessary
Temporal occasions, partly voluntary Recreations, Court attendances and
entertainments, so quite take up, that they can have but saint and weak
reflections, either of knowledge or care, in comparison of the others, upon the
most concerning business imaginable, the ordering Gods Church.

The Doctors Conclusion then, which he says is, both rational and evident, is
both irrational, and very dim-coloured to any eye but his own, who supposes (as
he tells us here, for our farther confirmation) That he has made it already
clear from the refutation of our Plea for St. Peter's Universal Pastorship;
whereas, it has been manifested, he had not one express word of proof to make
good his pretended confutation; insomuch, as I promise him a general pardon,
and acquittance for the frivolousness of all the rest, if he can show me in his
Answer, that any one place expressly testified, that which he pretended to
evidence by Testimonies.

What he adds, That it was appointed by the Council of Chalcedon, de jure, that
the King may erect a Primacy when he pleases. I dare be bold to call a forgery;
and that, it needs an ID EST of the seventeens, to make the Councils words
sound to his purpose.

What he tells us next, as a thing certain, Ibid.
That King Ethelbert at the time of Austins planting the Faith, did erect a
Primacy at Canterbury, the seat of his Kingdom: Imperii sui totius Metropolis,
says Bid, etc. is such a childish piece of insincerity, that it craves as
much pity as it deserves anger. Forbid only tells us there, How the King
answered them, that he could not assent to their new doctrine; yet because they
were strangers, and desired to communicate to him what they believed to be
true, he would not trouble them, but rather kindly entertain them, etc. Then
follows the Doctors Testimony, Dedit ergo eis manfionem in Civitate Dovernensi
quae Imperii sui totius erat Metropolis. Eisque, ut promiserat, cum
administratione victus temporalis, etc. Wherefore he gave them a dwelling place
in the City of Canterbury ( the Mother-City of his whole Dominions) and with
administration of Temporal food, he hindered them not from Preaching. So that
the giving them an House in Canterbury to dwell in, and meat to eat, is a clear
evidence with Master Hammond, That the King (yet a Heathen) erected a Primacy,
when certainly he knew not then what a Primacy meant.

Lastly, To convince absolutely, That Kings were Heads of the Church, and
translated and erected Primacies at pleasure, he concludes, That had it not
been for this, there is no reason assignable, why this Nation being in
Constantine's time, under three Metropolitans, there should be an addition of
two Provinces; or that the Metropolitical power should be so removed. As if it
could not be done at all, unless the King did it. What an Argument is here, to
bring for an up-shot of his proofs, That the King is Head of the Church? We
both acknowledge, that some removals of Ecclesiastical Seats have been in
England; but the Question is, Whether it belongs to the Kings, or the Popes, to
cause these removals; he undertakes to prove it the Kings right, we deny it.
The Doctor produces his Sacra Anchora, or last proof, That there is no reason
assignable why these Sees were removed, had it not been that the King had
power: We answer, We can tell how to remove them without the Kings power, to
wit, by the Popes; which is the question he professes to make head against: But
proceeds not farther, then only to say it must needs be the King, and that we
cannot assign the Pope; and that the thing was done, and therefore the King
must necessarily be the doer of it. Thus you see the Doctor is constant to his
Principles, in putting his strongest Arguments in the rear. What man living is
able to withstand so potent and cunning an Adversary?

Besides, suppose there had been neither Pope nor King, was there any
impossibility that consent of Bishops might remove the Primacy to another See?
especially, the Bishops being anciently of such Authority in England, That no
weighty affairs were transacted, but they had a share in the managing of them.
You see then Mr. Doctor there are two reasons assignable for the fact, which
you prove to be the Kings power, because he did it, and then prove he did it,
because otherwise it could not have been done.

After he has thus convinced Kings to have power also over Ecclesiastical
affairs, he proceeds to prove, that this power of theirs (taken C. 6. S. 20.
away by the Laws) is resumable: and, although his supposition being shown to
be groundless, there needs no answer to what he builds upon it, yet we will not
be so discourteous as to slight his mistakes by affording them no Reply.

Under Pope Melchiades in Constantines time was made a Decree, that if the
Donatist Bishops in Africa would return to the Unity of the Church, they should
be allowed either to keep the Bishoprics they had, or be provided of others:
their obstinacy permitted not this to be executed, and therefore it was
recalled. Near a hundred years after under Pope Anastasius, a National Council
in Africa ordained a request to Him and other Bishops of Italy, by whose
predecessors the revocation had been made, that the Donatist Bishops might
retain their places, if they would return to the Catholic Church; the cunning
Balsamon puts the provision it self for a Canon of this Council; and it had
been a foul offense in the Doctor to have taken notice of the request, though
he must needs have read it in Baronius, whom he cites in the very place.
Therefore he concludes, that Laws made at Rome do not take away the liberty of
another National Council to make contrary Laws thereunto. Although as far as
can be drawn out of the fact and Council, it argues the direct contrary, and
that it was not lawful, for their National Council to infringe what had been
done at Rome: so unlucky is the Doctor in bringing Arguments so restiff and
kicking, that they cast their rider out of his intent.

He tells next, that a Law though made by a General C. 6. S. 22.
Council and with the consent of all Christian Princes, yet, if it have respect
to a civil right, may in this or that Nation be repealed; quoting one Roger
Widrington and Suarez; the latter of them, gives this reason; because such a
Law made at a general meeting of Princes, is intrinsically a civil Law. But
what the Doctor will do with this after he has produced it I cannot certainly
say, only I see he must be very fruitful in unprov'd suppositions, ere it will
be able to do him or his cause any good. First, he must suppose that the title
of the Head of the Church is a thing not Ecclesiastical, but belonging to a
civil right; next, that that same title is denied their Kings, only upon
pretense of a Canon of a Council, and not upon Christ's donation of it to St.
Peter, these two unproved and ungranted positions (I say) he must suppose
gratis. Otherwise to what end does he argue that the Canons of Councils are
repealable and the Kings right by consequence resumeable.

What follows next in the 23 Section, that C. 6. S. 23.
this is affirmed and intended by Balsamon to all Canons in general, as the
judgment of learned men, in his notes on the sixteenth Canon of the Council of
Carthage, has already been answered, and shown that it is not Balsamon who
affirms it, but other men; neither does he call them learned men, as the Doctor
here imposes on him, but only says, that some men say the Emperor can do such
and such things. And he adds, that those persons proceed upon this ground, that
the Emperor may do lawfully whatever he lists.

His last Paragraph, for which (as his former custom was) he reserves the best
of his strength, proves that this right of Kings to be head in Ecclesiastical
affairs, cannot be alienated by prescription. The testimony he introduces is of
one Sayr, a late Monk, who wrote his Book at Rome; a man likely to speak much
in the Doctors behalf; whose opinion, in case he should say any thing against
us, being but of a private Casuist, may with the like facility be rejected as
alleged; But what says honest Sayr? he tells us, that when prescription is
neither of the Law of Nature, nor the divine Law, nor the Law of Nations, but
only the civil and Canon Law, there it extends no farther then every supreme
Prince in his Realm by his Law is supposed to will that it shall be extended,
and therefore that no subject can prescribe exemption from making appeal to his
King, or that his Prince may not punish him when Reason and Justice requires.
Let the testimony it self be what it will, what was the Doctor dreaming on when
he produced it? Marry he dreamt two things; First, that the Pope had heretofore
prescribed against the Kings of England in their pretended right of being head
in Ecclesiastical matters; next this prescription of the Pope has not its
force from any thing but a Canon or Civil Law. These two points the Doctor
dreamingly supposes to be certain principles, and it is discourtesie in us not
to grant them gratis, for fear we should spoil his learned Conclusion. What a
shame is this for a Doctor of Divinity, (whereas every boy that has been but
two years at Cambridge, knows he is first to establish his premises firmly, ere
he can claim any certainty of truth in his Conclusion) to suppose his premises
true* and upon that grant, kindly made by himself to himself, conclude at
pleasure what he lists. And what an unconscionable piece of affected ignorance
is this, to bring a Testimony which could not possibly be applied to his
purpose without proving the two former self-made suppositions; and yet to
neglect that necessary task, and conclude in these vain words, It were easy to
apply this distinctly to the confirming of all that has been said, but I shall
not expatiate. It is now become an old excuse with the Doctor to cry he is out
of his way, when he comes to a passage he cannot get over; but
all-to-be-labours things frivolous, and which (his self-laid grounds once
supposed) would be out of question.

Thus you see an end of his sixth Chapter, which was totally built upon this
ground, that the Authority of Head of the Church was no more then Patriarchal,
and consequently needed in rigor of dispute no other reply but only to deny
the supposition, and bid him prove it. What has been answered to each
particular, was only to let the Reader see how inconsequently and weakly he
builds, even upon his own foundations.

SECT. 8.
A Reply to Doctor Hammonds Narrative* Confession of his Schism.

THe Doctor having laid his tottering grounds for the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical affairs, by alleging some Testimonies expressly against himself
and his cause, and not one expressly for them, but what his fellow-schismaticks
afforded him. Next having supposed upon his own strongly-dreaming imagination,
without one direct place of any Authentic writer, against clouds of most plain
Testimonies from Fathers and Councils, frequent in our Controvertists, and not
touched by him in way of answer; against the most visible practice and
universal belief of the whole Catholic world; that the Pope is only a private
Patriarch and has no right of Jurisdiction over the universal Church. And
lastly, out of a few Testimonies witnessing de facto, that Kings did erect and
remove Patriarchates, without any word excluding the Churches precedent orders,
having concluded that such a power belonged de jure to Kings, and was annexed to
a Crown: These three things, most gravely supposed, he goes about to clear the
Church of England from the imputation of casting off obedience to the Bishop of
Rome at the Reformation; which is the intent of this Chapter.

But first he lays down at large the whole history of Schism (ommitting only
the main things that might disgrace it)* and by what degrees or steps this
miserable Kingdom and Church came to renounce the obedience to those
Ecclesiastical superiors, who had (by their own confession, for eight or nine
hundred years) steered that-then-secure Barque in a calm unity of Faith; and
which Authority C. 7. S. 2, 3, 4.
all the then present world, except King Henry's now friend, but late
Antagonist Luther, acknowledged and submitted to: First he tells us this was
done by the Clergy in a Synod, recognizing the King to be supreme Head of the
Church of England; Secondly, By their submitting themselves to the King; and
thirdly, the definition of the Universities and Monasteries after debate, that
the Pope had nothing to do more in England then any other extern Bishop; that
is, nothing at all: And all this in this sort concluded, subscribed and
confirmed by their corporal oaths, (which word corporal was well put in, for
their Souls and Consciences never went along with it) was afterward turned
into Acts of Parliament, in which it was resolved upon the question to defy
the Pope and all his works.

In answer to which (though a bare narration how a Schism was made, deserve
none) yet to devoid it of al excuse it may pretend to, I object, first, that it
did not originally spring from Conscience, no not even an erroneous one, but
from manifest malice and viciousness. Next that the Kingdoms assent to this il
originiz'd breach was not free: And thirdly, that though both these were
granted, yet this act of theirs, so largely laid out by Doctor Hammond, is
truly and properly a Schism, and entitles them schismatics; nay the more the
Doctor dilates upon it, the more schismatical he makes the breach, of which the
two latter himself though never so loath must acknowledge, unless he will deny
his own words.

To begin with the first, all the world knows that, till King Henry violenced
the breach, all England both Clergy and Laity were as equally and as peaceably
conjoined to the Catholic Church under the government of her supreme Pastor,
the Bishop of Rome, as either France or Spain are now: neither did they ever
express any scrupulosity that they had remained under such a Government ever
since the Conversion of their first Forefathers; nor were scandalized at the
then received Doctrine of the Church, holding as a point of Faith that the Pope
was its Head, but abominated the contrary as sacrilegious and schismatical. The
first urger of the breach then was the King (as is also acknowledged) let us
see then what or who urged him, that so we may trace the schism to its first
original, and show the newborn brat its right Parent.

As for the King, while his blood was yet in due temper and not overheated
with passion, that is, while his Conscience was uncorrupted, it is well known
he was as humble a son to the Church and her supreme Pastor, the Bishop of
Rome, as any King in Christendom is at this present; admitting appeals thither,
and his jurisdiction here; nay, indeed more officiously obedient then any King
now-adays can pretend; writing (or else causing to be set out in his name) a
Book against Luther in defense of the Roman Catholic Faith and the Popes
Authority which that Apostate rejected; for which work also he received in
recompense from the Pope the title of Defender of the Faith, inherited by the
succeeding Kings, though they have forfeited the claim to it by disavowing the
fact which deserved it.

What was King Henry's judgment of Henricus in Assert. 7. Sacram: contra Luth.
Art. 2.
the Popes Universal Authority till he fell into passion, is easy to be seen
in his own Book, where he strongly and rationally proves it in these words.

Negare Lutherus non potest, quin omnis Ecclesia fidelium Sacro-Sanctam sedem
Romanam velut Matrem Primatemque recognoscat ac veneretur, quaecunque saltem
neque locorum distantia neque periculis interjacentibus prohibetur accessu.
Quamquam, si vera dicunt qui ex India quoque veniunt huc, Indi etiam ipsi tot
terrarum, tot marium, tot solitudinum plagis disjuncti, Romano tamen Pontifici
se submittunt. Ergo, si tantam and tam late fusam potestatem neque Dei jussu
Pontifex, neque hominum voluntate consecutus est, sed qua sibi vi vendicavit,
dicat velim Lutherus, quando in tantae ditionis erupit professionem? Number potest
obscurum esse initium tam immensae potentiae, praesertim si intra hominum
memoriam nata sit? Quod si rem dixerit unam fortasse aut duas aetates superare;
in memoriam vobis redigat ex Historiis: Alioqui si tam vetusta sit, ut rei
etiam tantae obliteratae sit origo, Legibus omnino cautum esse cognoscat, ut
cujus* jus omnium hominum memoriam ita supergreditur, ut sciri non possit
cujusmodi habuerit initium, censeatur habuisse legitimum: Vetitumque esse
constat omnium consensu Gentium ne quae di^ manserunt immota moveantur.

Luther cannot deny, but all the Church of the faithful, acknowledges and
venerates the Sea of Rome as their Mother and Chief: at least whatsoever Church
is not hindered from coming thither by distance of place or dangers in the way.
Although if credit may be given to those who come from the Indies, even the
very Indians separated by such vast Lands, Seas, and Wildernesses, submit
themselves to the Bishop of Rome. -- Wherefore if the Pope has obtained so
great and farspread an Authority neither by the command of God, nor the will of
men, but has arrogated it to himself by some violence, I would know of Luther,
when and at what time the Pope broke forth into the profession of so ample a
Jurisdiction? Can the beginning of such a vast power be obscure? Especially, if
it were born within the memory of man. But if he shall say this power exceeds
one or two ages, let him bring it into our memory by histories. Otherwise, if
it be so ancient that the original of a matter, even of so great importance, be
worn out of memory, then let him know it is expressly provided for by the Laws,
that his right and title which so transcends all memory of man as it cannot be
known how it began, is judged to have had a lawful original; and it is manifest
that the consent of all Nations forbid those things should be moved which have
long remained settled and firm.

Thus was King Henry affected, and in this affection continued till he found an
itching I conceive not too conscientious) to his darling Anne Bullen; she being
too crafty to forgo the glittering offer of a Crown made unto her by the
love-besotted* King; he grew straight perplexed in mind for his former
marriage; began to think it unlawful, though till now neither he nor any in the
world ever scrupled it. The devotion he bore to his Saint Anne Bullen put a new
heat of Religion into his tender heart; his restless Conscience (alas)
persuaded him that his marriage with Katherine, although confirmed by two and
twenty years continuance, and sealed with the endearing pledge of issue, must
needs be disanuld.

The Pope was urged to dispense with his second marriage, though his former
wife lived: King Henry wooed, entreated, bribed; then grew into choler, and at
last plainly threatened a Schism, unless the Pope would grant and justify his
unlawful desire.

Here now if the Romish Religion were made up only of Policy (as those think
whose eyes her prudent and heaven-ordered Government dazles into a blind envy of
her privileges) the Pope should rather have sought pretenses to yield to this
unwarrantable request, then have denied it with the loss of a Kingdom from his
Jurisdiction; but the common Father of the Church more considered (unless we
will give way to the suspicious Reports of enemies) what detriment and scandal
to the whole world was likely to result from such an impious example in so
eminent a person; then consulted with flesh and blood how to second his desire
or cloak his grant with the outside of a dangerous necessity.

He first counseled friendly, then reprehended him Fatherly, at last refused
his consent absolutely: Upon this King Henry grew furious, put away his most
pious and virtuous Lady Queen Katherine, whose Angelical Sanctity and Dove*like
patience he always continued to honor, when as he beheaded her assumed Rival.
Her disenthronement was Anna Bullens enstalment: The marriage was celebrated
with a divorce of our poor Country from the Church: Appeals to Rome, denied
under pain of death.

The Popes Authority, which had remained inviolable, ever since we English were
by its means converted, utterly rejected; nay, the very name of Pope rased out
of all the Books in England; Monasteries and Religious Houses pulled down or
robbed, their Revenues (given by their devout Founders to pious uses)
confiscare and consecrared to the Kings riotous Lust. Subscriptions forced to a
new, and till that time unheard of, Church Government, a Secular Head of an
Ecclesiastical Body; they that would not subscribe, disgraced or put to death.

Thus the Reformation was first set on foot* and this lust of King Henry was so
fruitful* that it at once begot Tyranny, Rapine, the Reformation, Adultery.
Protestancy, at least the embrio of it, Sacrilege, Queen Elizabeth, and
Schism. And, though the Doctor excuses the imputation of King Henry's
Sacrilege, saying, That Sacrilege is no more Schism, then it is Adultery; yet
it is enough, if he grant (as he C. 7. S. 20.
must) That both his Sacrilege and his Schism, were born of the same
mother-occasion, the Kings lust; and so, though the Doctor say, That

-- -- facies non omnibus una* Yet I answer,

Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum: -- -- their faces not the same;
Nor different yet, as sisters well became.
Neither is this all to show, that the first occasion of the breach, was not
Conscience. The King himself desired oftentimes afterward a reconcilement;
which being not possible, without revoking all he had done, despair made him
resolve, Over shoes, over boots, to make the rupture still wider, while he
lived; though at his death, when it was no time to dally, the care of his Soul
now out-weighing the pleasure of his Body, he with extreme grief of heart
repented him of his Schism.

By this, one may see, how justly the Doctor pretended, Page 18, 19* as an
excuse of his Schism, The care of their Conscience, and the notadmitting any
sin, which the Church may oblige them to subscribe to; whereas, if the original
of the breach be this (as it most evidently is) then I cannot conceive the
Church obliged the ring leader of it to any sin in bidding him keep his own
wife: But if you pretend another, which by the whole scope of this Chapter, you
seem not to do, it will be found to have no nobler an extraction, then the
former; only perhaps, the carnal sin in him, may be changed into a spiritual
one in you; that is, King Henry's lust, into your self-conceited pride, and
refractory disobedience; which may indeed out^vy and excel him, though not
excuse you.

But perhaps your grounds, which before absolved the Rebel, Out* law, and
Anabaptist, will absolve him too, by saying it was King Henry's present
persuasion, that his wife was to be put away; and then comes in the whole
eighth Paragraph of the second Chapter, to plead for the adulterous King, thus;
Nay, though the error be really on his side, yet if the doctrines so proposed
(that he ought to keep his wife) as the condition of Communion be indeed
agreeable to truth, but yet be really apprehended by him, to whom they are thus
proposed, to be false, and disagreeable; it will even in that case be hard to
affirm, That that man may lawfully subscribe (or K^-Henry lawfully keep his
wife) contrary to his present persuasion.

Thus much for the first thing I undertook to show, that the original of this
breach proceeded not from Conscience; the second will also appear no less
manifest, That the progress and promoting of it, was altogether as
unconsciencious.

The second consideration, which renders this Schism more inexcusable in the
now Protestants, is, That when it first was brought into this Kingdom, it was
no free choice of the Ecclesiastical State; which, could the Doctor prove, he
would think it perhaps, of some weight. The King using all means, both by
persuasions and force, to make men subscribe; persecuting continually those
that refused, and putting to death many upon the same score; among the rest,
those two Lights of our Nation for learning and piety, Bishop Fisher, and Sir
Thomas Moor, most intimate with the King, and in the sincerest loyalty addicted
to him, till their knowing conscienciousness made them refuse to subscribe,
lest they might at once prejudice Loyalty and Religion by a preposterous
obedience.

But what need more proofs, since the Doctor grants here, Section five, That it
is easy to believe that nothing but the apprehension of dangers, which hung
over them (by a Praemunire incurred by them) could probably have inclined the
Clergy to subscribe, thus he: Though, blowing and supping both at once, he
striaght-way adds, That the Reasons or Arguments offered in debate, were the
causes (as in all charity we are to judge) of their decision. Whereas I cannot
see any reason, why the Doctor should be so uncharitably charitable, as to
judge them not* only weak, but to have been hardened, and lost for the future
all feeling of Conscience for their lapse; since the foregoing fear bears the
weight of a strong prejudice against the clear Verdict of Conscience, and the
future recantation of all the Bishops (who then subscribed) in Queen Mary's
time, and their persisting in Queen Elizabeth's days, rather evidences, That the
curb being removed, which misled them, it was Conscience which made them
return; and strength and force of Conscience which made them afterward
persevere in the same judgment.

The third thing I am to prove, and make the Doctor confess, is, That there was
a breach made, which denominates them truly and properly Schismatics. The
first part is so clear, that it needs no proof, since the very deed bears
witness. For first, your self acknowledge, you C. 7. S. 5.
renounced the Authority of the Roman See, and cast it out of this Island. Which
Authority yet you must acknowledge likewise, That all the whole World, which
before the breach you held the only good Christians, submitted to as sacred,
and descended from Christ's institution* which Authority was known and held,
both by them, and your selves, till then, to be over both you and your King, in
Ecclesiastical matters; and had enjoyed the possession of that Claim,
confessedly eight or nine hundred years; nor this upon title only of a
Patriarchate, your Conversion, or Grant of Kings, but of an Universal Primacy
and Pastorship over the whole Church by Christ's grant, and before your
conversion was dreamed on.

Lastly, The Government of the Church thus established, was held by all those
whom before that day you accounted the only Faithful, as of Divine Right, and
a point of Faith; and that the denial of it, twisted into one crime, both
Heresy and Schism.

A manifest breach then, and Schism there was made by you; first, from that
supreme Ecclesiastical Governor, under whom, both you and your Ancestors, till
that time, had ever-continued, and next, from the Universality of Christians;
by erecting to your selves a new structure of Church Government, which all the
vast Congregation of these, from whom you broke, detested and abhorred as
Sacrilegious and Schismatical. Singularity therefore most clearly manifested it
self in your new Church Government; and if singularity be opposite to a
community, of which, Communion is the Form, it follows evidently, That your
singularity destroyed Communion, and so was formally Schism. Again, if
multitudes of things of the same species cannot be made one, otherwise then by
the unity of order, it follows, That what dissolves this order, dissolves the
unity, and so causes a breach or Schism. But you manifestly unravelled all the
then constituted order of Gods Church, by casting out of the Kingdom, the
supreme Authority, in which, as in a knot, the other several ends were sum'd
and tied up; therefore you also unravelled and broke asunder its unity.

This then, as it is acknowledged by you, so in it self, is as clear, as the
most palpable matter of Fact can make a thing visible to the eyes of the World,
that there was indeed, at least, a material breach or Schism, by you made, from
that Body which communicated with the Church of Rome; and of which Body, you
were formerly as properly and truly a part, as a Branch is of a Tree. To which
add your proofs out of the Fathers, in your first Chapter, affirming* No just
cause can be given for a Schism; and it will follow, that your own words
clearly convince, and your own proofs evidently conclude you to be formally
Schismatics. I will put the Argument in form, to make it more plain, only
premising, That material Schism, as far as it concerns us, at present, is the
extern action of breaking from a community: Formal, the causlesness or
unjustifiableness of that material Fact; which must needs be criminal, because
it admits no just excuse to plead in its behalf. Then thus,

No Separation from the whole Body of Christians can possibly be justified, say
the Fathers, by you alleged, Chap. 1. Sect. 8. But your Separation was from
the whole Body of Christians: Therefore impossible to be justified. Where all
the evasion I can imagine in your behalf, is to distinguish the Major, That the
Fathers meant, Criminal Separation, or the Crime of Schism could have no just
cause given for it, not the material and external fact of Schism.

But first, this makes the Fathers very shallow, to go about to show, That no
just cause can be alleged for the crime of Schism, since every one knows there
can be no just excuse possible for any crime.

Next, the Fathers there alleged, pretend to particularize some special
viciousness in Schism, and are to that end produced by the Doctor: But there is
no speciality in Schism above other sins, to say, That no just excuse can be
given for the crime of it, since the like may be said of all sins, as well as
it. The fact of Schism therefore it is which they call unjustifiable; the same
fact, which with a large narration you here set down, and acknowledge, that
they said it, voted it, swore it; taking a great deal of pains, to prove those
whom you undertook to defend, to be voluntary, deliberate, and sworn
Schismatics.

Now all the Testimonies alleged by C. 7. S. 6.
your self against Schism, come in troops, bandying against you, and your
cause, as strongly, as if they had been expressly gathered to that purpose. As,
that a Schismatic is a semet-ipso damnatus, self-condemned* which you have
here very learnedly performed, as I lately showed, That ultro ex Ecclesia se
e^icerent, they cast themselves voluntarily out of the Church, etc. Quomodo t^
a tot gregibu^ scidisti? Excidisti enim teipsum. How have thon cut off thy self
from so many flocks? For thy self have cut off thy self; of which accusation,
your fifth Paragraph infers the confession: Your own voluntary recession from
us, and our Government, by your self here acknowledged, is an indelible token,
and (as it were) a visible ear-mark, that you are a stray*sheep, and a
runaway, a to^ gregibus, from the flock.

This badg of a Voluntary Recession, your Church must always necessarily carry
about her: Nor will you ever be able to wipe it off with all the specious Id
Ests, or Criticisms, your wit can invent.

SECT. 9.
The nature of Schism fetch*t from it is first grounds; and the material part of
it fastened upon the Protestants.

TO lay this charge of Schism yet more home to the Protestants, we will open
more clearly the nature of Schism, and describe it more exactly, that the
Reader may see how perfectly the Protestant Church is cast in the mold of it.
For the better conceiving of which, it will be necessary to show first what it
is, which makes the Sons of the Catholic Church like brethren live together in
Unity: and this will lead us into the consideration first of the formal Unity
it self, and secondly of the Reason and Ground of this Unity.

The Unity it self consists in two things; one is, the submitting to and
communicating in one common Head or Government; the Authority of which, if it
be established in an undoubted possession (as it was at the beginning of Mr.
Drs Reformation) is as necessary to the Ecclesiastical Community, as the
acknowledgement of the Undoubted Supreme Magistrate is necessary for the Unity
of any temporal Commonwealth. The second is the communication of the
member-churches with one another, consisting in the acknowledging the same
Articles of Faith, and using the same Sacraments etc. To these was added
anciently communicatory letters; which afterward, by reason of the perfect
colligation of the several members with their Head, was neglected as
unnecessary.

And these two Unities may be conceived again either negatively or positively.
By negative Communion in the same Head, I mean a not disacknowledging only of
the supreme Pastor; or at least such an indifferent acknowledgment, as having
no tie upon it, may be at pleasure refused; and the Authority rejected. As
likewise negative communication between the member-Churches imports either a
^leight not denying of communion, or such an acceptance and embracing of it,
as, having no obligation, may at pleasure be turned into disacceptance and
disavowing.

On the contrary; these two communications are then called positive, when there
is a positive obligation to acknowledge that Head, and communicate with the
other Churches. And this is that which can only make a Church, and found
Church Government: Or rather indeed there can be no Government imaginable,
either spiritual or corporal, without such positive communion, for a company of
men without an express and positive obligation to obey their Superiors, and
comport themselves toward their fellows, according to the laws, may indeed be
called a multitude (such as is a^e^vus ^ap^dum, an heap of stones) but not an
Army, City, Commonwealth or Church, which imply connection and order.

Neither is the obligation of only Charity sufficient (though in it self a
great Ciment of Unity) but it must be a visible one, resulting out of the very
Nature of Government, which is visible and exterior. Besides, Charity extends
universally to all, even those out of the Church; and therefore cannot be that
proper, peculiar and sole tie, which unites the Faithful, as they are a
Commonwealth of Believers.

The second thing is the Reason of this double Union, or rather of this double
positive obligation of Unity in the Church; which to conceive more clearly, the
Reader may please to consider, that a Christian is a Christian by his Faith;
and so a Congregation of Christians is a Community of the Faithful. Whence it
follows, that the Unity of the Faithful, as such, being in Faith, their faith
must be one; the ground therefore of the Unity of their faith is the ground of
the Unity of the faithful; but the infallibity of the Church is the ground of
the Unity of faith: Therefore the same Infallibility is the reason of the Unity
or positive Communion of the Faithful. This Rule therefore, broken or rejected,
dissolves all positive Communion amongst Christians, both in Faith and
Sacraments. For what tie could they possibly have to communicate in any thing
consequent to Faith, as Sacraments, Government, or any good work, unless they
first communicate in faith, the rule and ground of those Sacraments,
Government, and good works; and how can they communicate in faith, if there be
no Infallibility to bind them to an Unity in it? The denying therefore of this
Infallibility is the reason of all Schism, and even of Heresy too; nay, it
self is the Heresy of Heresies, opening a liberty for every man to embrace
his own newfangled opinions and introducing principles of incertitude, and at
best probability in Religion, whose natural course is to wander at last into a
Civil kind of Atheism. Nor can there be any rational pretense to oblige men's
consciences to a Religion, whose con^est uncertainty must needs infer an
absolute abolishment of all Church discipline, and content it self with a mere
voluntary obedience, that is, legitima^e all Schism, by taking away the very
possibility of Schismatizing.

Another reason may be given, why the denying this infallibility perverts and
quite overthrows all unity in Church Government. For the preservation of the
Churches unity in government being essential to Religion, that is, to the Art
of breeding up mankind to know and love God, it cannot possibly be conceived to
be of humane but div^ne institution; and therefore, being taught and instituted
by Christ, belongs to Faith, and so requires to be recommended by the same
never-e^ring Rule, which teaches us the rest of his Doctrine. He therefore that
denies this Infallibility, has no sufficient reason to believe the Article of
the Churches Government, and consequently will easily find evasion to excuse
his obedience to her commands.

The Unity of the Church being thus clearly delivered, there needs no new task
to show what Schism is; it being nothing else but the unknitting and dissolving
these several manners of this Unity and Communion, and in breaking a^under that
tie and obligation, by which these Unions of the several members with one
another, and of all with the Head, are firm'd and made inviolable. What
remains to be done is only to show that this Anatomy of Schism is the perfect
picture, nay the very Sceleton of the carkasse-Church of England; and that they
have infringed the laws of Unity in all the aforesaid manners.

And as for the first, which is the Unity of all the Members under one Head or
Chief Bishop and Pastor of the Church, in whom, at the time of the breach, all
the Hierarchical Order was summed up, as in the highest top of that
Heaven-reaching Climax, you confess here Sect. 5. that you cast it out of this
Island. The Authority, I say, of the chief Pastourship of the Bishop of Rome,
to which you and the whole Church you were then in, were subject; acknowledged
by you not Patriarchal only, but a large step higher, to wit, universally
extended over all Patriarchs and the whole Church, was that which you cast out,
and subtracted your self from its obdiencee. If then you will hold to your
former grounds, so largely to your disadvantage laid in your third Chapter,
that it is Schism in a Deacon or Priest to disobey a Bishop, in a Bishop to
refuse subjection to his Aroh-Bishop etc. How will you excuse your selves from
Schism in rejecting the Authority of the Head of the Church (unless you can
evidence that Authority null; that is, that Doctrine false) to which you had
been subject ever since your first Conversion, as to a more superior Governor
than either Bishop, Archbishop, Primate or Patriarch. In vain then was your
long frivolous digression, that Kings may erect and translate Patriarchates,
since a greater Authority than a Patriarch was rejected by you and cast out of
this Island; which no King ever pretended to erect and remove at pleasure. In
vain do you think to shelter your Schism under the wings of the Regal power;
since your King, being at that time actually under the Pope, as far as
concerned Ecclesiastical matters, and acknowledging his supreme Pastourship,
lies himself as deeply obnoxious to the charge of Schism, as you his subjects
and followers; or rather much more, as being the Ringleader of the breach. So
as no plea is so unwarrantable as to bring him for your excuse, who is the
person accounted most guilty, and who needs a plea himself for his own far more
inexcusable Schism and disobedience. But what excuse you bring or not bring
concerns us not at present; only this remains certain and acknowledged, that
you cast out of the Island that Supreme Authority, in which at that time, the
Faithful of the Church you were in, communicated; and in which chiefly
consisted the Unity of the Hierarchical Government, arising orderly and knit np
peaceably in acknowledgment of and subjection to that One Head. Whether you did
this justly or no belongs to the formal part of Schism, and shall be discussed
in the following Section.

Next, for what concerns the Unity of one Member-Church with another, it is no
less evident you have broke asunder all positive Communion, not in Government
only (as has been shown) but in Faith and Sacraments with all Churches which
communicated with the Sea of Rome, whom, before your Schism, you (...) the
only and sole true Members of Christ's mystical Body. That you broke from their
Communion in Government has been already manifested from your rejecting her
Supreme Governor, in the subjection to whom they all communicated. Nor is it
less evident that you have broke from their Faith, as appears from the
irreconcilable diversity of the points of Faith between us, and the large
difference between your 39. Articles, and our Council of Trent. Nor has the
Unity you and those Churches had in Sacraments escaped better; Five of them
being pared away as unnecessary; the sixth transelementated from the sacred
price of our Redemption into the egena elementa of bread and wine: and the
seventh only, that is, Baptism, with much ado remaining inviolate, lest you
should forfeit the name of Christians also, together with the reality. If the
denial of these, and your styling the best act of our Religion, to wit, the the
oblation of the Unbloudy Sacrifice (in your 31. Article) a blasphemous fiction
and pernicious imposture; and lastly, if your persecuting us to death be signs
of a positive communion with us; then killing may be called kindness, and
railing votes against us, may perhaps be styled Communicatory letters with us.

All Communication then both positive and negative, with the Church you were in
formerly, was by you renounced; yet at least some pretense of excuse had been
producible, if, departing out of that Church, you had either kept or renewed
Communion with some other, which was acknowledged by all the World, or at least
by your selves before the breach to have been a true one. But you can pretend
no such thing as Communication with any Church either true or even falls. For
first at your dawning or rather twilight in King Henry's days (for your
progress has not been to noon-day-light, but to midnight) you had nothing at
all to do with any other Church in Christendom. Since that time, though you
have indeed a kind of Communication with some few of your fellow Schismatics,
yet, if well examined, it is negative only. Faction against Rome initiates you
into so much friendship as to converse with the Calvinists; sometimes to call
them Brethren; sometimes to be merry with your doublejug Companions in the Synod
of Dort, of whose drunken and beastly behavior, wallowing worse then swine, in
their own vomits, I have heard a Pillar of your own Church scandalously
complain, having too much spirit of draff forced by them into his quea^ier
stomach. Though. I say, you may thus communicate with them in eating and
drinking (in which acts * before you made All Communion consist) Part. 1. Sect.
19.
yet any other positive tie and obligation either with them or any others to
conserve you in Communion, so as you may be said to make up one
Ecclesiastically-politick Body, united by some inviolable Order, such an
obligation, I say, could never be discovered between you and any other Church
good or bad, true or falls. The Greek Church holding almost all that we do, and
scarce two points with you, which are against us, as your friend Alexander
Rosse has particularly told you. The Lutherans hold much more with us in
opposition to you, than with you in opposition to us. The Cal^inists are
excluded by the most understanding Protestants from their Church, since they
admit not the Government of Bishops, held by the others to be of Divine Right,
nor the Protestants Fundamental, or, as the Doctor calls it, Cap. 7. Sect. 11.
The Bottom of the Foundation of the Reformation; to wit, that the King is
Head of the Church. The 39. Articles, which (as the Kings Supremacy is the
Imprimis, so these) are all the Items of the Protestants Faith, obtain not a
total admission from any Church but themselves; nor amongst themselves neither,
their great Champion, Mr. Chillingworth, rejecting them at his pleasure. Nor is
there any visible form of Government uniting them all together, but they are
forced to fly sencelesly to an invisible one; either of only Christ in Heaven,
or only Charity: pretenses to gull the easy vulgar, not to satisfy prudent
men; who know that the Church, though it be a spiritual Commonwealth, breeding
up Souls to a state of a future Eternity; yet, while it is here on earth, it
is a Commonwealth of Christians, visibly comporting or discomporting themselves
in order to Christ's laws, of which the Church is the Keeper and Conserver; and
therefore it must have visible Governors, without expecting a miraculous
recourse to Christ in Heaven, to resolve emergent difficulties, or to cherish
and punish her weldemeaned or misdemeaned subjects.

But for a more full demonstration that the Church of England has no perfect
Communion with the Greek, Lutheran, Calvinist, or any other Church, I refer the
Reader to the learned Exomolog^sis or Motives etc. of Mr. Cressy, a late
Protestant Dean, but now Religious of the ancient and holy Order of St. Benet,
where the Doctor may also read (among other controversies excellently treated)
the charge of Schism, sufficiently proved against his Church.

Perhaps the Doctor will allege, that their positive Communion with other
reformed Churches consists in the acknowledgment of Gods Word and the holding
to it. But I would ask him, whether he means they agree in the Name of Gods
Word, or in the Thing, or Sense of it. If in the Name only, then all that have
the title of Christians, that is, all Heretics and Schismatics in the World
are of one Communion; nothing being more rife in their mouths and pens, than
wrong alleged testimonies out of the Bible; the bare name then is not
sufficient, it must be the Thing, that is, the sense and meaning of Gods Word,
in which he must make their positive Communion consist; but since they have no
one certain, known, and commonly acknowledged Rule, by which to interpret Gods
word, and fetch out the true inward sense, lurking in the imperspicuous bark of
the letter, it follows they have no positive way or means to communicate in
the same sense, and therefore no positive unity can be grounded on that
pretense. And it would be as senseless to object that they communicate at
least in fundamentals, found in Gods word; since the Scripture not telling
them, they cannot tell certainly themselves which points are fundamentals,
which not, all being there with equal authority and like tenor delivered and
proposed to them. And if we should go to reason to know what are fundamentals,
surely reason would give it that the rules of Faith and Government are more
fundamental, than all the rest.

No positive communion therefore have they with our Church, as little with
their fellow schismatics; it being the nature of boughs separated, not to grow
together into one tree, after they have once lost connection with the root;
Where they are cut off, there they lie; and though for a short time they retain
some verdure, and some little moystning sap, counterfeiting life; that is, as
much Religion as serves them to talk of God and Christ) yet after a while they
wither, ro^, and molder away into an hundred atoms of dust; or else (if they
chance to be gathered up, or taken away sooner) they serve for nothing but to
be thrown into the fire.

SECT. 10.
That the reforming Protestants were and are guilty of the formal part of
Schism.

THat you have made then a material breach or schism is as evident, as fact and
reason can make the most manifest thing to the clearest understanding. The
formality of schism comes next to be enquired into, which consists in its
injustifiablenesse, or doing it without just causes or motives; which
consequently unless you can show, you must unavoidably be concluded formal
schismatics: And though the testimonies of the Fathers, which you formerly
produced, affirming that there can be no just cause given of schism, render all
further proof unnecessary; yet to make this matter still more manifest, I desire
Mr. Hammond, in the Churches behalf, that he would give me leave to summon him
to the Bar of Reason, that we may see what he can answer for himself, and his
friends, whose defense here he undertakes.

Cath. Do not you know that the Church (in whose bowels your ancestors, til K.
Henry began the breach, were bred) had no other form of Government then that
which now is of the Bishop of Rome; held chief Pastor of the universal
Church, and supreme in Ecclesiastical matters; and that, til the breach was
made, you held as sacred, and were under that government?


Dr. I pretend not to deny it; for this is the very authority I told you in my
7. c. 5. sect. we cast out of this Island. Besides Kings can erect and remove
Patriarchates at pleasure.


Cath. Do not answer, (Dr.) de Cepis, when we ask de alliis; you might have
saved your labor in a great part of your Book, where you slipped the question,
and digrest to Patriarchs. Our question is not of Patriarchal, but of Papal
Authority; and so we ask you, whether it be not evident, that this Papal
Authority was in actual possession of this Islands subjection at the time of
the breach; and so had been for 900 years, ever since Pope Gregory sent Austin
the Monk to convert the Saxons, forefathers to us English.


Dr. I know no Authority he ever had in England more than Patriarchal.


Cath. Do not you know that the Popes Authority then acknowledged in England
was held above Patriarchs, and therefore more then Patriarchal; and that you
grant you cast out of this Island, not a Patriarchal Authority only, but a
Papal one?


Dr. True; but the pretended Authority was usurpt, and not according to Gods
Ordinance.


Cath. How know you it was usurpt? will bare probabilities be a sufficient
ground to renounce an authority so long established in possession, held sacred
ever before, and to which your selves were till then subject; will, I say, a
mere probability, that perhaps that authority was not sacred, but unjust, serve
your turn to excuse you from disobedience in renouncing it?


Dr. No Sir, we have evidence it was unjust; and that the Church we were
brought up in erred in that point of belief.


Cath. This evidence of yours must either be a Demonstration from natural
reason; or an undeniable testimony, either divine or humane.


Dr. I do not pretend natural demonstration; but we have evident testimonies
against it.


Cath. Can you manifest that those testimonies (and the like may* be said of
Arguments from natural reason) have not been answered twenty times over by our
Writers; and (in case they have) can you show that you have replied upon all
their answers, so as they bear now no probable show of satisfaction? if not,
you cannot call your testimony an evidence. Next, are you certain that our
Authors cannot produce an hundred testimonies for one of yours; or at least an
equal number; and those seeming as expressly, or more, to make for us, as yours
do for you? If so, your testimonies are at least counterpois'd with the weight
of ours, and so cannot make an evidence, but hang only in the hovering scales
of a doubtful probability. Thirdly, are your testimonies such that they are of
greater weight than the judgment of all the Catholic world, holding the Pope
Head of the Church (as our greatest adversaries, the Puritans, say for twelve
hundred years, or, as you say, two hundred years later) are they of that weight
to overbalance so farextended, so numerous, and so learned an Authority? If
not, they are so far from evidences, that they fall short of being
probabilities.


Dr. I see you will hold to no authority, but that of your own Church, and this
is a method of security beyond all Amulets.


Cath. And good reason too, unless you can show us a greater.


Dr. A greater we have, id est, Gods word, out of which we can evidence, that
your Church, we were brought up in, was fallible, yea en'd in many points, and
particularly in this of the Popes Supremacy.


Cath. You cannot with any face pretend an evidence from Scripture against us,
unless you can evidence a greater faculty and means to interpret those Oracles
in you or your first Reformers, than there was in the Church you left: And
since these means are either supernatural light or natural parts and
knowledge, you must evidence an advantage above us in one of these* And first,
as for natural knowledge, you cannot be ignorant, that at the time of the
breach, the Catholic Church had an hundred Doctors for one of yours; what an
unproportion'd advantage then must that number swel to, if all the learned men
in the many foregoing ages, without any one of your Sect (then unheard of) to
counterballance them, be heaped into one Bulk, and those too, such as your
selves must acknowledge far more eminent in School Divinity, study in
Scripture, and all kind of Learning both divine and humane, than any of King
Henry's fellow-reformers were ever deemed; or if you stiffely deny an
advantage, we as stiffely pretend it; and so leave it a drawn ma^ch for what
concerns their parts; yet you your selves must giant, you are incomparably
overpowered in the numerous multitude of them.

In natural means then of interpreting Scripture, our extraordinary advantage
over your Reformers, makes it an impudence in them to pretend their advantage
evident. It must be then an evidence of a supernatural faculty in interpreting
Gods word, better than their Superiors and Pastors, which can make them
pretend to a clear knowledge thence that our Church has erred: But since no
supernatural thing, that is latent and invisible in it self, can be evidenced
or acknowledged to be such, without some exterior token exceeding the power
and skill of nature, as are miracles, gift of tongues, etc. none of which you
can lay claim to; it follows, that neither your reforming forefathers nor your
selves can produce evidence of any better means, either supernatural or
natural to interpret Scriptures than the Church you left; therefore no evidence
that they more truly interpreted it than that Church; therefore none thence
that the Church erred; therefore none from divine Authority, and no humane
authority being found comparable to that of the Church, it follows they can
have as little evidence from thence. Evident therefore it is that you neither
had nor now have any evidence at all, but only a probable perhaps, that the
Church erred; which being too slight a Reason to shake off subjection to an
authority so long established and held as a point of Faith by the present and
past world, consequently they who upon no better grounds should shake it off,
are guilty of a most rash and grievous disobedience, and Schism. But your self
here confess Sect. 5. that you cast this Authority out of this Island, without
power to evidence that that Church erred, as has been shown. What excuse then
can you allege to clear your Father-Reformers, and your self from a most
irrational, and selfecondemning Schism, nay more, heresy?


Dr. At least they had such proofs as they thought evident, and bred in them a
present persuasion that the Church has erred, which they could not in
conscience go against; and therefore it was hard dealing to punish them with
Excommunication for proceeding conscientiously according to their present
persuasion.


Cath. I doubt not but they might have a present persuasion that the Church
has erred; but I doubt much whether this present persuasion be sufficient to
excuse them either from sin or punishment. For this persuasion of theirs is
either rational or irrational; if rational, a sufficient reason may be rendered
why they denied so qualified a Government; and reason it self telling us that
no reason less than evidence is sufficient, it would follow that evidence may
be rendered that the Government was injust' which, as you see, could not:
Irrational therefore was that present persuasion of theirs; and if so, not
sprung from reason, therefore from unreasonable passion, that is, from vice,
therefore sinful and obnoxious to punishment, as all other like persuasions
are, which make men think and act against their duties and obligations;
Besides, all the Logic we have hitherto heard, assures us nothing can convince
the understanding but evidence, and therefore men take so much pains about the
moods and figures, that the discourse may prove evident; wherefore whatsoever
assent comes not out of Evidence, must come from our will and wilfulness; and
by consequence cannot be free from desert of punishment, if it happen to be
wrong and wrongful. Neither availes it to pretend invincible ignorance, since
no man living, if free from a proud spirit, can be so sottish as not to know
that it is his obligation to obey his Superiors so long settled in the
possession of their command, till most open and undeniable Evidences, and not
seeming ones only, should discover that Authority null. And, if the obligation
be of belief, he must condemn the Churches judgment in not seeing the falsity
of her doctrine, and prefer his own before millions more learned, who lived and
died in that faith, which savours too strong of a selfconceited pride; or else
imagine so little sincerity left in the Church, that all see and wilfully adhere
to a known falsehood, but himself; which is a plain sign of a rash and
Pharisaical presumption. And are not those punishable? yet the Doctor would
stroke such a fellow on the head, and give him sugar plums for following his
present persuasion and self-conceit, which he nicknames conscience. Nay he
highly applauds his first Reformers, whose conscience no doubt was tainted with
the same leaven. The Material Schism then, which was manifestly your fact, is
made formal by your want of evidence, that the doctrine was erroneous and
consequently her Government violable; Both which joined together give you in
plain terms your own name of flat proper and formal Schismatics, and entitle
you to all the bed-roll of vices and curses which you hoarded up for your self
and your friends in your first Chapter.


SECT. 11.
The Doctors argument* that the Popes power in England was derived under the
Kings Concession, refuted.

BUt it is now high time to return to overlook the work; who, after the
declaration of the matter of fact, confesses no great hold can be taken from
the freeness of the Clergy's determination, and therefore the whole difficulty
devolves to this one enquiry, whether the Bishop of Rome were Supreme Head or
Governor of the Church of England in the reign of King Henry the eighth. That
is, we are come about again to the beginning of the Book. But I am mistaken, he
tells us he has largely disproved, in his Chap. 4, 5, 6. all pretensions from
St. Peter's Supremacy, and from Englands Conversion; (to whose particular
answers I refer the Reader for full satisfaction) and he has now invented a new
ground of the Popes Supremacy in England, to wit, the voluntary Concession of
our Kings. What the Doctor means I cannot imagine. Some particular
privileges, and (as I may say) pious courtesies have, out of a special respect,
been granted by our Kings to that See, to whom they owe their first knowledge
of Christ, and his Law; but these are not the thing in debate; The right of
Supreme Authority is our question; now, who ever held this to come from the
Concession of our Kings? Yet this ayr-beating Champion of Schism first fancies
this to be our tenet, and then beats it all to dirt. He is as valiant as Sir
John Falstaff; let him tell his own story, and he will make you believe he has
killed eleven Enemies, when but one opposed him. We only found the Popes
Primacy upon his Succession to St. Peter: This is the only adversary-point the
Doctor is to combat, which he has most weakly opposed with gross mistakes,
palpable contradictions to Scripture, and pinning all the words that made for
his purpose to every testimony, as has been showed: But to counterfeit a
triumph, he makes every trivial thing, done either by or about the Pope, to be
the very ground of his Primacy, and then falls to work and impugnes them as
really, as if he thought we held them. The Pope cannot do any good action, or
convert a Nation, but that must be the ground of his Universal Pastorship over
us, and be impugned accordingly; A beggarly penny cannot be given to the Pope
by our Kings for pious uses, and out of a grateful obligation, but the poor
Peter Pence and such like petty grants must presently be the Popes Universal
Authority, given him by the Concession of our Kings, and that, as such, must be
impugned. The Kings of England, France, etc. cannot be said by G* de Heimburgh
to be free from swearing obedience to the Pope at their instalment (an
obligation peculiar to the Empire of Germany) but presently the Doctor
concludes hence an absolute power in our Princes; I suppose he means in
Ecclesiastical matters, for in temporal, none denies it; so as now the very
ceremony of swearing obedience to the Pope, is become the very granting of the
formal universal Pastorship; and they that do it not are concluded to be free
from the Popes Jurisdiction; though he knows well enough, that the King of
France, who as he confesses performs no such ceremonious courtesy toward
him, acknowledged notwithstanding himself subject to him, as the Head of Gods
Church. Lastly, (which he touches here again) he cannot read in some Authors
that Kings de facto executed the erecting and removing of Patriarchates, though
the testimony do not exclude the Churches fore* ordering it; but presently the
Popes Universal Power must be supposed to be transdignifi'd into a private
Patriarchate, and as a Patriarchate impugned. Thus nothing can come amiss to
the Doctor: Every argument he undertakes to manage is equally strong and
unresistable. A pot gun will serve him to batter down the walls of Rome. He
was borne a Controvertist; and it is an even wager whether he be better in the
gift of Use and Applicatioon, or in the Art of Dispute and Consutation.

Next comes another Dilemma or forked Argument, which though, proceeding on the
C. 7. S. 8.
former false supposition, needs no answer; yet for the Readers recreation we
will afford a glance. First, it is observable, that he never brings this
bugbear Argument upon the stage, but when he has made a Prologue for it of
some forged supposition of his own; and then the Thing, in virtue of that, acts
and talks through the vizard of a mistake; and yet, ere it comes to a
Conclusion, the Doctors weak reason cracks to make both ends meet. The sum of
it is this, that The Authority of the Pope was either originally in our Kings,
so as they could lawfully grant it to the Pope, or not; if not, then the grant
was invalid: If it were, then either the same power remains still in the King
to dispose of it to some other; or else, it does not remain in him, and* then
is his power diminish't, and so the Act is again invalid. I answer, the
Authority of the Pope was never held, by concession of our Kings, in any other
sense than this, that our Kings (as all other Christian Kings did) yielded him
what they held as of Faith to be due to him, that is, Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters; and therefore that they not only lawfully granted it,
but could not deny* it, except most unlawfully. Therefore their act of yielding
to it was not invalid, but very valid for what it was intended, which was to
express their obligation in deferring to the Head of the Church what was his
due. Wherefore he cannot dispose of it to any other or remove it, since the
Papacy (which is the thing in question) was never imagined at any private Kings
disposal till Doctor Hammonds time. Again his inference, that if it were in the
Kings Power, the same Power remains still in them to dispose of it, is as
groundless as the former; for we see by experience that Kings often diminish
their power, by yielding sometimes Forts, sometimes an Island or Country to an
over-powering enemy; and yet that act of theirs held valid notwithstanding.

Then (to prove this assertion) as the fellow that put four kinds of men that
pray, some that pray for others and not for themselves, othersome for
themselves not others, some for themselves and others, but some neither for
themselves nor others; or the Preacher, upon the Text seek and you shall find,
put four kind of seekers, some that seek and find not, others that find and
seek not, others that both find and seek, but others that neither seek nor
find: So the Doctor tells us here, that there are two C. 7. Sect. 9.
sorts of gifts, one that is so given that it is given; another that is so
given that it is kept with the giver; that is, not given; And then brings for
an instance this curious piece of Philosophy. Thus the Sun communicates his
beams, and with them his warmth and influence, and yet retains all which it
thus communicates, and accordingly C. 7. Sect. 10
withdraws them again. This Book (as the Reader must conceive) is the
Doctors En^yclopoedia, encompassing at once the whole world of Sciences. He
has before given us notice of Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, History, Law,
Greek, Hebrew, Grammar, and Criticismes: now he gives here a proof of
Philosophy and knowledge of Nature, and lets thee understand so strange a truth
as no man, unless he were out of his wits, could imagine; to wit, that the
very beams, sent hither by the Sun, are notwithstanding retained there still;
and therefore are in more far-distant places at the same time; so granting,
that the ordinary course of Nature performs more in a creature, than he will
grant Gods omnipotency can work in the glorified body of our Lord Creator in
the ever-blessed Sacrament. Nay more, he assures us that the Sun ACCORDINGLY
withdraws them again. What he means by ACCORDINGLY in that place I cannot
tell; less can I understand how the Sun withdrawes his beams again; I see
indeed effects in Nature of warmth witnessing that they remain here
incorporated in other bodies, but I see no natural causes to bandy the Suns
beams back to him; much less pullyes and long strings in the Sun to withdraw
them (as the Doctor expresses it) accordingly too. But the Doctor had framed
his *observation from the access and recesse of the beams of a candle in his
own eyes, when he was drowsy; and dreamt it seems ^^at night, that the eye of
Heaven had the like faculty.

Your next parity from God Almighty shoots beyond the mark: No bargain can be
made with him by reason of his Universal Dominion over his creatures by which
they may challenge a proprietary right to his gifts; therefore none with Kings
over their fellow creatures; that is something impious, unless you had
moderated the harsh-sounding expression: Neither are we properly our own, for
so we might dispose of our own life at pleasure, and the Book of your Done,
holding selfe-murder lawful, might pass as allowable, whose wit knew better how
to maintain a Paradox and with more plausible grounds, then you do your Faith.
But the truth is, that God never takes away what he gives; but is then said to
take away any thing, when he withholds his bountiful hand from a further
bestowing it.

This supposed, he tells us the King retains yet the power granted to the
Pope, and so may dispose of it to a Bishop of his own; and that the Kings power
frees them from that obedience and cleares the whole business of Schism. Alas!
what a weak reed you catch at to secure you from falling into the gulf of
Schism? Huic ipst partono opus est quem defensorem paras. Your Patron, the
King, needs a Patron himself. You should first evidence that the King might
lawfully renounce the so long possessed, so universally acknowledged authority
over himself as well as his subjects in Ecclesiastical matters, ere you lanch
forth into such selfe-said, and selfe-authoriz'd Conclusions; otherwise to run
widly forwards on your own seign'd and false suppositions, first that his title
of Universal Pastor comes by Concession of our Kings; next, that our Kings were
not found subject to that Authority; and thirdly (which is yet higher) that our
Kings are over that Authority and can dispose of it at pleasure; such voluntary
talking as this, I say, is better for a Sermon to your good women, where all
Coin goes current, than for a controversy, where no progress is allowable but
what is already made good by undeniable testimonies and well-grounded Reasons.

He shuts up the Paragraph with talking of the Popes willingness to enlarge his
Territory. True Sir, the Church is his Territory, which he is daily both
willing and industrious to enlarge, by converting barbarous Nations to Christ's
Faith; as he did once ours amongst the rest; for which you are so thanklesly
disacknowledging. This Territory we hope and pray may be enlarged beyond the
envy of all maligners, till all the Ends of the Earth, and plenitudo Gentium
the whole company of the Gentiles shall see the salvation of God. Among whom
the Church that Heaven-planted Tree, which bears folia ad sa^itatem Gentium is
even at this day spreading out her sacred branches; and the Authority of her
Head goes on not intensively but extensively enlarging; while your poor broken
bough, rootless and sapless, shrinks daily into nothing, resolved already into
its first principles, of a few seditious, disobedient spirits; whom at first
common hatred and then fragrant factiousness against the Church held together;
now, that being a far off and such a common interest not so necessary, the
spirit of Schism, kept in a while by humane policy, begins at length to work,
and like a swelling torrent scorns to be held in by a weak bank of turfe,
which once forced its passage through the midst of a Rock; and with good reason
too, for why should an acknowledged fallibility bridle them now, whom before an
acknowledged infallibility could not restrain.

But you would make Queen Mary co partner C. ^. Sect 11
in your Schism, and allege her retaining for some time the title of Head of
the Church; and her refusing to admit of a Legate from Rome; which things you
say will make it less strange, that this Supreme Power of the Popes should be
disclaimed in the time of King Henry the eighth. Yet, as for the first, you
know well enough that she never pretended it as her lawful title, but only
permitted that the former phrase of the Laws, which nicknamed her so, might
be used; till she, having settled the turbulent spirits, raised by your good
doctrine, which opposed her renouncing it, found an handsome occasion to
disclaim that title, usurped by her late Predecessors. Your self confessing,
that she urged the matter afterward in a Parliament, and with much difficulty
obtained it. Which plainly cleares her, and makes your bringing her Authority
upon the stage very frivolous, the fact being acknowledgedly against her will.
But I see not how it can excuse you; rather it accuses your Brethren at that
time both of schism and impudence, in forcing their Princess to retain an
unjustly assumed title against both her Will and her Conscience. What force he
puts in her denying a Legate no man knows, unless he could dive into the
mysterious depth of the Doctors thoughts. For, besides that there was another
Legate in England at that time, All Catholic Countries when they saw it
convenient have done the same, and yet ar^ reputed true sons of the Church,
since they retain as humble an Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and as firmly
acknowledge her authority as those who admit them. But I see the Doct^^ knows
not in what the absolute Supremacy (as he calls it) of the Pope consists; Every
waving of any request or favor is with him a flat denial and rejection of the
Authority; as if they who denied the former Kings of England subsidies, denied
them to be Monarchs or Heads of the Commonwealth. Neither can I see that this,
as you fancy, makes your breach less strange; but rather much stranger, that
whereas Rome was so far from that tyranny falsely by you imputed to her, that
you might have (as Queen Mary and as Catholic Kings now do) denied to admit
the Popes Legates, and all such flowers of pious friendship, or (as you will
call them) extravagant encroachments, and yet have remained in true charity
with the faithful and Communion with that your Superior; yet neither this
moderate carriage nor any thing else could satisfy your resolute and desperate
disobedience; but to reject the very Authority it self, utterly to C. 7. Sect.
^
extirpate it root and branch, and cast it out of this Island.

This renouncing then of the chiefest Authority of the Church you left, you
call, in a strange expression the Bottom upon which the Foundation of
Reformation was laid; upon which by the same workmen (who pulled down a C. 7.
Sect. 12
good house to build a worse) was erected a superstructure: in King Henry's
days, the number of the Sacraments, translation of the Bible, and the use of
the Lords prayer in the English Tongue; as if the Lords Prayer was never used
in the vulgar language till King Henry's holiness ordained it. As for the
Kings Vicar General, who presided in his duely-assembled Council (as you call
it) I can say no more of him, but he was a proper fellow. Domini similis, like
his Master; Vicegerent to him in that high and mighty title of the Chief of
Schismatics, the rotten Head of the corrupted body.

But Mr. Doctor proceeds in his Schism, much C. 7* Sect. 13
farther advanced (as he tells us) in King Edwards days: Yet first he is
resolved to clear the way, and remove a rub which he apprehends very dangerous,
to wit, lest we should think to prove the acts made in his days invalid and
vilify them, because the King was yet alas but a child, assuring us therefore
that the Laws of this Realm ordain that what is done by the Protector is done
by the Child, and that too, as well as if the Child had been a man. But I will
secure the Doctor of his s^are; for though the child had been a man and had had
as many wives as his Father, yet neither he nor they had been a jot further
from being plain Schismatics; unless this child or man had been wiser, holier,
and olde^ than all Gods Church, so to justify the breach which his Father had
made.

Very pitiful then had been the Doctors re^uge, had the infant King the Head of
their Church been at years of discretion; but ye^ far more pitiful is it, the
then Protector steering the helm of the Commonwealth; who^e traitorous and
ambitious design to intercept Queen Mary's succession being manifestly
discovered, whatever he acted against Catholics or their Religion (Q. Mary's
supports) ought in all reason but the Doctors be rather imputed to interest
than piety. But nothing can prejudice (as he thinks) the regularity of his
Reformation. Schism once admitted, as sacred, no wonder if tyranny, treachery
and ambition be not only lawful but pious and commendable. Yet his tyranny in
secular matters is become even the Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical; and so the
Reformation goes on in the Doctors Book currantly and merrily; especially
though some Bishops resisted and were punished, yet (as the Doctor says)
Archbishop Cranmer (who kept a Wench in King Henry's time) and the far greater
number of Bishops joining with him, all is well and the Reformation valid: Then
to cry quits with us for their persecuting our Bishops, he puts us in mind how
their friends in Queen Mary's days, were not only persecuted with fire but
with ^agot too; To answer which, let the Dr. but clear those malefactors from
Schism and Sedition, and we shall acknowledge the cruelty ours, and the
innocence theirs; otherwise let them remember our pretended persecution was
only execution of justice, and theirs a most sacrilegious and irreligious
tyranny. But I smell by the Dr. that he has been in John Foxes kennel.

The Reformations he mentions, introduced C. 7 Sect. ^4
in the Popedom of this head junior of their Church, are many changes (as the
Dr. tells us) and recessions from the doctrine and practices of Rome. That is
now grown reason enough to think all that was done to be lawfully done; Besides
(says he) That of Images, the lawfulness of the marriage of the Clergy was
asserted, (the Dr. likes that point of faith dearly) the English Liturgy
formed, the people got wine to their bread, etc. But that ill-favord, etc.
dashes out the best. Then, then it was (the Dr. should have added) that those
two sweet singers of Israel, Hopkins and Sternhold, (as Cleveland expresses it)
murdered the Psalms over and over, with Another to the same; then did the
Later of these in a fit of divine fury no doubt, bid God, give his foes a rap.

Then, then it was that that second Solomon, Robert Wisdom, inspired
questionless from Heaven, warbled out that melodious and exquisit hymn, which
with a sweet twang closes up the book of Psalms.

Preserve us Lord, by thy dear word,
From Turk and Pope, defend us Lord.
And the rest of that devout piece, able to ravish any Christian heart to hear
it. These and such other rarities of Reformation were then added, as harmonious
Epithalamiums to this under-age Bride-Church, to celebrate her espousals or
marriage with her Infant-Head.

After this the Dr. treates of the Reformation made under Queen Elizabeth in
his 15. Paragraph, C. 7. Sect. 15.
consisting of five or six lines on either side a long Parenthesis; which
Parenthesis tells us partly strange news, that Queens as well as Kings have
according to our Laws Regal Power; partly open fictions, that this plenitude of
power is as well in Sacred as Civil affairs; and that they have this by the
Constitution of our Monarchy. Whereas he cannot but know there had been many a
Monarch in England, ere their Schismatical Laws were made, which first allowed
the King a plenitude of power in sacred matters.

In the next place he touches the ordination of their new created Bishops,
evidenced (as he says) out of the records to have been performed according to
the ancient Canons by the imposition of the hands of the Bishops. Yet this
modest evidencing Record durst never show its head for about fifty years,
notwithstanding the outcries made by Catholics against the pretended
ordinations of Protestant Bishops, and strong presumptions to the contrary:
till at length, when the memory of that present age was past, which might
discountenance that pretense and argue it of impudence, out steps a new old
Record assuring us that they were regularly ordained. And this is the firmest
Basis the Protestant Ministry or Bishops have, to witness that they have any
more Authority to preach then an Anabaptistical Zelot, whose profession is
perhaps a Weaver; his Calling, his own Intrusion; his Pulpit a Tub, and his
Diocese a Conventicle. But suppose you had a material Mission from the hands
of Catholic Bishops, and that Mr. Mason had vindicated you in this point; yet
can either Mr. Mason or any else even pretend to manifest that those Catholic
Bishops gave you a Mission, that is, sent and Authorized you to preach
Protestant Doctrines, or could do it, in case they would, having no such power
from the Church, from whom they have all their power. Unless you evidence
this, both Mr. Mason and Dr. Hammond may as well say nothing. For since they
gave you no such authority as you make use of, that is to preach against the
formerly received Faith; nor sent you any such errand as you now declare and
preach, it follows that whatever you do to prejudice and extinguish that
doctrine (to propagate which they meant your Mission) is done only upon your
own head, without any authority but your own selfe-assumed licentiousness to
talk and say what you list; not derived from the consecrated hands of your
Catholic Ordainers, but from your own unhallowed schismatical hearts.

But Mr. Dr. is always afraid, where no fear is; answering C. 7. Sect. 17
at large here a supposed objection of ours against Q. Elizabeth for unchairing
some Bishops and installing others. But (alas!) I am more courteous to the
Queen than the Doctor imagines, and think no worse of her, but only that in
that fact she did after kind; for supposing her once the Head of Schisinaticks
and Chief-Bishopesse of their Church, I see no reason but she should depose
Bishops, Catholikely affected, and install heretical ones; and in a word, she
and her Bishops vo^e and act whatever they thought good, and I cannot tell what
should hinder them, since the now rejected Authority of Gods Church could not.
All the superstructures of the Reformation then, which the Doctor so often and
so largely in this Chapter has shown to be done regularly, I grant him to have
been done as regularly as his own heart could wish or man's wit imagine; for the
Authority of the Church being schismatically renounced, and the infallible rule
of Faith, which could only oblige men to an unanimous belief, being broken
and rejected; these grounds* I say, being laid, I yield that the
superstructure not only of their heresy, but even of Lutheranism,
Zuinglianism, Calvinism, Arminianism, Puritanism, Brownism, Socinianism,
Presbyterianism, Anabaptism, with those of Quakers and Adamites, but even of
Turcism and Atheism, were all very regular, orderly, rational and connatural
superstructures, upon the forelaid foundations. The ruin of all Faith must
needs accompany the renouncing of Certainty.

Yet I had forgot to let the Reader see how the Doctor excuses the Queen for
devesting some Bishops of their dignity; and his excuse is, because those
Bishops refused to take the oath of Supremacy; concluding that therefore she
dealt justly in devesting those Bishops, which thus refused to secure her
Government, or to approve their fidelity to their lawful Sovereign. By which
one may see the Doctor knows not the difference between the oath of Allegiance
and the oath of Supremacy. The oath of Allegiance or fidelity was instituted
expressly for that purpose; what needed she then press them to take the oath of
Supremacy, to approv^ their Fidelity or Allegiance; cannot one be a true
subject to his King by acknowledging him his Liege Sovereign, unless he will
take his oath he is Head of the Church? As if neither any of the former Kings
of England, nor any of the Catholic Princes that now are or ever have been,
had so much as one true subject, because none of them takes the Oath of
Supremacy.

What follows, is only a narration how the Schism went on and the rent was
made worse. C. 7. S. 2.
At length he shuts up this Chapter, by pronouncing an absolute Negative of
their guiltiness of Schism, from this one evidence, that all was done by those
to whom, and to whom only the rightful power legally pertained, to wit, the
King and Bishops of this Nation. So as the King must be Head of the Church,
that is concluded, hoagh all the world say and swear the contrary though
himself have not brought one express word to prove it: Nay more, he has
EVIDENCE it is no Schism, because the King and the Bishops voted it; as if
whatsoever the King and Bishops vote, let it be what schismatical doctrine it
will, though Socianism and Turcism, it must not be schismatical; so blind is
prejudice, that it can neither see without its own spectacles, nor beyond its
own narrow limits. The Doctor discourses all this Chapter long, as if he made
account all the world were comprised in one poor corner of it, England; like
the homebred fellow that thought the Sun set at the next town; if a King or
Queen here with a few Bishops, partly out of fear, partly out of favor, some
out of malice (and contradicted by others) decree any thing, it makes the case
irrefragable in the Doctors judgment: Not considering (which yet any prudent
man would) that the whole world, whom before they accounted only Catholic,
and in which had been hundreds of Kings Queens and Bishops, nay perhaps
thousands for one of theirs, had ever condemned by their contrary belief these
Votes and Acts to be scismatical and heretical. Besides, this King before the
breach acknowledging himself subject to that Authority in Ecclesiastical
matters, as all Catholic Kings now do, and as all his Ancestor-Kings ever
since Englands conversion had done, it must be, as I have told you often* most
apparent evidence, and such as greater cannot be imagined, which may warrant
him to exal^ himself above the Popes Authority, so long settled in possession,
and that in those very things in which before he was acknowledgedly under him;
especially the contrary verdict of such an universality, as I have before
mentioned, with its weight not to be counterpois'd, preponderating, and
mightily prejudicing any pretense of Evidence. Again, if the thing were
evident, how happened it that no Christian King till the time of King Henry the
eighth, and in his time none but he should discern this clear evidence, unless
perhaps (though they say love is blind, yet) his desire to Anna Bullen did open
his eyes in such miraculous manner, that he saw by the heavenly light of her
bright star-like eyes, that the Pope was Antichrist, his Authority unlawful;
and himself, who was then found under it in Ecclesiastical matters, to be
indeed above it, in case the Popes spiritual power should cross his carnal
pleasure.

To conclude my answer to this Chapter, I would ask two things of Mr. Doctor;
one is, in case a King should have broke from the Church, and brought in Schism
into his Country, whether it could probably be performed in any other manner
than the very method by which their Reformation was introduced? The other is
whether the Reformation be yet perfectly complete, or rather that Queen
Elizabeth swept the Church indeed, but left the dust sluttishly behind the
door; if it be not yet complete, I would gladly know how far this Reformation
and Receding from Rome may proceed; and what be the certain stints, and limits
of this rolling Sea, which it may not pass? For I see no reason in the Doctors
grounds, but if the secular powers think it convenient, they may reform still
end* ways as they please, nay even, if they list, deny Christ to be God; an
acute Socinian will solve very plausibly all the objections out of Scripture,
and produce allegations, which I doubt not he will make far stronger, than the
Doctor does his against the Pope; nor will there want some obscure testimonies
out of Antiquity, and express ones from the Arrian Heretics to evince the
Tenet; if this then were voted by a King, some of his Bishops and a Parliament,
the Doctor must not disobey and hold Christ's Divinity; since the thing was done
by them to whom (as the Doctor says) rightful power legally pertain'd. They
having no infallibility then, may happen to vote such a thing; and the Doctor
having no infallible certainty to the contrary, ought not recede from his
lawful Superiors, so as upon these grounds all religion may be reformed into
Atheism; and (the infallibility of the Church once denied) the temporal Power
has no reason to have his rightful authority stinted, but at pleasure to make
Reformation upon Reformation from generation to generation, per omnia saecula
saeculorum.

THE THIRD PART.
Containing the answers to the four last Chapters of Dr. Hammonds Schism.

SECT. 1.
Doctor Hammonds second sort of Schism, and his pretense that they retain the
way to preserve Unity in Faith, refuted.

MAster Hammond has at length finished C. 8. Sect. 1.
his greatest task, and done preaching of the first species of Schism, as it is
an offense against the subordination, which Christ has by himself and his
Apostles settled in the Church; and is now arrived to the second sort, as it
signifies an offense against the mutual unity, peace and charity, which Christ
left among his Disciples.

This Schism against Charity, for methods sake, (as he tells us) he divides
into three species. Sect. 2.
The first is a Schism in the Doctrine or Traditions, a departure from the
unity of the Faith once delivered to the Saints, from the institutions of
Christ, of the Apostles and of the Universal Church of the first and purest
times, whether in Government or practices, etc. Where first this methodical Dr.
makes Faith and Charity all one; putting his Schism against Faith for the first
species of his Schism against mutual Charity. Next, he ranks also the rejecting
Christ's Institution of Government under this second species of Schism against
Charity, which most evidently was the first General Head of Schism hitherto
treated of; that is, of the Offense against Subordination settled by Christ in
the Church: For Christ could not settle such a subordination in the Church, but
he must at the same time institute the Government of the Church; since there
can be neither subordination without Government, nor Government without
subordination. So as now the Schism against Government is come to be one of the
Schisms against mutual Charity; and, to mend the matter, comprehended under the
same Head with Schism against Faith. Was ever such a confusion heard of? And
yet, all this is done (says the Doctor) for methods sake.

But to proceed, the second species of his Schism against mutual Charity, is an
offense against external peace and Communion Ecclesiastical. Where I find as
much blundering as formerly. For these words must either signify an Offense
against Superiors and Governors of the Church; and then it is again co-incident
both with the first general Head of Schism, which dissolves the subordination
of the Churches subjects; and Sect. 2.
also with the first particular species of Schism against mutual Charity, which
(according to the Doctors method) included a breach from the Government
instituted by Christ. Or else, they must signify an Offense against the
mutually and equally-due correspondence and Charity, which one fellow-member
ought to have to another; and then it falls to be the same with his third and
last species, which he calls, The want of that Charity which is due from every
Christian to every Christian. So that, if the jumbling all the Bells together
in a confused disorder may be called musical, then the Doctors division may be
styled methodical.

After this, he subdivides this first species, (to C. 8. S. 3.
wit, Schism against Faith) into A departure from those Rules appointed by
Christ for the founding and upholding truth in the Church; and into The
asserting particular doctrins contrary to Christ's and the Apostolical pure
Churches establishment. But first he cleares himself of the former of these by
answering our suggestion (as he calls it) that in casting out the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome, they have cast off the Head of all Unity. To which he tells
us the answer is obvious; First that the Bishop of Rome was never appointed by
Christ to be the Head of all Christian Unity, or that Church to be the
conservatory for ever of all Christian Truth, more than any other Bishop or
Church of the Apostles C. 8. Sect. 4.
ordaining or planting. Where I find almost as many absurdities hudled together
as words. For first, what signifies the Bp. of Rome was not appointed by
Christ? Christ was not on earth when St. Peter's Successors in the Sea of Rome,
sat there; and when he ordained St. Peter chief of the Apostles, Saint Peter
was not yet Bishop of Rome. Next, if he means that St. Peter was not appointed
by our Savior, as the Head of Christian Unity, St. Hierom's testimony, I
suppose, will be as good as the Doctors word, who tells us, Inter duodecim, etc.
Amongst the, twelve one Hierom. contra Iovinian.
was chosen, that A HEAD being constituted, the OCCASION OF SCHISM MIGHT BE
TAKEN AWAY. Where we see expressly Saint Peter, the Popes Predecessor, was
advanced to be HEAD; and this to take away occasion of Schism, that is, to be
HEAD OF CHRISTIAN UNITY. Thirdly, hence also follows that Christian Unity is
conserved by him more than by any other Bishop, contrary to the Doctors
assertion. Fourthly, he equivocates in the word Roman Church, and takes in it a
sense which he knows we never meant: Our acception of it being of the
Universal Church communicating with the Mother Church of Rome; his, of the
private Diocese of Rome it self. Fifthly, it is groundless to affirm, even of
this private Church of Rome it self, that she is not the conservatory of
Christian Truth more than any other; since the Doctor cannot but know the
Fathers are of a contrary belief, holding that the two chief Apostles, dying
there, bequeathed to that Church, as a sacred Legacy, a greater vigor of
Christian Tradition. Again, Histories and Fathers witnessing so unanimously her
firm persistance above the rest; objections often urged by our Authors to that
purpose; the Doctor might at least have afforded us one testimony of the
contrary, besides his own bare saying. Lastly, what is the Doctors intent in
saying Christ did not appoint the Church of Rome conservatory (for ever) of all
Christian truth? What means this canting Parenthesis (for ever) As if Christ
might perhaps appoint her to conserve truth for a while, but meant after some
time to discharge her of that office. But this Parenthesis the Doctor reserved
for a starting-hole, that he might at pleasure cry out she had erred, when he
had found out some odd testimony, which with the help of an id-est-clause might
overthrow the Authority of the whole World.

His second Defense for relinquishing the means to preserve Unity of Faith,
which we charge them with, is this; that The way provided by Christ and his
Apostles for preserving the Unity of Faith, etc. is fully acknowledged by their
Reformation. Which way (says the Doctor) is made up of two Acts of Apostolical
Providence; First, their resolving upon some few heads of efficacy to the
planting of Christian life through the world, and preaching and depositing them
in every Church. Secondly, their establishing an excellent subordination of
Church Officers, etc. As for the first of these C. 7. Sect. 5
Acts (as he calls them) of Apostolical Providence; if these two Heads he
speaks of, as thus deposited, be indeed sufficient to form a Christian life in
order to the attainment of Eternal bliss, and that they came down certainly to
us by this depository way at first in the Churches, and so derived successively
age by age, Dr. Hammond C. 7. Sect. 12
is suddenly become a Proselyte and a plain Papist: For, we neither say we have
any point of Faith superfluous for the Community of the Faithful; nor that
those we have, came to us by any other means than seruando depositum, by
preserving uncorrupted those necessary doctrines thus deposited.

But I fear much, when the matter comes to scanning, Mr. Hammond, in this his
doctrine, neither goes to Church nor stays at home, but halts very lamely in
the midway. He stays not at home; for his Church of England is so far from
holding the points deposited by the Apostles in Churches, a certain way to
preserve Unity of Faith, that nothing is more abominable to her than the name
of Tradition. This appears by the sixth Article or Canon of Queen Elizabeth's
female-headed General Council, where the Scripture is made the sole ground of
Faith, and nothing affirmed as necessary to Salvation, but what is built upon
it; whereas the Doctor here builds points necessary to salvation (for sure
those few heads of special efficacy to the planting a Christian life, can be no
less) upon their preaching and depositing them in the Churches; nay more, the
Unity of Faith, that is, Faith it self, (for Faith, if not one, is none) upon
this way of depositing. Yet for all this he will not go to Church neither,
though he stay not at home. For ask him, are those few Heads all that are
necessary? he will tell you, n^; yet which be those necessary Heads, how many,
and why no more were thus delivered (since this he says is A WAY TO PRESERVE
UNITY IN FAITH; and on the other side he sees what multiplicity is bred by the
diverse C. 8. ^. 5.
interpretations of Scripture) ask him, I say, these questions, and no
particular account can he give you; only he had a mind to say something in
geneneral, lest he might be thought to have utterly contemned all Traditions.

Again, these Churches, in which were deposited those few Heads of such special
eefficacy to plant Christian life, were they infallible, that is, such as we
may certainly trust to in their preserving that depositum? if they were* they
might as well be infallible in other necessary points also, and so the Doctor
has slipped, by good hap, into our Rule of Faith, and (though hoodwink't) goes
to Church again. But if they be not infallible, that is, connot certainly tell
us that they delivered us the right depositum, and the same they received, then
the Drremaines as he is, and has brought nothing to his purpose. For since
Unity of Faith cannot be preserved without some efficacious means of bringing
it down to us inerrably true, unless this depositing was such as must upon
necessity continue for ever, ( which is that we call Infallibility, or
Indefectibility of the Church) the providence of the Apostles had been very
slight, and nothing at all to the Doctors purpose; that is, it had been no
efficacious way to preserve Unity of Faith.

He adds afterward, And all this is asserted and acknowledged by every true
son of the Church of England as zealously as is pretended by any Romanist. Here
again the Doctor seems to step forwards toward the Church* and to draw a
great troup of backward unwilling Protestants after him. For if they hold (as I
conceive he means by these words) the doctrines deposited in the Church, as
zealously as the Romanists, they must hold them as of Faith; for so far our
well-grounded zeal carries us, and that the depositary is so trusty as it
cannot deceive us. Now you see the Doctor is got as far as the Church-door.
But when he hears them within the Church talk that a company of men can be
Infallible; he leaps you back at one jump as far as the Sceptick Schools of
the Heathen Academicks.

But how could Mr. Hammond imagine this pretense sufficient to acquit him from
Scism in renouncing the way to preserve Unity of Faith, or to prove that he and
his fellows still fully acknowledged it. The way to preserve Unity of Faith,
held by all the Christian world before their breach, was the belief of the
Churches Infallibility; and we think man's wit cannot invent a better for that
End. Either then, this must be the way to preserve Unity in Faith, or some
other; if this, you manifestly broke and rejected it, as has been shown, and
as the 19th Article of Queen Elizabeth's new Creed professedly declares; if some
other, whatever it is, it must needs include a fallibility and uncertainty in
the Church, of the doctrine she teaches. Wherefore, either evidence to us that
a professed and believed fallibility can be a better way to preserve Unity in
Faith, than a belief of Infallibility; or else grant that renouncing the
latter you renounced the best and most efficacious way to conserve such an
Unity.

The second way to preserve Unity in Faith here mentioned by the Doctor (as
fully and zealously acknowledged by him and his fellows) is the establishment
by our Savior and his Apostles of an excellent subordination of all inferior
Officers of the Church to the Bishop in every City, of the Bishops in every
province to their Metropolitans, of the Metropolitans in every region or (...)
to Patriarchs or Primates; allowing also amongst them such a primacy of Order
or Dignity a^ might be proportionable to the (...). etc* Thus the Doctor. In
answer to which, w^ will examine a while, whether this way, thu^ laid out, be
indeed the way to preserve Unity i^ Faith! For, if notwithstanding this
subordination, no Priest is bound to believe his Bishop, nor Bishop his
Metropolitan, nor Metropolitan his Patriarch, how can this conduce to the Unity
of Faith? But peradventure he will say this subordination in obedience is a
great help to keep out errors, and then, if this be so, we must take into
consideration how this point relates to Unity of Government, as it is a means
to conserve Truth, the breaking of which Unity is called Schism. So the
question in that case is reduced to the examine how his subordination provides
against Schism. Let us admit then that all the world were made up of Churches
governed in this Order as the Doctor has put them; I would ask, if in the time
of the Arian Heresy, a Priest had dissented from his Bishop, an Arian, but yet
consented with his Metropolitan, had it been schism in so doing? The Doctor
must answer, No; for the Metropolitan being of higher Authority than the
Bishop, the adherence to him would more secure the Priest from schism, than the
relinquishing the Bishop could endanger him. Next, if a Bishop dissent from an
heretical Metropolitan, but consents with a Catholic Patriarch, is it yet
Schism? Surely no, since the same reason clears him that cleared the Priest
before. Again, if the Metropolitan dissent from his own Primate or Patriarch,
but agree with all the rest, is it yet schism? Certainly no; for the collection
of all the rest, being of greater Authority than any one in particular, can by
consequence more excuse him, than the other can condemn him. Hitherto then we
have found none of the Doctors Amulets against Shism. Let us proceed; If a
Patriarch dissent from the first, from the Doctors (...), but yet concedes to
all the rest, is it yet schism? The Doctor answers, no; For in regard he owed
the other only something more of a civil respect, as a younger C. 7. Sect. 17
brother does an Elder, without any inferiority to him in Command or
Jurisdiction, it cannot be a Schism. Forwards still; Suppose some Nation or
some Patriarch dissent from a General Council, is it yet Schism, still the Dr.
answers, No; for in his third Chapter, which branch't Schism into all its
Species, he put no such schism as that against a General Council. How then has
Mr. Hammond by this new way provided against Schism, if according to this
Subordination, all the Church may fall together by the ears, and all may find
lawful excuses to secure them from* being Scismaticks; since the economy of
that distracted Family is so ordered, that neither any one in particular, nor
any in common, have any tie to hold them to the rest, without which ty of
consent in matters of faith, this imagined subordination can no way be a means
to preserve Unity of Faith; and conquently the Drs. Church*government (without
some stronger obligation to knit up all this Order in an Unity) is not an Act
of Providence, either worthy our Savior or his Apostles.

But what is become of the King or Emperor all this while, is he no body now,
who before was the Chief? It seems the Apostles made no reckoning of him in
all their Providence. It is wonderful Mr. Hammond should so forget himself, and
proceed so inconsonantly to his own grounds; that, whereas before the King was
Chief Governor, Head of the Church, Supreme in Ecclesiastical matters, over
and above both Metropolitans and Patriarchs, etc. Now in treating the
Government of the Church, instituted to preserve the Unity of Faith, he thinks
the Head of the Church, whom he had formerly exalted above all that is called
HOLY, not worth the mentioning. Does he think the Unity of such a Head conduces
nothing to the preservation of Unity in Faith, which yet he grants to a far
more inferior, Bishop? or accounts he it a small sin for a Patriarch to
dissent from so Sacred a Head of his Church, and his lawful Superior, nay
Supreme in Ecclestastical matters, and to whom the rightful power (as the
Doctor told us) in those things legally pertaines? Yet Mr. Hammond had good
reason to omit it. For though he may talk of, and advance that doctrine in
common, so to escape the Supremacy of the Pope (for you must conceive that he
had rather have even a Bramble* rule over their Church, than that
all*o're*spreading Cedar, the Bishop of Rome) yet he declines it as handsomely
as he can, when he should apply that doctrine to particulars, as is seen in our
present case. For indeed who would not laugh at him, if he had told us (as he
must, had he introduced the King) that it was the height of Schism to dissent
in a point of Faith from a Thing which neither the Catholics, nor yet
Protestants (as you here see) acknowledge; but a kind of a Lay-Elder, an
Office, which (were it not three days older) might seem borrowed from their
dearly beloved brethren the Presbyterians.

Yet the Doctor is grown kind; and allows that the Scripture grants to S. Peter
some Primacy of Order, or Dignity. If so, Mr. Hammond, C. 8. S. 5.
then, for any thing you know, it may be a Primacy of Jurisdiction; And it
stands only upon the certainty of your, and our interpretation of Scripture,
whether it signify such a Primacy or no. Neither indeed could it be any other,
if any hold may be taken from your words. For S. Peter, as you grant, and as
the words (...) Simon, the first of the Apostles, plainly evidence, had some
kind of Primacy then given him; and if it were then given him, he then had it,
that is, he had it in our Saviors life time; but you told us before that S.
John had the dignity of place (which is the same with Primacy of Order) before
all others in Christ's life C. 4. S. 14.
time, even before S. Peter himself* The Primacy then which S. Peter had in
Christ's life time, must be some other Primacy; and what Primacy could this be,
but the Primacy of Jurisdiction? Again, if by this Primacy he allows S. Peter,
he means such a precedence as has any effect or efficacity in the Church
according to the nature and degree of a Primacy; this is all the substance of
the Popes Authority, and all that is held by us as of Faith; but if he means by
Primacy there, a merely inefficacious and dry Presidency and Precedence of
Order; such as is with us the walking on the right hand, or sitting first at a
Table, without any superiority more than a courteous deference of the rest;
then the Doctor must imagine our Blessed Savior had no better thing to do,
when he made S. Peter the first, but to take order, for fear the good Apostles
should fall to complement, who should sit, go, or speak, in the first place:
and consequently this tenet (being an Act of our Saviors, registered in
Scripture) must be a courteous point of Faith, obliging all the Apostles,
under pain of damnation, to be civil, and make a leg to S. Peter.

In the next paragraph the Doctor is full of C. 8. S. 7.
fears and jealousies, and makes a great doubt that the subjection of this
Church to the Authority of the Bishop of Rome will never be likely to tend to
the Unity of the whole. And why think you so, Mr. Doctor? do you not find
evidently that the Church (before Luther and K* Henry renounced the said
Authority) enjoyed most perfect peace and tranquillity, as those who are under
that government do most blessedly now? and on the contrary, that after that
Authority was rejected, nothing has succeeded the rejecters, but perpetual
turmoiles, schisms, divisions and subdivisions into Sects; and daily mutations
in Faith and Government, as far as the temporal sword did not hinder them. Is
not this as evident as all History, and even our very eyes can witness a
truth? Lastly, do not the present distractions you now groan under awake you,
to see that the source of all your misery springs from the leaking Cistern of
Schism you have dug for your selves? Did your Ancestors find so little
Unity under the Government of the Roman Catholic Church, or have you found
such a constant Unity since you left it, that you can presume the re-admitting
that Government is never likely to tend to Unity? Yet you cannot think
otherwise, unless all other Churches of Christians paid that subjection too.
Do you your obligation; why should their backwardnes in their duties make you
deny yours? Besides, whom do you call Christians? all that cry Lord, Lord,
that is, profess the name of Christ, but deny the only certain Rule to come
to the knowledge of his Law? such as were the Gnostics, Carpocratians,
Donatists, Socinians, and all the heresies that ever arose since the infancy of
the Church; or do you mean by the word Christians, only those, qui faciunt
voluntatem Patris, do the will of our heavenly Father, that is, all that hear
the Church, or have a certain and common Rule to know what Christ's Law is? if
so, all these acknowledge subjection to the Head-Bishop of Rome, never denied
by any but those, who, at the same time they denied it, cast themselves out of
the Church, refusing to hear her.

You say the Eastern Churches had not acknowledged it ere your departure. Admit
they had not: can their pattern warrant you (more than it can warrant the
Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc.) unless you be certain they did well in
it? They rejected it indeed, and for their reward were by all the Christian
world (till you, falling into the same fault, began to call them Brothers) and
by all your Ancestors justly held and called Schismatics. Yet, when they were
in their right mood, they admitted it as much as any Roman-Catholike, as
appears in the Acts of the Florentine Council, to which they subscribed; nay
even when they were disgusted and refused Unity, they acknowledged the power of
the Bishop of Rome; as appears by a testimony of Gerson, cited by your friend
Bishop Bramhall against himself ( in his just vindication of the Church of
England, p. 101.) which witnesses that the Greeks departed from the then-Pope
with these words, We acknowledge thy power, we cannot satisfy your
covetousness, live by your selves.

His second doubt is, that the Bishop of Rome C. 8. Sect. 6
is not able to administer that vast Province. I wonder how he did of old; and
why he may not do the same again as well as formerly. But the Dr. calls it a
politic problem whether he can or no; and would have it judged by those who
are by God entrusted with the Flock. Id est (says he) by the Princes, the
nursing Fathers in every Church. It is indeed a politic problem, that is, a
question concerning Government; but since it concerns Government
Ecclesiastical, it falls not under the scanning of temporal Politicians. The
Christian Commonwealth would be brought to a pretty pass, if the Government of
Gods Church, so long acknowledged as left by Christ, and continued in the
Church 300. years (by their own confession) ere there were any Christian
Princes, should anew be called into question by humane policy. But these two
words of Scripture Nursing Fathers make it plain to the Doctor (satisfied with
any thing himself fancies) that the Government and Jurisdiction over the Church
belongs to Kings; as if to nurse, cherish and foster, were to rule, order,
govern and command; or, as if Joseph, who was Foster-father to our Savior, was
as good as, or the same with God Almighty, who was his true Father. And I
wonder where this Doctor ever read, that our Savior entrusted the Government
of his Church and Ecclesiastical affairs to any but the Apostles,
Ecclesiastical persons; or that any held Nero, the Heathen Emperor, to have
right and title o be Head of the Church.

Again, if our Savior left that authority with his Apostles, I would gladly
know, by what new Orders from Christ, it came to be transferred from their
Successors into the hands of secular Princes. But the Doctor has by his former
words brought the matter at length to a final decision. The question is,
whether it be sitting the Pope should rule over the whole Church, which none
denies but a few schismatical Princes; he comes to take up the controversy,
and tells us those very Princes (for all Catholic Princes have already
determined the contrary) must decide the truth of the business. As if an
Umpire, being to arbitrate a quarrel about the Authority of the
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, opposed by the Major, his Competitor, should take
up the business by saying it was a politic problem, belonging to the
Government of the University, and so ought to be decided by none but the Major.

SECT. 2.
Of Dr. Hammonds evasion in recurring to the first 300. years, and concerning
the humble and docible temper of his Church.

HAving thus cleared the Protestants for renouncing the Rules of Faith; (which
was part of his well-divided Schism against mutual Charity as far as it
concerns Faith) he is come to treat next of the second part of that first
species of mutual Charity, which concerns Faith, to wit, of the particular
doctrines in Faith: in which he says he doubts not but to approve himself to
any that will judge of the Apostolical Doctrines and Traditions by the
Scriptures and consent of the first 300. years, or the four General Councils,
etc. which is a very plausible and pithy piece of shuffling, expressing a plain
tergiversation from approving himself willing to do any thing, but to wave and
shift the Question. For first, we must judge of Apostolical doctrines and
Traditions by Scripture. I ask, are those doctrines clearer expressed in
Scripture than they are in the depositories of the Churches, by which he told
us before they were brought down to us, or no? If they be clearer in Scripture,
what needed we those depositives at all, and to what end does that Apostolical
Providence serve? If not, how can we judge of them by Scripture, which speaks
more obscurely of them? Again, since we must judge of Apostolical doctrines by
Scripture, what rules does the Doctor give us to settle our judgment, when
things are clear in Scripture and when not? for we see many men, who govern
themselves by fancy, think that evident, which another judges to have no
appearance of truth. And, for my part, I even despair of bringing clearer
proofs from Scripture, than that S. Paul converted Jews, and S. Peter
Gentiles; which yet you saw could give the nice Doctor no satisfaction.

Another tergiversation is his standing only to the first 300. years; where
the Authors being scarce, by reason of the Churches obscure state under
persecution; and hardly any occasion to speak of the late risen controversies
between us, he hopes no great matter can be concluded against him thence, where
scarce any thing is found that concerns our quarrel. As if, being to fight a
Duel with an Adversary, he would stand to the appointment of no place and time,
but only in a wilderness and a dark night; where they might be sure never to
meet, or being met, never see one another. No better is his standing to the
four first Councils only; which were all called upon other occasions, and so
touch not any point of debate between us, except only on the by, and therefore
obscurely; the best testimonies out of which have been already objected by him,
and solved by us. But why only four? since all Councils are of equal
Authority; there being nothing found to authorize the first four, but was
found in the fifth, sixth, etc. So that this challenge of the Drs. is all one
as if an Arian Heretic would be judged by no place in Scripture, whether
Christ were God or no, but out of the Proverbs of Solomon; where nothing is
found concerning that point; dilating much upon the praises of Solomon, and
what a most pure and uncorrupted piece of Scripture that Book is; but producing
no Evidence in the world why the other Books of Scripture were not as pure and
sacred as it.

But the Doctor escapes not so; he has engaged himself by this (as he thought)
secure grant, further than he imagines. His allowing of four Councils to
examine his Faith by, is an acknowledgement that he admits the Authority of
Councils as sacred and binding. He must either then show EVIDENCE that the 5th
Council erred, or that the Church and her Pastors had declined from the faith
of the foregoing Age, or else he is obliged to accept it, and so the rest,
under the penalty of forfeiting the title of a good Christian: for no less
blot will fall to his share, who rejects an Authority held sacred by himself,
without most clear Evidence of a just exception. As he who acknowledges the
Authority of Parliament, by admitting the Acts of some as valid Laws, is
bound, by the very acknowledgment of some, to accept all the rest, unless an
open Evidence convince their Votes not to have been free, or that there was
some other known defect in the managing of them Only in this latter a far
less Evidence will serve the turn, the Authority of Parliament being but
humane, whereas the other was held and acknowledged to be sacred. But indeed,
the truth is, he accepts not even of those four, because he thinks Councils to
be of Authority; but because he thinks there is no doctrine in these against
his Fancy or Faith; or if any, he hopes he can make a shift to shuffle it off:
In the mean time gaining a very great patronage and countenance to his cause,
in pleading it relies on such highly authorized supports.

No candider than the former is his evasion C. 8. S. 7.
of being judged by the purest Ages; which in reality signifies only such
times wherein nothing was treated against those heresies which afterward
cling'd together to compound Protestantism. This is manifest by his admitting
300. years next after Christ, no more; by which he excludes the fourth and
fifth Ages, yet at pleasure admits the fourth General Council held about the
middle of the fifth Age. So that, the whole Church must be imagined to be first
pure, then impure, afterward pure again, according as the supposition of it
suits best for the Doctors purpose. If none of their particular heresies were
rife, and therefore not condemned in the first obsure 300. years, presently the
Dr. cries up those Ages for pure; But the Church in the next Age, having now
got rid of persecution, became pestered with homebred factions and heresies;
which made the Fathers of the Church take pen in hand, vigorously confuting
them and some of the Doctors tenets among the rest. Hereupon the Doctor
presently decries that Age as impure* popish, corrupted. But then in the middle
of the fifth age was called a Council, which chanced to treat nothing
professedly of the errors afterward embraced by the Protestants; nay more,
had a certain passage in it (which I have before cleared) serving them to
blunder in against the Pope; Immediately that Council was sacred, and that age
(or at least that year) was pure again. For it cannot be imagined the doctrine
of that Council was pure, but the belief of the Faithful in that Age taught by
those Pastors which there resided must be pure also. Far more consonant then to
their grounds is the doctrine of the Puritans, denying promiscuously all
Antiquity; than to pick and cull out at pleasure what serves their turn (as do
the Protestants) and to like and reject, allow and disallow what makes for or
against them, without giving* any evident reason, why they put such a
difference.

In vain therefore does the Doctor (like a very Saint) pretend in behalf of
their Church an unaffected ignorance though they should mistake, being
conscious to himself what pitiful shifts he makes use of in stead of grounds.
In vain does he hope that this ruliness (as he calls it) and obedience of
theirs will render them approvable to God; unless they can render God an
approved reason, why they will at pleasure hold his sacred Spouse, the Church,
holy in one Age and adulterate in another; and shape and fashion Christ's
seamless coat, according to the mode of their ever-changing fancy. Lastly, most
vainly do they hope this ruliness in holding to the first 300. years will
lead them into all truth, unless they could show that all the points of Truth
between them and us were professedly treated and decided in those times, and
the decision on their side.

He ends in a preaching manner with extolling C. 8. Sect. 8.
the humble and docible temper of his Church. Truly, Mr. Doctor, it is a
wonderful commendation to your Church that she is yet to be taught: Pray, when
will she be at age to leave going to School? when will she be out of her
prentice-like tutorage, and set up for her self to profess truth, as a Church
should do? I thought a Church should have been Columna and firmamentum
veritatis; the Pillar and firm foundation of Truth; but yours is like the hinge
of a door, or a weathercock, docibly turning with every wind of doctrine. How
do you think the Puritans or any other Sect should in reason yield any
Authority to your Church, since she professes her self yet learning her Faith;
that is, as yet knows it not? If it be such a commendation in your Church to
be docible, I suppose it is so in others* and consequently in the whole Church;
and then, I p^ay, who must teach her, or what greater Professor is there on
Earth of the knowledge of Christ's Faith, to whom the Universal Church may
submit her self as doci^le? Perhaps you will say that one particular Church
must sisterly and charitably assist and teach another; that is, though each be
ignorant it self, yet (like the blind leading the blind) they must all be
supposed mutual Mistre^ses, and consequently all learned.

But let us examine a little further this docible and humble temper of your
youngling Church. Is it d^ciblenesse or humility think you, to forsake a
Mistress, who had all the qualities which could give ^er Authority, and fall to
teach your selves new reformed doctrines without any Authority at all? Such is
the humble d^ciblenesse of your Church. Is it docibleness to cast off the
Authority of 14. General Councils, and the consent of Christendom for twelve
hundred years, and rely upon your own judgments to interpret the rest as you
list? This is the so much*brag*d on docibleness and humble temper of your
Church.

Parallel to the former, or rather far ou^vying them (though of a contrary
strain) is that most heroic Act of your docible humility to be willing to hold
things concerning your eternal salvation upon the Authority of the C. 8. S. 7.
four General Councils, or the Doctors and Church of the first 300. years;
which Drs. and Councils notwithstanding it is an Article See the 21 Art. of the
Church of England.
of your Faith that they are fallible: And as for the Church of those times,
that it was fallible your self grants; for you confess that the same Church
erred in the fourth Age. Now, to hold Articles or points of Faith upon that
Authority, which it is an Article of Faith may deceive me, is such a
magnanimous piece of docible humility, as I dare be bold to say, in the Doctors
behalf, neither the Apostles nor any Saint in the succeeding Church durst ever
own. Neither can the present Catholics, whom some (who neither understand
their own, nor Catholic grounds) laugh at, as blindly humble and obedient to
the Church, lay claim to such an incomparable degree of humility, proper and
peculiar to the Protestants only. For we pretend not Faith certain, but upon a
deemed INFALLIBILITY in the Authority assuring it; so as, though they may be
supposed blameable by you for failing in their grounds, that is, in believing
the Church infallible; yet they cannot be condemned for proceeding
inconsequently upon those ground^; for an infallible Authority deserves a firm
assent. But to stand to the acceptance of matters of Faith, which you pretend
most certain, upon an Authority confessed by your selves uncertain, is such a
condiscension of humility, such a prostrating your proper knowledge, as is not
only a blindly-cap^ivating your Judgment, but even an utter renouncing all
judgment, prudence and common sense; not a submitting the reason by a voluntary
winking at objections, but a quite extinguishing and perfect putting out of the
very Eye of reason it self; and is all one as if a man should say, For any
thing I know, such a one may lie in what he tells me; yet nevertheless I will
strongly persuade my self that all he says is most certainly true.

Yet this humility the Doctor calls here a C. 8. Sect. 8
special mark of the Church of Englands Reformation. And surely you have
reformed well; since you have not only reformed the Unity you before enjoyed,
into distractions; the Faith you formerly professed into newfangled misbeleefes:
but your former reason and judgment into present folly and fancy. What is said
of your accepting the four Councils, etc. may also be applied to your private
interpretitions of Scripture, which found your Faith; which Faith you will have
to be certain and firm, though the persons Interpretation it is built on, be
fallible and obnoxious to error. The pious words in your own behalf with
which you close up your Chapter, spoken in an Elegiack tone, are very moanfully
moving words out of a pulpit; rhetorical enough for women, not rational enough
to satisfy any prudent man. You profess you would preserve the Unity of the
Apostolical Faith and primitive practices, as entire as Christ's body or
garments. Good Mr. Hammond, leave mocking your Readers; and tell us why the
Primitive times must needs just end then, when the Church began to flourish,
and the Fathers to write against your doctrine. And as for Christ's body or
garments, I see no such great respect in you or your Churches doctrine allowed
toward holy Relics, that I should be willing to trust those sacred pledges
to your unhallowed hands; from whose rude usage his mystical Body, his Church,
Faith (its Rule) Sacraments, Government, nor any thing, though never so sacred,
left by our Savior, has found any security.

SECT. 3.
An examination of some common notes produced by Dr. Hammond, to particularize
his Clients to be no Schismatics.

HIs 9th Chapter undertakes to clear his Church from the 2d. sort of his Schism
against mutual ^^arity, to wit, from that Schism which is against extern Peace,
or Communion Ecclesiastical.

And first, he alleges for his plea, that they have retained the right form of
Government, C. 9. Sect. 5
etc. So that now, Schism against Subordination or Government (for they are all
one) which was the first general Head of Schism, and also comprehended under
the first species of the second Head, as appears C. 8. S. 2. is by the Doctors
accurate method come to be under the second species also of the same second
General Head. Which is all one, as if dividing vivens into Sensitive and
Insensitive, and then subdividing the Genus of Sensitive into the two Species
of Rational and Irrational, or Man and Beast; he should first treat of
Insensitive, the first Genus, and (that done) fall in hand with Sensitive, the
second; and then, under each Species of that, return to treat professedly of
Insensitive again; that is, to speak of Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs, when he
should speak of men and creatures endued with sense. Surely Doctor Hammond is
more methodical in his Sermons; otherwise, the World must needs look upon him
as another S. John Baptist, because he preaches in a Wilderness.

But let us follow him through all his Mazes, distinguished by no orderly path,
but what his own inconstant and desultorious track makes. First then he tells
us that they retai^ the Form of Government, in and under which the Apostles
^ounded Ecclesiastical Assemblies or Communion, viz. that of the Bishop and his
inferio^ Officers in every Church. As if the Arian Heretics, who denied Christ
to be God, and almost all heresies that ever broke from Gods Church, did not
retain afterward the Authority of their own Bishops. But what availed it
either them or you, but to the greater danger of damnation; if you adhered to
those Bishops, who had rejected the Authority of their former Superiors, and
taught you doctrines contrary to the Order of Gods Church; without whose order,
much less against it, they had no Authority to teach at all?

Again, you tell us of one piece of your Government (that of Bishops)
constituted indeed by the Apostles; but you tell us not of the main hinge of
your Churches Government, which is, of the King being its Head and Supreme in
Ecclesiastical matters. This is the sum and top of your Churches Government,
put us not off with an odd end of it. This is that, for substituting which, in
stead of the Ecclesiastical Head you rejected, we charge you of Schism and
breach of Communion Ecclesiastical: for in so doing you cut Gods Church into as
many single headed, and consequently diverse-bodied and disparate
Congregations, as there are Kingdoms in Christendom. Show us that this your
Novelty in Government was practiced by the Apostles in their Assemblies, or
instituted by them or their Blessed Master, and then you will say something to
the point. Remember your purest times of the first 300. years; show us that
all that time the Church was ordered by the Emperors Presidency, or that this
Government was instituted by Christ and his Apostles: If you cannot, then tell
us, how comes it to be held now as a chief point of Faith? You may not in
reason think to uphold your self your by testimonies out of the following ages,
unles you will disavow your own grounds; for those ages were (as you say) all
impure. Lay your hand then on your heart, Mr. Hammond, and tell us in good
sadness, if you be not gravelled in your own doctrine, while you maintain this
new Lay*Ecclesiastical Government.

His second plea is, that, as they maintain the Order of Bishops, so they
submit to the exercise of C. 9. S. 1.
it, acknowledging the Authority of those Governors. In answer to which, no new
thing is to be said, this being the very same with the former; only First
changed into Secondly. For, the obeying, submitting to, and acknowledging the
due Authority of Governors, is the very formal maintaining and accepting the
Government, which was his first branch. So as this is another orderly
production of the Drs. methodical Head, which vents it self in first,
secondly, thirdly, etc. upon all occasions, though both his first, second, and
third be the selfsame formal thing.

His third plea is, that they observe the circumstances Ibid.
necessary to the assembling themselves for public worship. First, that of
place ( Churches.) Secondly, that of time (the Lords day, primitive Festivals.)
As if all Schismatics in the World do not meet at some set times, and in some
appointed and set places. Thirdly, Forms of prayer and praises (almost all out
of our Mass and Breviary.) Celebration of Sacraments (only five of them being
quite abolish't, and three quarters of the sixth.) Sacramentals, Copes and
Surplisses, which you might by the same principles, call rags of Rome.
Preaching (against Christ and his Church; such doctrine as none ever sent you
or your first Forefathers to preach.) Cathechising (infecting and imbuing
tender and easy minds with your tainted doctrine. Fourthly, that of
Ceremonies, such as the practice of the Primitive Church has sent down
recommended to us. Pray, by whom did she send them down and recommend them to
you? Examine well, and you shall find that the same authority recommended to you
many more, as from her, though you only accepted of what you thought
convenient. Lastly, that of discipline to bind all to these performances.
Doubtless all Sects in the world impose some obligation upon their subjects to
keep them together, else they could not be a Sect. Yet that your tie, either
to that, or any thing else concerning Government, is as slack as may be, is
manifest out of the slender provision made against Schism according to the
Protestant grounds, See Part 3. Sect. 1. as I have shown in my answer to the
foregoing Chapter. Neither are you beholding to your doctrine for any
discipline sufficient to hold you together in Unity, (a professed fallibility
is too weak for that) but to the secular Power; the threat of whose sword held
you in awe for a while; but as soon as that Power was dissolved, your
slack-sinew'd Church, which no tie either in Reason or Conscience held
together, bewrayed its composition, and like the statue seen by Nabuchadonosor,
fell all to pieces.

It were not amiss ere I leave these three pleas, already mentioned, to take a
second survey of them, that the Reader may visibly perceive how less than
nothing this Doctor has said, either to his, or indeed any purpose. To make
this discovery sincere, we must mark his intent and scope in this Chapter,
which is to free or clear their Church from the breach of Commmunion
Ecclesiastical, which he makes to consist in such and such things. Now a man
that goes about to clear another of an imputed fault, should (as I conceive)
propose the objected fault with the presumptions of the defendants guiltiness:
and then diluere objecta, wipe off the stain of the accusations, and clear his
innocence. What does the Dr? he takes no notice of what is objected; but in
stead of that, only reckons up some few indifferent things which their Church
has not rejected (and sure it were a hard case if they had rejected all which
their Forefathers taught them) and then thinks the deed done. In particular, he
tells us first that they retain the Government of Bishops; but why they have
innovated a new Church Government, making the King Head in Ecclesiastical
matters; or why they obey those Bishops, who can derive their mission of
doctrine from no former Church or Authority; which only are the things objected
to them, as schism; of these two points he says nothing That they now obey
their Bishops he tells us, but why they obeyed not him, or why they cast out
his Authority, whom they held before to be the Chief-Bishop, that is a matter
not worth clearing. The Pope's Antichrist, and there is an end.

Then he clears his side from Schism, because they assemble in Churches: but he
never considers that we charge them with plain Sacrilege for meeting there,
and deatining those places (anciently ours, and built by us) out of the true
owners hands, and applying them to profane uses: All that with him, is very
laudable, and needs no clearing either from injustice, or sacrilege. He clears
their Church of Schism, because they observe yet some Festivals (and the like
may be said of Sacramentals and Ceremonies) but considers not that the schism
consists in this, that they, at their own voluntary pleasure, refusing some,
and admitting others, denied consequently obedience to that Authority which
recommended both unto them; and which disobedience their own grounds condemns,
as shall presently be showed.

He cleares his Church of Schism, by alleging they observe some form of
Prayer: but never takes notice that the crime we object to them is this, that
they ruined Religious houses to build dwelling Halls; so they mangled our Holy
and ancient Service-books to patch up their reformed piece of the book of
Common Prayer; leaving out all the most sacred parts of it, to wit, Canon
Missae, and what ever concerned the Heaven-propitiating Sacrifice, that highest
and soul-elevating Act of Religion; and only taking out of it those sleighter
things which might satisfy the lowersiz'd devotion of their reformed spirits,
and was enough to serve them to cry, Lord, Lord.

He brings, as a proof of their innocence from schism, that they have
celebration of Sacraments, Preaching and Catechizing, etc. But thinks it not
worth clearing, that of seven Sacraments they have retained only the substance
of one, and the shadow of another. Nor ever considers whether their doctrine be
true or false. All is one for that with the Doctor; if they do but preach,
pray, and catechize, let it be what it will, it is a certain note that they are
no schismatics.

Lastly, he puts as an argument to clear them from schism, that they have
some Discipline to bind to these performances, etc. (that is, they use some
little wit or means to maintain their schism, and hold their tribe together*)
but he waves that for which only we accuse them of Schism; to wit, that they
utterly renounced all the discipline, and even all ground of it, in that
Church, of which theirs was once a member, and fancied to themselves a new one,
without any ground of Authority, and with direct opposition and contempt of the
former discipline.

Nor has he only, in this present endeavor to clear his Church of Schism,
omitted the very mentioning those matters which were to be cleared, but even
the things he alleges, as whose retaining, he makes account frees their*
Church from schism* are such pitiful ordinary businesses, so indifferent to
all or most schismatics and heretics, that they can no way particularize them
to be none, or exempt them from the common crew of their fellows. For what
schism ever arose, but had some kind of government or discipline, had their
meetings in some set places, at some set times, prayed in their own new way,
preached, taught and catechized their own doctrine. So as the Doctor might with
^ar better Logic have concluded the Protestants no schismatics, because they
have all noses on their faces; this being common to Catholics as well as
Schismatics; and so might seem partly to excuse them: whereas the other, of
admitting such points and no more (which are the Doctors notes of his Church)
are disclaimed by all Catholics, and common to almost all Schismatics. Nay
some schismatics and heretics have retained much more of what their Ancestors
taught them, as Lutherans; some almost all points, as the Greeks and the old
Arians; the latter of which (excepting their one heresy against Christ's
divinity) had twenty times more marks of a Church in all other things, than
the Drs could ever pretend to.

Fourthly, he assures us, that the Popes C. 9. S. 2.
Authority is an usurpation, and the use of more ceremonies and Festivals an
imposition of the Romanists. How so Mr. Doctor? if the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome was brought in 900. years ago, when Pope Gregory sent to convert our
Forefathers to Christ's faith, as your self and your followers grant, then how
is it an usurpation of the present Romanists? Were we, who now live, alive
900. years ago? or are they who lived 900. years ago, alive now? But in
regard you only say it, and bring no proof, I shall not trouble my self in
vouchsasing you an answer. As for the imposition of more ceremonies, which you
say the present Romanists used toward you, without any authority from the
Primitive Church, it is so silly, so contrary both to our grounds and your own
also, that you make your self ridiculous to any man that, understands either
one or the other. For since the institution of Ceremonies is one of the (...),
or things indifferent, left to the ordering of Gods Church, as both the 20th
Article of the new English Creed expressly determines, and all moderate
Protestants hold, I wonder why our Church should not, when she saw convenient*
ordain new Ceremonies (and the like may be said of new Festivals, which are
things indiferent also) and recommend the observation and practice of them to
you, who were then members of that Church, her subjects and children. Most
lawfully then did our Church, (even in your own grounds) in imposing new
Ceremonies on you* her then-subjects; and, if so, as unlawfully did you in
spurning against her Ordinances. Neither consequently, can those few you retain
upon your own head (and not her Authority) excuse you from Schism.

Equally absurd is your zealous profession of conforming your selves in
ceremonies to the Primitive times; for if the Church has Authority upon
emergent conveniences and difficulties to institute new Ceremonies and alter
old ones; then, you must either grant our Church in the fifteenth age to have
been no Church (which you dare not affirm for fear of spoiling your own
mission) or else grant that you were more bound to hold the Ceremonies
recommended by her, than those which descended from the Primitive times; Since
our Church could better see what was expedient for her present circumstances,
than the Primitive could foresee so long before hand, what was likely to be
convenient for future ages.

SECT. 4.
Of Doctor Hammonds charitablenesse in admitting all to his Communion, and our
pretended Uncharitableness for refusing to go to their Assemblies.

IN the fifth place the Doctor professes, like a good charitable man as he is;
that they exclude no Christian from their Communion, that will either filially
or fraternally embrace it with them. No truly, to give your Religion its due,
it is a wonderful civil and courteous profession, and admits all the old
condemned Heresies into Communion, provided they but profess Christ; whatever
points else they deny, it matters not. Nay it is sufficient, if they call
themselves Christians (though all the world else calls them Heretics) yet your
kind hearted Church cannot but friendly entertain them. You keep open house for
all comers. The doctrine of Oportet haereses esse, There must be heresies, is
changed by your boon behavior into It is impossible there should be heresies.
For whereas the world heretofore understood those to be Heretics, who held the
letter of the Scripture, and some points of Christianity, but denied others,
which were the tenets of the Universal Church at that time; you have now quite
changed the former notion; and think none to be excluded from Communion, that
is, none to be Heretics that bear the name of a Christian; so as though they
deny all points of Christ's doctrine, yet profess Christ's name, and the outward
letter of the Scripture, let them come, and welcome. Anabaptists, Brownists,
Presbyterians, Quakers, Carpocratians, perhaps Arians; nay even Simon Magus
himself; all these sewed together only with the aerie sound of the word,
Christian, will serve for broken-ware pieces to patch up Doctor Hammonds motley
Church. For since they hold to his grounds, that is, to profess Christ's name,
and the letter of the Scripture, he cannot in any reason admit some, and refuse
the rest.

Again, the Doctor is willing to admit any that will filially or fraternally
embrace communion with them, that is, all that will be either under them, or at
least not above them; but is loath to admit communion with any that will
paternally communicate with them, that is, be over and govern them: No, take
heed of that; as much courtesy as you please, but not a dram of humility,
obedience, nor subjection to Superiors: These peace-preserving virtues would
quite break the neck of Schism and Faction. If there be any such over-powering
Authority, though never so long settled in possession over the Country, and
acknowledged and believed by all Christians, in never so many ages, to be of
divine institution, yet presently the spirit of Schism, in the first place,
endeavors to break asunder the bonds of this paternal communion; to pluck it
down to the ground, and cast it out of the Island.

You are willing (you say) to admit all to your Assemblies that acknowledge the
foundation laid by Christ and his Apostles. You love mightily to talk plausible
words in the air, and in general, as if you made account your Readers should
be all fools, to search no further than the empty sound of your universal
sayings, not applying them to the thing in question. Good Mr. Doctor, tell me
what it is to acknowledge the foundation laid by Christ and his Apostles? Is it
to acknowledge Scripture? All heresies in the world fly only to it, and make
it their armourhouse to oppugn Christ and his Church. Arians and Socinians most
of all, and yet they can deny Christ's Godhead: So as by this means indeed, you
will have store of communicants. Is it the true sense of the Scripture? then
truth being one, and falsehood manifold, if their interpretation be different
from yours, both cannot be true, and consequently both acknowledge not the
foundation left by Christ: for, falsifying his word, cannot be that foundation.
Again, if this be the foundation left by Christ; you must have some certain
and known Rule to come by the true sense of the Scriptures; else you cannot be
certainly assured who acknowledge this foundation, and so admit rashly to your
Communion you know not whom. Is it perhaps the true sense of Scripture, but
restrained to fundamentals? still the same difficulty remains, unless you
have some certain Rule to distinguish and sort out the Essentials from points
of less importance; to talk much of fundamentals, and never tell us which are
they, is but a shuffling trick of a mountebank, and very unbecomming a grave
Divine. Or is this Foundation perhaps the solid sense of Christ's law written
and planted in the tables of men's hearts by the Apostles, and thence by a
welllink't chain of Universal Tradition derived to our times? If so, you must
admit only Catholics, and exclude all the rest; since only they hold this
foundation. Or rather indeed, since you deny this way of bringing down Faith to
be sufficient, which Catholics hold as a certain and infallible Rule, it
follows, that if you will go conseqently to your own grounds, you must not
admit them neither, since this is not the by-you acknowledged foundation laid
by Christ and his Apostles. It remains then that you are willing to admit all
those that shall say they have the Foundation laid by Christ and his Apostles;
and then you cannot doubt but to have the brotherly fellowship of all heretics
and schismatics in the world, that have been, are, or shall be; since all
pretend strongly in general terms to acknowledge that Foundation.

Nor is he less devoutly charitable in the C. 9. S. 6.
following words, that they earnestly desire to be admitted to the like
freedom of external Communion with all the members of all other Christian
Churches, as often as occasion makes us capable of that blessing of the one heart
and the one lip. This it is to be so inured to a drowsy* sounding vein of
preaching Quodlibets, till a man has humm'd and drumm'd away all reason out of
his head. Speak sense, man; and let your pretended Charity come clad in Truth,
or else I must justly suspect it to be nothing but Pharisaical hypocrisy. I
hate contradictions, though told me in never so pious a tone. Was it ever heard
that any Catholic denied you Communion, if you were capable of that blessing
of one heart (the same interior belief) and one lip (the same exterior
profession.) To what purpose then are those seemingly pious words produced.
Leave off paying us with this hollow language, empty of sense; render your
selves capable of that blessing in your actions; renounce and repent your
disobedience to your so-long-acknowledg'd Superiors: Repeal your schismatical
ordinances against Christ's Church: Re-acknowledge a certainty in Faith, which
is now brought, by your professed uncertainty, to the very brink of Atheism;
Return to the never-erring Rule of Faith, the voice of the Church, which held
you for eight or nine hundred years in the firm and undivided Unity of the
same belief. Do, I say, this efficaciously, and then you shall be freely,
cordially, and with open arms received into Communion by them; who would
willingly (though they lovingly reprehend you, to make you reflect on your
errors) not only spend empty words, but even lay down their lives to procure
your Salvation.

Sixthly, the Doctor charges us, that the C. 9. S. 4.
only hindrances which obstruct external Communion, are wholly imputable to us:
which he proves first: because the Pope excommunicated all those Catholics
that went to the Protestant Assemblies in the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth.
And was it not well done think you? This has ever been the constant practice of
Gods Church, to enjoin the Faithful to abstain from the Communion of those, who
maintained a different, that is, an heretical doctrine. The simpler sort of
Catholics were gulled by you to believe you had only turned into English what
was in Latin before, and therefore out of an unwariness, went to your
Churches, which lately had been theirs; and not out of love to your new
reformed doctrine: Till at length, the Father of the Church thought fit to
disabusethem from the error into which your false persuasions had led them;
and forbid them the same room, who were not of the same company. And I wonder
how it can stand with reason or sense, that, holding you heretics, we should
let the poor people go to your Assemblies, to be taught false doctrine; Nay
even Nature it self seems to interdict such an unnatural commerce; that
Catholics, who held the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy of Divine Institution;
Mass, and the rest of our doctrines, from which you receded, sacred, should go
to your Congregations, to hear the first railed against, as Antichristian; the
second, as Idolatrous and a blasphemous fiction; the rest, as erroneous and
pernicious deceits. Blame not then, Mr. Hammond, Nature, Reason, and the Pope,
for hindering this confusion, which you call external Communion; but rather
blame your selves for introducing new doctrines, whence result such
incompossible and inconsistent practices.

Yet the Doctor tells us, that from this prohibition, C. 9. S. 5.
proceeding from the Popes Excommunication, it is visibly consequent, that they
were cast out, and cannot be said to separate. Sure it must be a temper of
shame above brazen, to tell us this now in the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth;
whereas himself has laid out knot by knot how the Unity of the Church, in
which they were formerly, was unloosed, or rather violently broken, in the time
of King Henry the eigthth, King Edwards Protector, and all the first ten
years of this Queen. To which, though enough, and more then enough has been
said, yet I will once more press it home to the Dr. and then leave him to his
wordish shifts, and the Reader to be his Judge. You and your King also were
once members of the Roman Catholic Church, and subject to the Authority of the
Pope; This Authority you confess ( C. 7. S. 5.) you cast out of this Island;
But a rejection of an Authority, is a recession from that Authority; therefore
you are guilty of a recession from the formerly-acknowledg'd Authority. So far
for Government. Now for Doctrines and Practices. You once believed and
practiced as the Roman Catholic Church, to wit, when you were in her: That you
reformed you confess; and C. 7. S. 14. call your reformations, recessions from
the doctrines and practices of Rome. A recession therefore was made by you,
both from the former Government, as also the former doctrines and practices:
But a recession is a voluntary departure, as plain sense evidences; therefore
you made a voluntary departure from the formerly-acknowledg'd government,
doctrines and practices of Rome. Now then, to tell us so long after; and after
so large a narrative confession of your own to the contrary, that you departed
not, but were cast out, as if nothing had been done by you till the tenth year
of Queen Elizabeth, is such a piece of forgetfulness, as could only be
peculiar to Dr. Hammond.

But I perceive the Doctor thinks there is no Schism, till the Pope have
actually excommunicated: as if there might not be a criminal departure from
the former Faith, its Rule, Sacraments, and the Churches Government, before the
Church comes with her spiritual rod of Excommunication to whip the Offender.
From all these, I have already manifested, that you had divided, and by so
doing, made your selves incapable of Communion with the former Faithful. Upon
this, it was necessary to separate the Faithful from you in divine offices and
therefore both just and fitting to excommunicate you; as well to punish you
(who were long before schismatics) for your crime, as to warn the sounder
flock to abstain from your contagious communion. Neither can you blame us for
excommunicating you, whom your own grounds, here delivered, clear in that point
from any imputation of Rigor: Your self confessing that you rejected Roman
Catholike^ from your assemblies, and censured them upon their S. 5.
avowed contumacy against the orders of your Church* Let us know then, why our
Church might not do the same, and with much more reason to you, who were once
members of her, and whose recession from her orders, and contumaciou^
persisting still, your self will witness; show us, I say, why she had not as
great Authority ^ver those, who were once hers, as your^ claims over those,
who were never yours; o^ if you cannot, then grant, you were justl^
excommunicated by her once, and remain a^ justly excommunicated still, until
you disavo^ that contumacy, which obstructs your Communion.

His second Reason why we hindered the external Communion (as he calls that
confusion* is our imposing such conditions on our Communion, that they cannot
subscribe without sinning or seeming to sin against conscience. And what sin,
or seeming to sin, is this, think you? the belief of Doctrines, or
Approbations of Practices, which they neither believe nor approve of. The
question is not, Mr. Doctor, whether you believe or approve of them, or no, but
whether it were your own sinful pride of understanding which made you and your
first reformers disbelieve all their teachers, and think themselves understood
more of Gods mind, than all the world before them; and yet, when they had done,
acknowledged themselves but fallible in their contrary belief; that is,
uncertain whether they or their teachers were in the right; and is not this a
wise ground for any scholar to disbelieve his Master, or any child to disobey
his father and mother. If it were pride, which made you think otherwise, (as
truly no man knowing the grounds you build your reformation upon, and how the
greatest and most learned authority this world could show, opposed you can in
reason judge any other) then it is not innocence in you, nor a sufficient
excuse for your not-Communion, that you do not believe these doctrines; but it
is your sin; and the root of all your misery and schism, that you correct not
that vice, and so leave off that erroneous judgment, which misleades you from
the truth; usurping the office of your spiritual guide the holy Catholic
Church. Free C. 9. S. 7.
the soul then first of that vice, and then you will stand in no need to offer
violence to your minds, nor be afraid to make an unsound confession; the fear
of which you pretend for your excuse. But of this I have said already more then
was needful.

Yet Mr. Hamond is ready to contest and maintain his negatives by grounds that
all good Christians ought to be concluded by. I hear again a sound of words in
general hovering in the air. But what are those grounds in particular, by
which he will contest his doctrines? he tells us in his last Paragrapraph that
they are proofs from Scriptures, or the first Writers (those of the first 300.
years) or the four General Councils. But let us ask first by whose
interpretation of Scripture he will contest his Negatives? he will tell you,
by his own, or some few others like himself, which (not professing themselves
Infallible) he must tell you also he is uncertain whether it be right or no:
And is not this a wise ground to contest his Negatives by, against the positive
doctrine of Gods Church? But let us ask whether he thinks our Saviors command
to hear the Church, be a ground by which all Christians ought to be
concluded. Perhaps, after much shaking his head between loathness to reject our
Saviors words, and unwillingnesse to grant any thing to the Church, he will
answer, yes; the Church of the first 300. years. Then ask him again, who
taught all good Christians, that they should hear the Church of the first 300.
years only, and then stop their ears against her perpetually for the future?
he is gravelled. Again, ask him whether those first three century of years
treat of all late*sprung Negatives? He must tell you, No, they do not treat
all our n^w*controversies; but he will praise them notwithstanding, to put you
^ft your question; and tell you they are the purest and most primitive times.
Ask him next, why he recurs to such obscure times, and stark dumb in our
present controversies? and he must answer, if he will speak out heartily, that
durum telum necessitas, necessity drives him to adhere to them. All the
following Ages, except that holy year in which was celebrated the Council of
Chalcedon, inveighing most impurely against his new doctrine. Thus the Dr.
chooses obscurity for the Patron of his cause, which can be no Sun to reveal
truth, though it may serve for a dark hole to hide falsehood. Neither can he
from his grounds pretend otherwise to contest his Negatives, than by mere
negative arguments, so as the inference must be this; Our points of doctrine
were not contradicted by the Writers of the first 300. years, therefore they
are true: This is the utmost he can conclude thence; whereas, to make this
illation valid, he must first prove, that all truths about Faith were debated
in those days; next, that all which was debated then, is come down certainly
to our times. Neither of which he will be able to manifest. Will not any
judicious Reader think such Rules as these like to bind all good Christians to
be concluded by them? Dr. Hammonds interpretations of Scripture, Councils, and
Fathers, that say nothing, or else very little on the by, concerning the
question; And lastly, negative arguments. To omit that the Writers of those his
primitive times, speak as much and as efficaciously against the Doctors cause,
as is imaginable their present circumstances should invite or give them
occasion. To end then this Chapter with the Doctors words something altered,
these pitiful evasions, and unwarrantable shifts, put together, and applied to
this matter, will manifestly charge him with an apparent guilt of this second
branch of the second sort of Schism.

SECT. 5.
Our pretended Uncharitableness in judging and despising others, retorted upon
the Objecters.

IN his tenth Chapter he gives us a short Sermon concerning the third species
of Schism, which is against mutual charity; divided by him into two Heads, of
judging and despising others: both which he very charitably disclaimes in
behalf of their Church, and would very courteously present us with them. But,
to omit his pious formalities, and come to grounds. Do you think it is
uncharitableness to judge as our Savior judged; that is, to believe what he
said to be true? Our Saviors judgment is, that if any one do not hear the
Church, let him be to thee, as a heathen or a publican. If therefore we see
with our eyes, that you acknowledge no Church to be heard, and yet proceed not
to such harsh terms as our Savior himself has laid down to us, I hope you
will impute it to us as a great moderation, and not as uncharitableness. Now,
that you did not hear the Church, when you broke from ours (and much less
since) is most evident: For your first Reformers most manifestly receded from
the former acknowledged Government, Rule of Faith, Sacraments, Doctrines, and
practices of the Roman Catholic Church, of which you were then a member, as
has been shown and acknowledged; and she teaching them the contrary then, it
could not be said they heard her, when they began their Reformations. Neither
did they join themselves with any other Church, whom they might be said to
hear; nor was this doctrine taught by the very Church of England it self in the
former age; since their Forefathers held and taught them a contrary belief.
Evident then it is, that those few, who, in the time of King Henry the 8th,
adhered to his lust-born Reformation, neither communicated with, nor heard any
Church at Dr. Ham. C. 7. S. 12.
all; but began a new Church, a new Government, a new Faith, and new practices,
both without and against the command of that Church, which both they and their
Forefathers, ever since that Church first taught them Christianity, held to be
the only true Christian Congregation. How can we then, seeing evidently they
heard not any Church, judge otherwise then that our Saviors words are true,
that is, that they are in a sad condition; and you much fadder, who have not
returned whence they receded, but followed their steps, and have made the
breach wider; unless perhaps you think or hope the crime is less, because
there is now a greater multiplicity of offenders, which harden one another to
obsti^acy by their number.

Next, is it uncharitableness not to renounce that Rule of Faith, in which
clearly is founded ^ll the Certainty we have of Christ's Law, and all the hopes
of our salvation; to wit, the inerrability of our Church, believed by our
Ancestors, ever since Christ's doctrine first dawned to the dark world? Yet this
which witnesses your doctrine heretical, we must absolutely renounce, ere we
can deem you other than Heretics: Either we must judge the highest Tribunal
in the world, upon whose living voice we build all Faith and true sense of the
Scriptures, to have lied; that is, we must judge our highest Superiors,
Pastors, Teachers, and Church to be erroneous in Faith, and heretical, or else
we must judge you our equals at most, and (till you out-lawed your selves) her
subjects, to be truly criminal, and rightly condemned.

Thirdly, Unus Deus, una Fides, unum Baptisma, there is but one Faith, as there
is but one God. That your Faith and ours cannot be one, is most evident. All
our whole Church condemning yours as heretical; and yours, when the humor
takes them, as much detesting ours as erroneous: Nay, the most dreadful
sacrifice of our Saviors Body and Blood, our Holy of Holies, reviled and
abhorred by your Art. 31. of the Church of England
Church, as a blasphemous fiction and pernicio^^ imposture. Both our Faiths
therefore cannot be one, and consequently one of them is none but erreur
against Faith; which, if firmly adhered to, as it is, must be Heresy; either
your Faith then, or ours, under penalty of maintaining a contradiction, must
necessarily be held as heresy. Now comes this Doctor, and accuses us for the
most uncharitable men in the world, because we will not judge our own Faith
heretical, and so free theirs. Remember our Saviors words ( Mr. Dr.) He that
believes not, is judged already; Join this to Una Fides, and our contradicting
one another in most important points of Faith; and you must necessarily
conclude, that neither of us, if he be certain he believes and has that one
Faith, can make conscience of judging the other, since the other is judged
already, in receding from, or not having the true Faith. Nay, if he judge him
not to be already judged, he must judge himself to be in the same state of a
self-judg'd unbeleever; or rather, on the contrary, he must make conscience of
not judging him, for such; but, by a colloguing piece of courtesy, draw him
into eternal perdition, and himself follow him, for his uncharitable
connivence. Thus you see the Dr. never meddles with any point, but he blunders
and destroys all the reason that ever concerns it.

Neither is it Charity, but partly fear of most open shame, partly ignorance of
any grounds, or what belongs to a Church or a Government, which makes him not
judge us to be both Heretics and Schismatics; since one of us must be such,
and he has a good mind to give us these new Titles, whom he very angrily here
calls his vaunting enemies. But as the former body C. 10 S. 3.
of our Church, out of which their few Reformers receded, standing and
remaining still one and the same, together with that plain and common notion
that a tree is not said to be broken from a branch, but the branch from the
treeleaves them so much light of apprehension, as not to dare to call us
schismatics; so the acknowledged antiquity of our doctrine, ever persisting
the self-same, and the confessed innovation of theirs frights them, though
unwillingly from styling us Innovators and Heretics.

Fourthly, our judging you, may indeed seem to be error, but malice and
uncharitableness it cannot. For since the grounds of our Faith, which
necessarily oblige us to judge thus of you, and all such, were held by us, as
firmly before you were ever dreamed of* as at present; you cannot object that
we invented new grounds to conclude so hardly of you in our thoughts; nor that
they were purposely and maliciously aimed at your then-unhatch'd Congregation.
So as you may, if you please, pretend that all the grounds, on which we hold
our Faith, Gods word, and its true Interpretation, are erroneous, and therefore
that our so judging of you, necessarily springing from those Grounds, is an
error; yet malice or uncharitableness you cannot call it, since we cannot
hinder the consequence from following, without denying the grounds which infer
it; that is, without denying the certainty and truth of all our Faith. And me
thinks the zeal of our Missionaries to reduce others from the ill state we
conceive them in, with daily hazarding, and often laying down actually their
lives for that end, both in this Country and many others, should transfer the
charge of Uncharitableness to your colder part^; for sure it can be no less
to judge them uncharitable, who so readily and willingly lay down their dearest
lives, to redeem the souls of their very enemies and persecutors from a
believed danger. Yet this is the Doctors Goliah's sword (as he calls it)
wherewith he threatened to give a fatal wound; Though in truth I can discern no
more edge in it than in a Beetle.

S. Cyprians testimony of Neminem damnantes, neminem a communione nostra
arcentes, Condemning no man, nor driving any from his Communion, was spoken of
himself, of his own temper toward the rest of Gods Church, acknowledged by
himself to be such, and that in the point of Rebaptization of Infants; which,
though held stiffely by himself; yet his charity so moderated his zeal, that
he expressed his indifferency in those alleged words; Neither had he reason to
deny Communion to other Catholics for a private opinion only, till the Church
had interposed her Authority. But where did the Doctor read either in S.
Cyprian, or any other Father, that they admitted to their Communion those who
had been condemned as Schismatics and Heretics, by all the Churches in
communion with the Sea of Rome; as were the Protestants? Unless he can show
this, he abuses most absurdly that holy and learned Father, by seeming to make
him allow a promiscons admission of all Sects, let them be what they please:
which savours more of Doctor Hammonds spirit, who would have all come to his
Church thas call themselves Christians, than of Blessed S. Cyprians, who knew
better what belonged to Church Order and discipline.

But I thought there was one of the Drs mysteries in it, when I saw the words
of the Father alleged to an end so in^onsonant to his Doctrine, without
quotation of any place, Book, Chapter, or Epistle. But Mr. Hammond will have
the thing between us to be only differences C. 10. S. 3.
in opinion; and indeed if that supposition, that the only ground of all our
Faith, in which consists our main difference, were but an Opinion (as on his
part it is not) I see no reason why either he or I should trouble our selves
to write Books in defense of an Opinionative Faith; it were better in that case
to eat, drink, shake hands, and be merry; nor trouble our selves with thinking
whether there be a Heaven or no, which we can never come (the ground of Faith
being but an Opinion) to any certain knowledge of.

In the last place of his first Part of this Schism, he tells us, we beg the
question in calling them Schismatics, because they deny it, and offer to prove
the contrary. Certainly Mr. Hammond has been so long in the Pulpit, that he
has forgot the fashion of the Universities, where there is no disputation, but
the one affirms, and the other denies; and the Defendant holds his Conclusion
for true, till the Opponent proves the contrary; without being judged to incur
the fault of begging the question. Besides, to what dark holes you run for
clear proofs, we have already shown; and, till you can show us a greater
Authority to acquit you, than is the Churches Tribunal, which condemned you,
your denying it will but double the fault, not clear it; especially since the
material fact of Schism, that is, dividing from the persons with whom you
formerly communicated, cannot be denied, however you may pretend the intention
or cause of it to be doubtful or obscure.

Ere I leave this first part, of judging other^^ I desire the Reader to fancy
in his own mind as perfect a Schismatic as can be imagined, and therefore
deservedly cast out by the Church* which done, let him read this Doctors tenth
Chapter, and he shall easily perceive that he has not brought one word for
himself, which the other justly-condemned schismatic may not with as good
reason make use of. So easily it is discoverable by the manner of weapon the
Dr. wears, whose side he is on, and whose banner he fights under.

His second charge of Schism against mutual Charity, is, that we despise and
set at naught the Brother. Good Brother Doctor tell me how we despise you? We
pity you indeed, seeing the calamities you are fallen into by your former
fault; as also to see you persist still obstinately blind in the midst of your
punishment: But despise you we do not. Yet you conclude the cause by the
effect, that is, our casting you out of the Church; and therefore say the guilt
lies on our side. EUGE QUANTI EST SAPERE! Let us put the demonstration a
posteriori in form, and you shall see the invincibleness of it. They, who cast
others out of the Church, despise them, and are guilty of schism against
Charity. But the Roman Church cast us out of the Church. Therefore they despise
us, and are guilty of schism against Charity.
By which account no Church can condemn any one of schism, but she must be a
schismatic her self; whereas we did not cast them out, but upon their avowed
contumacy against the orders of our Church, which the Doctor C. 9. S. 5.
himself holds as a reason sufficient for the Protestant to excommunicate
Catholics. Where you see the first Proposition can only be sustained by
making this shameless assertion good, that no man can cast another out of the
Church, but he must despise him, and consequently be guilty of
unchartiableness and schism. But the Doctor argues, as if a Rebel should
confess at large, that indeed he rejected the Authority of the Supreme
Magistrate, and receded from the former Laws and Customs of the
Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding they must not punish him and his company; or
if they do, they are guilty of faction, sedition, dissension, and despising
their fellows. What King now could be so hard-hearted as to punish a Rebel
defending himself with such a wise, solid, and rational plea? The Doctor
confessed that they rejected the Authority of the Pope, formerly acknowledged
to be Supreme; that they receded from the doctrines and practices of Rome, of
which Church they were a little before members and subjects; and* when he has
done, tells this Church it must not punish them, nor excommunicate them; or, if
she do, she is guilty of schism, uncharitableness, of despising and setting at
naught the Brother. But pray Mr. Doctor, what schism is it (after you had run
away from the Church, ever since King Henry fell in love) to tell you in the
tenth year of Queen Elixabeth, when she saw you would not mend, but grew daily
worse and worse, that she could no longer forbear to punish your pertinacious
disobedience?

After this the Doctor crowds together a great company of advantages of our
Religion, with which we pre-possesse our subjects; though the Doctor mistakes
in some; and which he says are so many reasons, why they do not set us at
naught, and despise us.

First, the advantage of our education. True, indeed we are taught to obey our
Superiors, and hear our Pastors.

Secondly, the prescribed credulity to all that the Church shall propose. Good
Mr. Dr, whom should the Faithful believe in telling them the sense of Gods
word, if not the Church? such pitiful guessing Southsayers as you? Are not our
Saviors words Hear the Church; and I am with you ever till the end of the
world, plain enough, and sufficient to secure their credulity to such a
Heav'n-assisted-Mistress? And indeed how can you think those, who cannot employ
sufficient time to study out their Faith, should be otherwise instructed than
by Credulity? Look whether your Proselytes do not rely even upon your private
Authority? so natural and necessary is it there should be an Authority to
govern weak people.

Thirdly, the doctrine of infallibility. That is, we tell them Faith is
certain, and has certain grounds: a grievous accusation!

Fourthly, the shutting up the Scriptures in an unknown Languge. That is,
taking order that the unlearned nor unstable pervert them not to their own
damnation.

Fifthly, the impossibility that the multitude should search or examine
Tradition with their own eyes. That is, the Doctor is utterly ignorant what
Tradition is. Is it such an impossible matter for the meanest person that has
age enough, to know what doctrine was held by Christians ten years ago? or
for them that lived ten years ago, to know what was held 20* years since, and
so forth. Especially, Faith not being a mere speculation, but showing it self
in practice, which proclames that heavenly law of Grace so openly, that all
must see it except such as neither have no eyes, or wilfully shut them. This
(Sir) is the main mystery of Tradition, which you imagined we kept reserved
like the Ark of the Testament and Mose's Tables, from the sight of the people.

Sixthly, The prosperous estate of the Roman Church, and the persecutions and
calamities of yours. I see we are in some sense beholding to our good fortune,
or your misfortune, for your chariritablenesse. But you complain for nothing;
what persecution suffer you in England in comparison of the Catholics? What
Laws make it Treason to become a Protestant, as they do to be reconciled to
the Catholic Religion? What Oaths are imposed on Protestants to renounce their
Faith under pain of high Treason and forfeiture of their Estates, as in those
of Supremacy and Abjuration against Catholics? Read over the large Volume of
Penal Statutes made in the days of your Dominion, and you shall find, that
Catholics can neither be married, nor baptized, nor taught at home, nor sent
abroad, nor maintained by their parents while they live, nor buried, when they
dye, without incurring the danger of a Praemunire, or some other severe penalty.
In all these I am confident your kind of Protestancy never endured the least
punishment; but a light cross is enough to overload a weak patience, and every
small discountenancing makes those that have enjoyed a long case, cry out,
persecution. I see your parchment Church shrinks and ^na^kles at the sight of
the fire, while the Catholic remains firm and unconsum'd, nay grow^ clearer
in the midst of it. And yet I do not intend to deny, many of you have been
very great losers by these late Revolutions, but only to say your sufferings
are to be referred to a civil, not religious account, or at least that nothing,
even in your own judgment, essential to Religion, is persecuted, or so much as
denied in England; for Bishops, and Servicebook, and Kings Supremacy you must
not call essential, without contradicting your own both profession and
practice, since you can so kindly embrace your Sister-Churches, and communicate
with them, who deny those points as zealously as the fiercest Anabaptist.

Lastly, our literal sound of Hoc est Corpus meum, which the Doctor calls our
principal espoused doctrine of Transubstantiation. Indeed we had rather wed
our belief to that sense of Gods word, which Fathers, Councils, and the
perpetual doctrine and practice of Gods Church has recommended to us, as the
Virgin-daughter of him who is the Truth; than to a loose Polygamy of 40.
several interpretations; Minerva's born of your own heads, whose
mutually-contradicting variety ^hews them to come by the paternal line, from
him who is the Father of all falsehood.

For these prejudices instilled into the hearts of Catholics, the Doctor and
his Church spare us very charitably, and are far from casting us out of the
Church. For Gods sake, Mr. Dr. whither would you have cast us? Would you throw
the house out of the windows? I mean the Church, Gods house, out of the window
of Schism, which you broke in the side of it.

Again, let us but see how artificial, nay incomparable nonsense this Dr.
speaks. I conceive nothing can be cast out of a thing that was never in it;
show us then that* there was once a constituted Church of Protestants, governed
by the King as Supreme Head, and holding their doctrines and practices, in
which the Roman Catholic once was, but receded from that Doctrine and
Government, and invented this new Religion which he holds at present. Unless
the Catholics were once thus in you, how could you cast them out? What a
weakness is this to think that Robin Hood, Little John, and a few Outlawes, do
King Richard and all England a great deal of favor in not casting them out of
their Rebel-commonwealth, as no true members of it, and denying them the
protection* of their seditious counter-lawes; under which Laws, and in which
Commonwealth, neither the King nor his good subjects were ever reputed.

One word more ere I leave this point, to let the rational Reader see, whether
the Protestants or we be more chargeable of judging and despising others.
Suppose, Mr. Doctor, we, who are sons of the Catholic Church, had both judged
and despised you upon our own private heads, it had been but to judge and
despise our equals. But your Reformation had been impossible, unless you had
first both judged, despised, and preferred your selves above your Supreme
Governors, the Church and all your Forefathers. The chief Government, C. 7. S.
5.
empowered actually over you in Ecclesiastical Affairs, you rejected and cast
out of this Island. Next, many of your wise Brethren since, preaching,
teaching, and writing whole Books, to show that that Governor is Antcichrist,
the Beast in the Apocalypse, and what not? Could these things be done without
judging and despising? You made Reformations and recessions from the former
Churches doctrine, cried out she had erred, was a Strumpet, the Whore of
Babylon, impious, sacrilegious, idolatrous. Was not this the most rash judging,
the most venomous railing at and reviling of Gods sacred Spouse, formerly your
Mistress and Mother, that ever was foamed out of the mouth of madness it
self? Again, the whole world, whom you esteemed, before, good Christians, and
all your Ancestors in England, condemned, by their contrary belief, your new
Reformed Doctrine: And, do you think your innovators could have broach't their
opposite doctrines without both judging and despising all this vast Authority?
Your Charity then, Mr. Doctor, in this point, can be only imagined to consist
in this, that you have not judged and despised your selves; for all else, that
you thought formerly to deserve any Authority, you both judged, despised,
rejected, reviled, and condemned. In a word, our judging you, is our
subscribing in our own thoughts to that Verdict, which the Church has past
against you, whose tribunal was held by all the whole Christian world (and your
selves also, till you became guilty) to be the most high and sacred that ever
gave sentence since the world's Creation.

As for despising your persons, we deny it as a mere calumny; and profess our
selves bound to honor every one according to his quality and degree; the
reasons indeed, which you produce to clear your self from Schism, we despise,
as worse than ridiculous; A Paradox in a matter indifferent, if maintained
ingeniously, deserves its commendations: but the most manifest absurdities that
can be imagined, and in which are interessed men's salvations, such as is the
renouncing an Authority granted to be the most ancient, most sublime, most
sacred, in the world, upon fallible, uncertain, and unevident grounds; and
only sustained by plain contradictions, false and self-^eign'd suppositions,
ID ESTS of our own adding, the best proof not arriving so high as a
probability; These, I say, Mr. Doctor, have nothing to secure them from our
despising, unless perhaps, it be their falling below ou^ contempt. Of the
mixed temper of these is the constitution of your Book; which shows that you
have been used to row at your own dull pleasure in the shallow and
softly-murmuring current of a Sermon; but never launch't with a well*rigg'd
Ship of Reason into the ^oysterous Maine of deeper, controversies.

Thus the Doctor concludes his Treatise of Schism, closing up his tenth Chapter
with these words; I foresee not any objection which may give me temptation or
excuse further to enlarge on this matter. No truly, I could never yet discern
you guilty of that fault, that objections gave you any great temptation to
answer them; since I have not seen you put one Objection or Argument of ours
worth a straw, from the beginning of the Book to the end; On the contrary, when
you light on a wrong supposition of your own, as that the Pope is only a
private Patriarch; that the Papal Authority in this Island came to the Pope
from the Title of its Conversion, or from Concession of our Kings; then I
observe a very strong temptation in you to enlarge a whole Chapter upon that,
which no body objects, except your own fancy.

He adds, that he professes not to know any other branch of Schism, or color
of fastening that guilt, upon our Church, made use of by any, which he has not
prevented. Yes, Mr. Doctor, I told you before, how you have omitted the two
chief branches of Schism, and most of all made use of by us against you; to
wit, Schism from the whole body of the Church, and from its highest Tribunal,
The General Councils; which we as freshly, and more chiefly, charge upon you,
than any of the ^est.

The Last SECT.
Our Objection that the pretended Church of England is now invisible,
maintained and asserted to be just.

SChism being thus established, as legitimate and laudable, the Patron of it
resolvs to prosecute his Project home, and therefore strives in this last
Chapter to wipe off any prejudice arising from their present distractions and
persecutions, the proper effects of their Schism. The occasion seems taken
from some of our side, calling them The late Church of England; as if now a
FUIT were put to their former being by their present misfortune. Our advantage
C. 11 S. 1.
offered from thence he forms (and that rightly) in to this objection; that
it is absolutely necessary to communicate with some one visible Church; that
now the Church of England is not such, and consequently the Church of Rome, so
illustriously visible, must be taken up in stead of it.

Thus far, abstracting from the partiality in his manner of expression, we
both agree, C. 11. S. 2.
In answer to which, the Doctor alleges first That a member of the English
Church was not under this guilt of not communicating with some one visible
Church twenty years ago; and consequently unless he have contracted this
guilt since by commission or omission of something, he can no more be charged
with the Crime now, than formerly. All this while the Doctor is in a mistake,
and runs on very currantly, but quite out of his way. For we do not object
this present condition to them, as a crime or guilt (rather that which was
twenty years and more ago, was their crime, and this their punishment) but as
a different state from the former, or indeed more truly, the want of a State.
For twenty years ago, though they wanted the substance, yet they had at least
a shadow or Ghost of a Church, which might delude the eyes of the simple; but
now even that has disappeared and vanished into Air. Our advantage, not taken,
but offered, from thence is this, that as before they had a show of a Church;
so their adherents, whose weaker eyes could not distinguish substance from
shadow, might have then some shadow of motive or excuse, for remaining in it,
and not returning to us; but now this fayery apparition being gone, not even so
much as the least resemblance of a motive is left to lead them through the
wayless path of their dark doctrine; or hinder them from returning to the
common beaten road of their Ancestors.

The objection of this then is not vain, as the Dr. imagins, since a new and
stronger motive offered, deserves in reason a new, distinct, and fresh
proposal. I grant therefore, Mr. Dr. that it is not your choice, crime, or
offense, to be in this misery, though it be your fault that you were brought
into i^; it bring a connatural punishment, orderly subsequent to the vice of
Schism, as shall afterward be shown. And the present invisibility of your
Church is never the less true and real, though we admit it be your misfortune,
not your crime; since a ship may as well be cast away in an unavoydable
storm, as by the negligence of the Pilot.

Neither do I take it to be the saddest part of your infelicity (as you call
it) but rather the greatest happiness that Gods sweetly-chastising mercy could
have sent you, that, by weighing your present dissolution, and the causes of
it, you may retrive your wanderings, and recollect all your scattered and
distracted members into the ever-firmly United Body of the holy Catholic
Church.

Thirdly (for the Doctor was so eagerly C. 11 S. 3.
zealous to clear his twenty-years-ago Protestant, that he put first and
thirdly, but quite forgot secondly) he runs on in his error, that we impute
this state of their Church to the Protestant as a guilt, from which he goes
about to clear him. For if he has contracted this guilt, (says the Dr.) it
must be by some irregularity of actions contrary to the standing Rule and
Canons of this Church; whereas I conceive it very regularly consequent to your
new Canons, that you should fall into this very condition you now groan under;
For your Rule and Canons granting the Authority of the Secular Power to be the
BASIS of your Reformation, Head of the Church Government, Supreme in
Ecclesiastical matters, and your only defense and excuse, when we ask you
upon what Authority you left us, it is natural and imbred in the very
primogenial Constitution of your Church, that it should be dissolvable at the
pleasure of the same power which set it up. It is not therefore the standing to
the Rule and Canons of your Church, which secures you in a firm and immutable
perpetuity, but those very grounds are they which engage you in a fleeting and
perpetual mutability.

You applaud with your Encomiums the Protestant, that has actually lost his
possessions, liberty, etc. rather than depart from his rule; which truly I
conceive a very irrational action in him, and deserving more pity than
commendations. For the 39. Articles, being the most distinct Rule Protestants
have, one of which defines that General Councils both can Err and have erred;
whence follows a fortiori, that their own Meeting where these Articles (their
Rule) were Art. 21
made, being at most but a Provincial Assembly, is much more liable to error,
I see no reason why he should lose the certain possession of present goods for
maintaining an uncertain opinion: especially since he holds salvation can be
had in other Sects, as appears by Dr. Hammonds admitting all whom he calls
Christians C. 9. S. 3.
to his Communion. And if the Doctor reply, it was their conscienciousness to
hold what they supposed true: I answer, their conscience is imprudently
governed, whilst it instigates them to profess with their own so great
disadvantage and loss, what they had no obligation to hold; for none can be
obliged to the belief of a point which himself and those who propose it are
uncertain whether it be true or no. Though (if I be not misinformed) the
greater part of your suffering-fellow-Protestants have had more wit, and most
commonly were put out upon other pretenses than their Religion.

Thus* far the Doctor has proceeded clearing himself from the want of a
visible Church, imagining we object it a guilt or crime, whereas we only
propose it and more urgingly press it to the consideration of the misled
Protestants, as a decay, corruption, annihilation of the former visible shadow
of a Church, and the occasion of a new fault in them; that, having lost their
own, they return not to ours, out of which they confess they came, and of
which they protested theirs to be a member. C. 11. S. 5.


In the next place he tells us, that as yet, Blessed be God, the Church of
England is not invisible, it is preserved in Bishops and Presbyters rightly
ordained, and multitudes rightly baptized, none of which have fallen off from
their profession. Where the last words are most certainly true, if he means
that none of those who yet stand have as yet fallen off, which I conceive is
his meaning; for all these who have not stood, have fallen off, which are enough
to show of what metal their Church was made; and whether more have fallen or
stood, let the Doctor judge. But as for the rest of his selfe-congratulation,
it is a miserable piece of self flattery, and which his own grounds quite
discountenance. For if a Church be a Congregation of the Faithful, and Faith
(as S. Paul argues) comes by hearing, hearing from preaching, preaching from
mission, or being sent; which mission is an Act of Jurisdiction; it follows,
that if their Bishops and Presbyters have now no Jurisdiction, then the
Protestants have neither lawful mission, preaching, hearing, faith, nor
consequently, Church. Now, that they can claim no Jurisdiction, follows out of
their own grounds; for when we urge them upon what Authority they cast off the
former Ecclesiastical Superior, governing Gods Church in chief, they run for
their defense, to the secular Power, to which they attribute supreme
Jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical within this Island; It is acknowledged
(says the Dr. C. 7. S. 2.) that the Papal Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
was both by Acts of Convocation of the Clergy, and of Parliament, cast out of
this Kingdom. Thus you see he recurs to a power merely secular, in the
Parliament, for renouncing and abolishing a spiritual power and Jurisdiction,
held before, greater than ever the Protestant Prelacy was imagined. Merely
secular, I say; for the Doctor confesses here, that it is easy to believe that
nothing but the C. 7. S. 5.
apprehension of dangers which hung over them, could probably have inclined the
Clergy to that their first Act; And how great influence this apprehension of
danger might have over the secular part of the Parliament, is easy to be
determined, since they saw the gravest Patriot in the Kingdom in danger of
death, for holding against the Kings new pretended Title; and many others, for
the same respect, most cruelly persecuted. A Parliament therefore merely of
Seculars, and those such as can in no wise be presumed free, was held by you of
sufficient Authority to renounce a Jurisdiction, deemed formerly much higher,
and known to be almost ten times longer settled in possession than your
Prelacy; I see not therefore why a secular power should not be, in your
grounds, sufficient to abolish a jurisdiction, which only leaned and relied on
a secular support.

But what was done in King Henry's days, being disannul'd again by both the
spiritual and secular power in Queen Mary's Reign, must necessarily be held of
you invalid, if you will go consequently to your own grounds. Let us then
examine the resurrection of your Church, by a Parliament held in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth; In which Parliament (to omit the small title the Queen had
to the Crown, being born of a second bedfellow, whilst King Henry's former Wife
was yet alive, and declared illegitimate both by the whole Parliament and her
own Fathers Act) were wanting the spiritual Lords, the Bishops; who were, for
their Religion, kept, at that time, in prison; For which reason, when a Quere
was raised about the beginning of the late long Parliament, whether Acts made
without Bishops, were valid, it is said to have been resolved affirmatively,
upon this ground, because otherwise the Protestant Religion, voted by a
Parliament, in which was no Bishops, would be invalid also.

I see not then what great advantages could be in that Parliament, to Vote out
the greater Authority of the Pope, or give your newmade Bishops (ordained God
knows how) Jurisdiction; but the same may be pretended by a succeeding
Parliament, to deprive them, and set up a new Form of their own. Certain it is,
that you acknowledge the Secular Power for the Source and first Fountain of
your Jurisdiction; Since then, the present Secular Power has put a stop to your
father Ordination, and disannul'd your former Jurisdiction, your own grounds
conclude you de facto no Church; for if you have no Jurisdiction, you can have
no influence of power over the Layity; and so no spiritual Common* wealth made
up of Bishop, as Head and Pastor, and of the Layity, as body and flock. And,
as for the present, this general suspension (should we say no more) of your
Ecclesiastical power, makes you de facto no Church; so, in time the very inward
right it self, which you pretend, may be justly extinguish't. For, since your
Jurisdiction confessedly depends on the secular Authority, it follows, if this
be suspended or abolish't, that must needs share in the same fate: Now, all the
world agrees, that not only the possession of a secular power may be
interrupted by force, but the Right it self in time be absolutely lost; and
the new Government, however at first introduc't, be at length purged of its
original blemishes, into a clear and unquestionable Title. In which case
certainly your Church would be no more visible in England, than it is now at
Geneva. Which sufficiently differences your condition from that of the
Primitive Christians, or the present English Catholics, they claiming a
Jurisdiction underived from the secular power.

In vain therefore would it be to tell us their Character remains, and therefore
they are still Bishops and Presbyters, since the character can only entitle them
to a name, the thing being gone, to wit, their power of Jurisdiction, and
consequently their Mission; For if they have no Authority to teach and preach
more than the Layity, they are levelled into an equal pitch with them; so as now
they cannot be said to be a body, but a company of mutually distracted parts;
not an orderly Church or Congregation* but a rude and indigested Chaos of
Confusion.

It is not then, Mr. Doctor, your serving God in private Families which we
object to you for being an invisible Church (which you run upon in your 5.
Sect.) but that which your self confess here, that Now all Order, Form,
Bishops, and Liturgy is thrown out of your Church together. It is your want of
Pastoral and Episcopal Authority, which makes us conclude you no Church. Yet so
good is your Logic, that in the next paragraph, you think, though Bishops be
abolish't, yet in case this come not through your C. 11 S. 7.
fault, it cannot be charged against you: so as though all Prelacy and
Superiority be taken away, that is, though there be none that have power to
preach and teach, and all be reduced into an equally-level'd Anarchy, yet as
long as it happens not through your fault, yen are still a Church; As if Doctor
Hammond should say, though his body were cut into millions of incoherent
Atoms, yet, as long as this happens not through his fault, it is still a
well-ordered Body, ID EST, it is still Hammond.

The parts of Gods Church are compacted into a Whole by Order, and as much
depend upon Spiritual Superiors, having power to teach and preach Christ's Law,
as the Commonwealth does on Secular Magistrates to preserve their temporal
Laws, and govern according to them; without this order the Whole is dissolved,
the Body is lost, the Church is gone. Doubtless, Mr. Doctor, it is not the
fault or choice of the present Protestants, that they are thus bassled and
persecuted (which yet you have spent this whole Chapter, except only the first
Paragraph, to prove.) so needs no such great and large disproose, to manifest
that that which is so much against men's wills, should be their Choice and
Crime. Yet we may justly impute your Churches ruin to the sandiness of her
foundation; which being the Authority of the secular Governors, must render her
liable to change, as often as the unconstant wind of temporal circumstances
shall alter the former Government, or as often as the former Government yet
remaining shall see it necessary for the present peace or conveniences of the
Common wealth, to introduce or admit the more prevailing sway of a new Religion.

But I foresee that the Doctor, to avoid this objection, will cling in with us,
and call the Antichristian and Idolatrous Romanists their dear Brethren, and
tell them they acknowledge their Jurisdiction and Mission to come from them,
desiring them not to reject them now in their greatest necessity, but let them
seem to have an Authority derived from the Apostles by their means; proffering
that they, in courteons recompense, will acknowledge Rome to be a true Church.
This indeed is ordinary with them; but yet as frivolous still as the former.
For the Authority which our Church could give you, was only to teach and
preach Catholic Doctrine, and ordain others to do the same; to govern the
Catholic flock, and to preserve them in the anciently received Unity of Faith.
The Authority to do these could come indeed from us, and so if any who pretend
to have received Jurisdiction from us, continue to execute and govern
themselves by that Commission, so far they are warranted by the former
Authorization; but if they went beyond their Commission, nay more, acted quite
contrary to their Commission, I wonder what Jurisdiction or Mission they can
pretend, as derived from us. Our question then is of such a power as your
Bishops pretend to, and exercised; that is, of bearing the Ensign of a Squadron
of the Churches Enemies, Preaching an opposite Doctrine to the Church, which
you pretend to have empowered you, and ordaining others to do the same.

Evident it is that the Roman Catholic Church, which is the only spiritual
power you can think to have any Jurisdiction or Mission from, never gave you
this Authority, wherefore it must come to you from the mere secular Power; on
this Power therefore is built all the Authority you have to act as Protestants,
or in order to the Protestant Church; and consequently the whole building of
your Church was erected only and solely upon this uncertain and sandy
foundation. This made Mr. Hooker (one of the best, and perhaps the most Lib. 5.
number. 79
prudent Writer of all that profession) affirm of their Church, that it was not
likely to continue more than fourscore years; nor could he judge otherwise,
seeing it bear evidently the Principles of corruption and mutability in its
very constitution; to wit, the materia prima of a secular Basis; which
continually exposed it to a mortality, as the forms of Government should have
their ever-limited period; and discovering the professors and Governors of it
to be none of those to whom our Savior promised his perpetual assistance to
the end of the world. How much happier then would you be, if leaving this
fleeting and unbodied shadow, you would return and unite your selves to the
Catholic Church, Which, enjoying this promise from our Savior of an
indefectible perpetuity, not only experiences the certain faithfulness of that
promise in a large continuance of 1600. years, but also sees with Evidence,
perhaps more than scientifical, that the walls of this Jerusalem are built
upon such strong foundations, that the Church, and the Authority and
Jurisdiction of her Governors can never fail or decay; since they rely not on
the slippery and weak prop of the temporal power for their Authority, but on
those who received it from the eternal never-altering Fountain of all power,
with Commission to delegate and transmit it with an uninterrupted succession to
the future Governors of the Church, till we all meet in the Unity of Glory.

Nor is the means of transmitting this Heavenfounded Jurisdiction to Posterity,
less certain than is the law of grace, written in the hearts of the faithful,
in indelible characters, that inviolable Rule of Faith, a Rock too adamantine
to be undermined by human policy. Let then her enemies, though even Princes,
rage as much as they please, nay even bandy and conspire together to subdue
this freeborn Kings Daughter to their profane yoke; her Jurisdiction, as it
ever has, so will it ever remain secure and inviolate, being independent of
them, and (by reason of the state of Eternity, her end and aim) of a superior
order to their Authority; which was instituted only for the rightly dispencing
the transitory goods of this world.

Your parallel of the Jews suffering under the Zelot's fury, or the old Roman
yoke* which you make account is so evident, that the Reader will supercede all
necessity of making it up, I conceive to aim very little or nothing at your
purpose: For (though they intruded unfit men into the Priestly dignity, yet
they did not actually, neither could they possibly take away the Jurisdiction
of the High Priest, because this Jurisdiction was not given them by those
secular powers, but by God himself; the contrary of all which happens in your
case, as has been shown: For the Jurisdiction of your Bishops may be taken away
by the same Parliamentary power that set it up. That it was not their guilt,
nor yours neither, we willingly grant; and I wonder you could imagine us so
unwise, as to object that to be your voluntary Crime, which you cannot but know
we hold to be your involuntary punishment.

Your wishes and prayers for peace and communion among all who are called
Christians, are no less ours; and this, not in words only, but in efficacious
endeavors; and, in several Nations, with daily labors, and extremest
hazards, to reduce the straying flock to their safely-guarded fold. Nay, this
Communion is so vehemently desired and thirsted after by us, that we are ready
to buy it at any rate, except the forfeiture of the Certainty of Faith and its
Rule; the forfeiture of which, is the loss of our own Communion also. If Mr.
Hammond can persuade himself and his friends to return to this Rule of Faith,
the Churches Infallibility, which only can unite us in the same steadfast
belief of Christ's Doctrine; and to acknowledge the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome; in the acknowledgment of which, consists the constant unity of
Church Government; then not only we, but all the Angels and Saints in heaven,
who rejoice at the conversion of sinners, shall join in exalting Jubilees for
the Blessed and long wished for return of our wandering and self-disinherited
Brethren. The former of these (if Mr. Hammond will not believe it) I have told
him where he may see it as visibly as Rushworth's Dial. and the Apol. for
Tradition.
is possible any thing should be made to the eye of Reason. The latter, to wit,
the Popes Supremacy, is defined in the Florentine Council, subscribed to both
by the Greek and Latin Churches; where, what the fourth General Council, held
at Chalcedon, wrote to Pope Leo, that (...), that he was over the members of
the Church, as their Head, is more plainly expressed in these words, We define
that the holy Apostolical See, and the Bishop of Rome have the primacy over all
the world, and that the Bishop of Rome is Successor to S. Peter, the Prince of
the Apostles, and truly Christ's Vicar, and Head of the whole Church; and the
Father and Teacher of all Christians, and that there was given him in S. Peter
from Christ a full power to feed, direct and govern the Catholic Church: To
these two points, if the Protestant will subscribe, that is, secure inviolate
that which touches the root, and most vital and intrinsecal part of the Chruch,
to wit, the Rule of Faith; she will not stick to open her outward rind, that
is, offer some violence to her uniformity, in indifferent and more extrinsecal
practices, to re-ingraft their dry and sapless branch, which now lies
withering, into her ever-flourishing body. To which, if these poor endeavors
of mine, may in the least contribute, I shall for the future not reprehend, but
congratulate Dr. Hammond for his fortunate Errors, and honor his ill grounded
reasons, as of richest value; which, by stirring up others to detest them, and
show what weak pleas are producible for Schism, became the happy occasion of
his own, and others salvation; and of Embosoming the Daughter-Church of England
in a Charitable Communion with her dearest Mother; by whose painful throws she
was first born to Christ, her Spouse; at whose breasts she sucked the first
milk of his Doctrine, and from whose arms and ever-cherishing embraces, first
by the malignity of an ill-govern'd passion, next by humane policy, she has
been so long separated.

FINIS.
DOWN-DERRY: OR Bishop BRAMHAL'S Just Vindication of the Church of England
refuted.
MY choice at first directed me, rather to answer Mr. Hammond, than my Lord of
Derry; having observed his Book not only to bear a greater vogue in the world,
but to be inwardly furnished with Arguments more suitable to the profession of
a Divine; But after I had advanced past the midway of my journey, I met some
Protestant friends, who, though formerly they had still cried up the Doctor,
yet soon as I told them, in confidence, that an Answer to his Schism would
instantly be ready for the the Press, they immediately began to extol the
Bishop, and demand either a present Reply to him, or else they should not spare
to conclude the Victory their own. When I had expressed how weak and unreasonable
their discourse was, which, if admitted, would always judge him to have the
right cause, that speaks the last word. I parted with a promise; if, in stead
of that sport, which he far more than the other, tempts a wit-at leisure to
make with him, they would accept of a short Refutation of the substantial
passages, I should not fail to endeavor their satisfaction: which thus I
perform.

Reading, with some diligence, the Bishops Book, I find, that as there is much
commendable in it for industry, so is it exposed to an unavoidable Check of
being Patron to an ill Cause; whence it may be a pattern of wit and labor,
but little assistance to the truth, further than by showing how weak Error is.
But, not to spend time and paper in vain, let us state the controversy
clearly, that it may be seen how strongly and pertinently his Discourse
proceeds; Not that I intend minutely to examine his whole Work, whereof the far
greater part is little or nothing to our controversy, as will appear by the
bare stating the Question; but only to say enough for him whom the substance
can content, without engaging into unnecessary and circumstantial disputes.

He begins his Book, telling us nothing can be objected with more color of
truth against the Church of England, than that they have withdrawn themselves
from obedience to the Vicar of Christ, and separated from the Communion of the
Catholic Church. And that this crime is justly charged upon his Church, not
only with color, but with undeniable evidence of fact, will appear by the
very position of the Case; and the nature of his Exceptions.

As for the first, it is unquestionably certain, and universally assented to by
all Protestants, who understand any thing, that at the beginning of Henry the
eighths Reign, nay at his first courting his Protestant Mistress, the Church of
England agreed with that of Rome, and all the rest of her Communion, in two
Points, which were then, and are still the Bonds of Unity betwixt all her
Members* One concerning Faith, the other, Government.

For Faith, her Rule was, that the Doctrines, which had been inherited from
their Forefathers, as the Legacies of Christ and his Apostles, were solely to
be acknowledged for obligatory, and nothing in them to be changed.

For Government, her Principle was, that Christ had made St. Peter First, or
Chief, or Prince of his Apostles; who was to be the first Mover under him in
the Church, after his departure out of this world, and to whom all others, in
difficulties concerning matters belonging to the universal, either Faith or
Government, should have recourse; And that the Bishops of Rome, as Successors
of St. Peter* inherited from him this privilege, in respect of the Successors
of the rest of the Apostles; and actually exercised this power in all those
countries which kept Communion with the Church of Rome that very year wherein
this unhappy separation began.

It is no less evident, that in the days of Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, and her Successors, neither the former Rule of Unity of Faith, nor
this second of Unity of Government (which is held by the first) have had any
power in that Congregation, which the Protestants call the English Church. This
is our chief objection against you.

As for us, our Tenet is, That those Churchs, who continue in Communion with
the Roman, are the only Churches; which, in virtue of the first Principle
above mentioned, have the true Doctrine; and, in virtue of the second, the
right Government; and, in virtue of both, the unity and incorporation into the
Church of Christ, necessary for salvation: And by consequence, We hold them
only to make the entire Catholic or Universal Church of Christians; all
others, by misbelief or Schism, being excluded.

Now, because no understanding man can deny this to be the true Charge, the
only way for a Protestant to clear his Church from Schism, is to show it not
guilty of doing this, either by disproving the former to be the necessary Rule
of Unity in Faith, or the latter the necessary Bond of Government; both which,
though they sometimes say, yet because in these Books, professedly composed for
their Vindication from the guilt of Schism, they, directly and of set purpose,
handle neither; it is clear they intend to shuffle, not speak pithily.

The first Principle (which also includes the truth of the second) we hold by
this manifest Evidence, that still the latter Age could not be ignorant of
what the former believed; and, as long as it adhered to that method, nothing
could be altered in it; which way of assurance carries with it the Testimony
of all that are truly called Christians; and this by so ample a memory and
succession, as is stronger than the stock of human Government and action: no
right of Law or human Ordinances being able to offer so ample, clear, and
continued a Title.

They must remember how their Forefathers, who began that which they call the
Reformation, were themselves of this profession before their pretended reform.
They ought to weigh what reasons their Ancestors should have had to introduce
such an alteration. They must confess themselves guilty in continuing the
breach, unless they can allege causes sufficient to have begun it, had the
same ancient Religion descended to these days; For the constant belief of the
Catholic world both was at the time of your division, and still is, that these
Principles are Christ's own ordination, recorded in Scripture, derived to us by
the strongest Evidences that our nature is capable of, to attain assurance what
was done in Antiquity; Evidences inviolable by any humane either power or
proof, except perfect and rigorous demonstration, to which our Adversaries do
not so much as pretend, and therefore without further dispute, remain
unanswerably convicted of Schism.

And though after this, it be superfluous to say any thing to any Book, which
does not so much as attempt to demonstrate either of these Points false, yet I
shall bestow a few thoughts to declare the quality of the Lord of Derry's
Arguments, not examining them any further, than to show how little they are to
the purpose.

In his two first Chapters, though there be many things false, and more taken
up without proof, yet I will not touch them, because he only pretends to
settle the Question, which is already done for my part; And so I will begin my
Animadversions, where he begins his Arguments, in the third Chapter.

His first proof is, because not Protestants, but Roman Catholics themselves
made the first separation. 1. If it were so, how does that acquit you? since
continuance in a Breach of this nature, which cannot be sodered by time, is as
guilty as the very beginning. Now these two Bonds of Unity, being of Christ's
own institution, no time can sear the bleeding wound; And this because we hold
by the fore-declared strength, they now must have demonstrations to contradict
it, as well as the first Separaters.

2. How does he prove they were not Protestants? because they persecuted
Protestants: what then? did not Luther persecute Carolstadius and Zuinglius?
do they not now in Germany and other Countries? Lutherans permit no
Calvinists; Calvinists no Lutherans. Did not you persecute Puritans and
Brownists? Do you not now complain to be persecuted by others? will you make
all these, Papists? or why are not they Reformers as well as you? you will say
many of these first breakers died Catholics; True, but upon Repeutance. Of
Gardener (whom you press so particularly) it is recorded, that upon his
death*bed, he said, Peccavi cum Petro, exivi cum Petro, sed nondum flevi cum
Petro; and so fell on a bitter weeping for that offense.

But in a word, is not this renouncing the Pope the most essential point of
your Reformation? All the rest your good natured Religion can either embrace or
censure; and, as occasion serves, admit or refuse Communion with the deniers of
any other Article, never so fundamental, this only is indispensable. Then be
sure we never hear you again deny but that they who made this first Breach,
had in them the quintessence of your Reformation, and were far less consistent
with Catholicism, than your modern younger*brother Sectaries are with your kind
of Protestancy; since your selves confess the admittance of the Popes Authority
more destructive to you, than the denial of Prelacy.

His second Argument is, because in the separation of England from Rome, there
was no new Law made, but only their ancient Liberties vindicated.

The first part is so notoriously false, that I wonder any one can have the
face to pronounce it; a Law was made in Henry the 8ths time, an Oath invented
and exacted, by which was given to the King to be Head of the Church, and to
have all the power the Pope did at that time possess in England. That this was
a new Law none but impudence it self can deny.

As for the second part, let us see how he proves it. He brings diverse
allegations, wherein the Popes pretenses were not admitted, as being in the
prejudice to the State or Church of England. What is this man about, that he
so forgets the question? Do we profess the Pope can pretend no more than his
right? or is the question of this or that particular action of the Popes? or
does he think a legitimate Authority in common is rejected, when the particular
faults of them who are in Authority are resisted? Is Magistracy or Royalty
rejected, when Pleas are commenced against Kings or Commonwealths, as going
beyond their true Jurisdiction? Yes, but the Pope is expressly denied the Power
to do such or such things. Why then, even by this fact he is acknowledged to
have power in other things; since to limit an Authority implies an admittance
of it in cases to which the restraints extend not.

But he presses Laws anciently received in our Kingdom. What is his meaning?
were not those Laws in force in the beginning of Henry the eighths Reign? or
was his breach but the conservation of these Laws, and we began our Religion
there? Are there any of these laws which are not equivalently in France, Spain,
Germany; Nay Italy it self? Are none of these therefore Catholics? are they
in as little communication with the Pope, as Henry the eighth after his breach,
or the Protestants in Q Elizabeth's times? How ridiculous, how impudent a manner
of speaking and arguing is this? to force his Readers to renounce their eyes
and ears and all evidence.

In this fifth Chapter, he argues out of the Liberties of the Britannick
Churches. But first I would know what this belongs to us, unless it be proved
that their practicks were an obliging precedent to us; have we any Title from
the Britannick Churches, otherwise than by the Saxon Christians, who only were
our Ancestors, and by whose conquests and laws all that is in the Britannick
World belongs to us, and is derived to us; Yet is this also false* For nothing
in History is more evident, than that the British Churches admitted
appellations to Rome at the Council of Sardica: And, as much as we have Records
in our Histories of the Pope Eleutherius, so much appears the Popes Authority
in that time. And out of St. Prosper contra Collatorem, and in Chron. We have
that the Pope Celestinus, by his care, and sending St. German, Vice sua, in his
own stead, freed the Britans from Pelagianism, and converted the Scots by
Palladius, though Venerable Bede, as far as I remember, does not touch that
circumstance.

But that which is mainly to the purpose, is, that since the Privilege we
pretend was one that descends upon the Pope* in quality of Successor to St.
Peter, how far it was executed, may be unknown, but that it was due, none can
be ignorant. And here our late Bishop begins to shuffle from the privilege of
St. Peter, to the Patriarchal Jurisdiction of the Pope, which is another, an
historical, a mutable power, and so concerns not our present debate.

Two objections he makes seem to deserve an answer; First, That the Welsh, or
Britans, sided with the Eastern Churches against the Roman in the observation
of Easter. To which I answer, it is true, they observed not Easter right, yet
never so much as cited the Eastern Churches, in abetment of their practice, but
only the custom of their own Ancestors: Neither was there any cause of
siding, we not hearing it was ever pressed by the Church of Rome, after
Victor's time, to any height. The Council of Nice, and the Emperor Constantine
exhorted the Christian World to it, but without any coercitive force: And if
the Britans resisted, or rather neglected them, I think we ought not to say
they sided against them, but only did not execute their desires.

St. Iren^us was of the French Church, yet testifies this question was no
matter of division; so that it cannot be guessed by this what influence the
Roman Church had or had not upon the British. It seems certain also, that St.
Lupus and Germanus neglected this Point, that is, thought it not necessary to
be corrected; however St. Austin seemed more rigorous. And though Palladius,
sent from Celestinus, converted the Scots, yet we find some of them in the same
practice.

The second Objection is out of a piece of a worn Welsh Manuscript, hoped by
the Protestants to be a Copy of some ancienter Original, which, though it has
already been proved a manifest forgery, counterfeited by all likelihood in Q.
Elizabeth's time, when the English Protestants sought to corrupt the Welsh, by
Catechisms and other Writings, printed and not printed; Yet if their great
Antiquaries can show, that in St. Gregory's time, this name Papa, or Pope,
taken by it self, without other addition, as Papa Urbis Romae, etc. was put (as
in later ages) for the Bishop of Rome, I shall confess my self much
surpised* If they cannot, these very words sufficiently convince the
Manuscript to be a mere Imposture.

Another suspicion against the legitimatnes of this paper naturally arises from
this, that Sr. Henry Spelman, one so diligent in wi^ing off the dust from old
writings, found no other Antiquity in it worth* the mention; which shrewdly
implies the Book was made for this alone. And so this demonstrative proof of
the Bishop, is a conviction of the forgery of some counterfeit Knave, and the
easiness of assent in Mr. Mosten, and the Knight.

In his 6th Chapter he pretends three things; 1. That the King and Church of
England had sufficient Authority to withdraw their obedience from Rome. 2ly,
That they had sufficient grounds for it; and 3ly, That they did it with due
moderation. I doubt not but the intelligent Reader understands by the first
point, that the Bishop means to shuffle away the true difficulty; and, whereas
the Question is of the Privilege given by Christ to Saint Peter, and from him
descended to the Popes, his Successors, spend his time about a Patriarchal
Authority, which we also acknowledge to be of humane institution; And here I
must confess, that generally when no body opposes him, his Lordship carries it
clearly and gives his empty Reader full satisfaction.

He tells you out of Catholic Authors, that Princes may resist the
oppressions of Ecclesiastics, and themselves have privilege to exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: That Popes have been convented and deposed: That
Emperors have changed Patriarchs, and that the Kings of England have as much
power as Emperors. And all this to handle the Question, which is not in hand,
since our dispute is not what can be done in respect of the Popes Patriarchal
Authority, which the good Bishop himself professes the Pope has renounced these
600. years.

No doubt but the other two points will follow the former in missing the
Question. For, admitting the Popes Authority to be derived from Christ, what
grounds can there be for renouncing it, or what moderation is the rejjecting
it capable of? Nay even, if it were of humane institution, many things there
are which cannot be rejected, unless it appear the abuses are not otherwise
remediable.

Suppose then the Christian World had chosen themselves one Head for the
preservation o^ ^o precious a Jewel, as Unity in Religion, how great
absurdities must that Head commit, what wrong^ must it do, to cause it self
to be justly deposed, and not only the Person deposed, but the very
Government abolish't.

Suppose again, that this alteration should ^ee made by some one party of the
Christian Common-^ealth, which must separate it self from the assistance and
communication of the ^^st of Christianity; ought not far weightier causes be
expected, or greater abuses committed?

Suppose thirdly, that by setting aside this Supreme Head, eternal dissentions
will inevibly follow in the whole Church of Christ, to the utter ruin of faith
and good life, which our Savior thought worth the coming down from Heaven to
plant among us; and then tell me, whether the refusal to comply with the
humors of a lustful Prince, be ground enough ^o renounce so necessary an
Authority. Let the Bishop be now asked, whether Kings deserve to be deposed,
and Monarchy it self rejected for such abuses as he gathers against the Pope?
or whether there may not easily be made a collection of as many an I great
misgovernments against the Court of England, or any other Country? Let him
remember whether like abuses were not alleged against his own
Parliamentary-Prelacy, when it was put down. Will he justify, that if the
m^^demeanours pretended against them had been true, the extirpation of Prelacy
had been lawful? Surely he would find out many remedies which he would think
necessary to be first tried; and S^^ggin should as soon have chosen a tree to
be hanged on, as ^hee have ended the number of expedients to be ^^yed, before
he would give his assent to the extirpation of Episcopacy.

It is then of little concern to examine whether his complaints be true or
false, since he does not show there was no other remedy but division: and much
more, since it is known, if the authority be of Christ's institution, no just
cause can possibly be given for its abolishment: but most, because all other
Catholic Countries might have made the same exception which England pretends,
yet they remain still in communion with the Church of Rome, whose Authority you
cry out against as intolerable; nay, the former Ages of our Country, which
your self cite, had the same cause to cast the Popes supremacy out of the
land, yet rather preferred to continue in the peace of the Church, then attempt
so destructive an innovation as Schism draws after it. Neither n^w after we
have broke the ice, do our neighbor Nations think it reasonable to follow our
example, and drown their unity in the waters of Contradiction.

Lastly, the pretenses on which the English Schism was originally made, were
far different from those you now take up to defend it; there was then no talk
of imposing new Creeds as the conditions of Communion; no mention of the
abominations of Idolatry and Superstition, which now fill your Pulpits, nor
indeed any other original quarrel, but the Popes proceeding according to the
known Laws of the Church, which unfortunately happened to be contrary to the
tyrannical humor of the King.

The other point of due moderation, is a very pleasant Topic, had I a mind to
answer at large his Book; The first part of moderation, is the separating
themselves from their Errors, not their Churches; this signifies to declare
them Idolaters, superstitious, wicked, and nevertheless communicate with them;
reconciling thus light to darkness, and making Christ and Antichrist to be of
the same society. I confess this a very good moderation for him that has no
Religion in his heart, or acknowledges his own the worst, there being no danger
for him to fear seducing by communication with others. But whoever is confident
of his own, by this very fact implicitly disapproves others. I cannot say mine
is true, but I must say the opposite is false: mine is good, but the opposite,
I must say, is naught: mine necessary, but I must judge* that which is
inconsistent carries to damnation, though I am bound both to pity and love the
person that dis^ents. Therefore, who does not censure* a contrary Religion,
holds not his own certain, that is, has none.

The second part of moderation he places in their inward charity, which, if
he had manifested by their external works, we might have had occasion to
believe him: Our Savior telling us the tree is known by the fruit it bears.

The third part therefore, he is pleased to think may be found, in that they
only take away Points of Religion, and add none. Wherein is a double Error.
For first, to take away goodness, is the greatest evil that can be done. What
more mischievous than to abrogate good laws, good practices. Let them look on
the Scotch Reformation, who have taken the memory of Christ from our eyes, by
pulling down Pictures and Crosses; the memory of His principal actions, by
abolishing Holidays; the esteem of virtue, by vilifying his Saints, and left
him only in the mouths of babbling Preachers, that disfigure him to the people,
as themselves please. What if they took away the New Testament too, and even
solemn Preaching, and left all to the will of a frantic Teacher, were not this
a great moderation, because they added nothing?

The second abuse is, that he who positively denies, ever adds the contrary to
what he takes away. He that makes it an Article, there is no Purgatory, no
Mass, no prayer to Saints, has as many Articles, as he who holds the contrary.
Therefore this kind of moderano is a purefolly.

The last Point he deems to be a preparation of mind to believe and practice
whatever the Universal Church believes and practices ^ and this is the greatest
mock-fool Proposition of all the rest. First they will say, there is no
Universal Church, or if any, indeterminate, that is, no man knows which it is;
and then, with a false and hypocritical heart, profess a great readiness to
believe and obey it. Poor Protestants, who are led by the nose after such silly
Teachers and Doctrines: who, following the steps of our old mother Eve, are
flattered with the promses of knowledge, like the knowledge of God, but paid
only with the pure experience of evil.

In his seventh Chapter, he professes, that all Princes and Republics of the
Roman Communion, do in effect the same things which the Protestants do, when
they have occasion, or at least plead for it What non sense will not an ill
cause bring a desperate man to? All this while he would persuade the World
that Papists are most injurious to Princes, prejudicing their Crowns, and
subjecting their Dominions to the will of the Pope. He has scarce done saying
so, but with a contrary blast drives as far back again, confessing all he
said* to be false; and that the same Papists hold the very doctrine of the
Protestants in effect, and the difference is only in words: So that this
Chapter seems expressly made to justify the Papists, and to show, that, though
the Popes sometimes personally exceed, yet when their passion is over, or the
present interest ceases, then they acknowledge for Catholics and Orthodox,
those who before opposed them, as also that the Catholic Divines, who teach
the doctrine of resisting the Pope in such occasions, are not, for that, cast
out of Communion; which is as much as to say, it is not our Religion, or any
public Tenet in our Church, that binds any to those rigorous assertions, which
the Protestants condemn.

If this be so, what can justify your bloody Laws, and bloodier Execution,
for the fourscore years you were in power? Why were the poor Priests, who had
offended no farther than to receive from a Bishops hands the power of
consecrating the body of Christ, condemned to die a Traitors death? Why the
Layman, that harbored any such person, made liable to the same forseiture of
estate and life? Why were Baptisms, Churchings, Burials, Marriages, all
punished? Why were men forced to go to your Synagogues under great penalties?
Seldom any lawful conviction exacted, but proceeding upon mere surmises. A
Priest, arrested upon the least suspicion, and hurried before the Magistrate,
was not permitted to refer his cause to witnesses, but compelled to be his own
Accuser; and, without any shadow of proof so much as inquired after, if he
denied not himself, immediately sent to prison as a Traitor. A Priest, coming
to his Trial before the Judges, was never permitted to require proof of his
being a Priest; It sufficed, that, having said Mass, or heard a Confession, he
could not prove himself a knave.

What shall I say of the setting up of Pursuivants to hare poor Catholics in
all places and times; I have seen, when generally they kept their houses
close-shut, and, if any knocked, there was a sudden pang and solicitude,
before they durst open their doors. They could neither eat nor sleep in any
other security, than that which a good Conscience gave them.

But the cruelst part of all, was to defame us of Treason. First you make a
Law, that, to acknowledge the Successor of S. Peter had a common
superintendency over the Church, was Treason; and then brand us for Traitors.
Should a Presbyterian or Independent Power make it Treason to acknowledge
Prelacy, would you think it reasonable presently to conclude all the
older-fashion'd Protestants Traitors?

Nor can I persuade my self I offer any violence to Charity, if I plainly and
roundly charge you, that in all this you proceeded flatly against your
Consciences, it being impossible you should really judge the bare receiving
Orders beyond Sea to be Treason, which is abundantly convinced by your very
offer of pardon, nay sometimes preferment, if he, whom you made the people
believe was a dangerous and bloody Traitor, would but go to Church with you;
For what Priest dyed for being a Priest, but he might have rescued himself at
the last hour by such submission? What Priest was so bad, whom you were not
ready to entertain with honor, if he would take party with you?

So unlucky is his Lordship in this Chapter, that, whatever his intention is,
he absolves us, or at least condemns himself, if he would be understood as the
Letter of his Exceptions sounds, he absolutely clears our Religion of a
calumny, which the Protestants most injuriously charge upon us, that our
vassalage to the Pope destroys our subjection to our Prince; citing so many
instances, where Catholics, remaining such, have disobeyed the Pope. If he on
purpose lays his sense to be ambiguous, of which I have some jealousy,
because he uses that juggling phrase in effect, then he absolutely proves
himself a Deceiver. In short, if he mean honestly, he justifies us; if
otherwise, every honest man will condemn him; But whatever his inward meaning
is, the Case opened will declare it self.

Christ, being to build his spiritual Kingdom upon the Basis, not only of the
Roman Monarchy, then flourishing, but of a multitude of Kingdoms, either bred
out of the destruction of that, or originally independent and distinct from it,
which, in process of time, should embrace his Faith, saw it necessary to make
such a* band of Unity betwixt the Churches, of which his spiritual Empire was
to be integrated, that it neither should be offensive to temporal Princes, nor
yet unprovided of means to keep the Church in such amity as to be able to work
like the Congregation of Jerusalem, which had Cor unum and animam unam. For
this reason he gave the principality among his Apostles to S. Peter, and
consequently to his Successors among theirs. The effect of this Principality
was, that when public meetings of Bishops were necessary, all emulation, who
should have recourse to the other, was taken away, since it was known all were
to defer to him, meet as and where, was most fitting for him.

Again, if any inconvenience fell among Christians, there wanted not one who was
by office to look to it, though in the place where it fell out, there were no
superior Authority to curb the offenders. This one Seat might, by the ordinary
providence of Almighty God, keep a continuance of Succession from S. Peter to
the end of the World, whereas the vicissitude of humane nature permitted not
the like to be done to all the Sees where all the rest of the Apostles had
signed their Faith by their precious death. Hence it is the Sea of Rome is
invested with the special privilege of Mother and Mistress of the Church. But,
not to dive into all, or the questionable consequences of this Primacy, this
only I intend to insist upon; that it is the hinge upon which all the common
government and unity in Faith, Sacraments, Ceremonies, and communication of
spiritual Fraternity depends, which being removed, the Church vanishes into a
pure Anarchy, no one Province or Country having the least obligation to any
other, to repair to it, to obey it, to make Meetings and common Ordinances with
it. So that the whole frame of the Church will be utterly dissolved, ceasing to
be a Church, and becoming a ruinous heap of stones, precious indeed in
themselves, but without order, shape, or connection.

By this it clearly follows, whatever is the truth of those Questions which
our Bishop reckons up to have been disputed between other Christian Countries
and the Papacy, that as long as this Principality we speak of, is
acknowledged, so long there is an Unity in the Christian Church, all particular
Churches being by this subordination perfectly one, both with their Head, and
among themselves. This is the bridle our Savior put in the mouth of his
Church, to wield it sweetly which way he pleased. No dissension in Faith or
Discipline, nay not any war among Christian Princes could annoy the World, if
this Authority were duly preserved and governed; Many excellent effects we have
seen of it, and more the world is likely to enjoy, when the admirable
conveniences of it shall be unpassionately understood.

What Christian Prince can choose but be glad to have an Arbitrator, so prudent,
so pious, so disinteressed, as a good Pope should be, to reconcile differences,
and to hinder bloodshed, either in his own people, or between his neighbors;
And, who sees not, that the Popes office and condition, among those who
reverence him, is perfectly proper for such an effect beyond the hopes of
wisdom that had not known th'exprience of it. What a desperate attempt then is
it to bite at this bridle, and strive to put the whole Christian World in
confusion? This is your crime, in this consists your Schism, in this your
impiety and wickedness.

Agreeing then, that this is the substance of the Papacy, temporal
preheminences and wealth being but accidental to it, we shall presently see
all those arrows which the Bishop shoots against us, fall directly on his own
head; For if the Papacy stand firm and strong in all those Countries that have
resisted the Pope when they conceived he encroach'd on their' liberties, it is
evident, notwithstanding all such disputes, the Being and Nature of one Church
is entirely conserved, they all governing themselves in an Unity of Faith and
Sacraments and Correspondence like one Body, as is visible to any that will but
open his eyes, and so are Members of one Christian Community. Whereas the
Reform (as they call it) has cut off England from all this communication and
correspondence, and made it no part of any Church, greater than it self; and by
consequence, that can pretend to Universality and Catholicism, but a headless
Synagogue, without Brotherhood or Order; if joined with any other, it is not in
a common head, but with the tails of opposition to the Roman Catholic.

No more can the several Protestant Churches be allowed to compose one Body,
than all the ancient Heretics did, nay than Turks and Jews and Christians may
be now said to do; since the sole root of unity Protestants can pretend, is
only their agreement in certain general Points, which most of the old
Heretics professed; and even Turks, and Jews believe some part of the
Christian Faith: As for the Protestant distinction, that all are of one
Communion, who agree in fundamentals, it is no better than a mere shift, til
they exhibit a list of such Points, and prove them obligingly and
satisfactorily to all the rational people of the World, that they, and they
only, are essential to Christian Communion.

His eighth Chapter would fain be thought to prove the Pope and Court of Rome
guilty of Schism. First, because she takes upon her to be Mistress*, where
she is but Sister to other Churches. It is their saying, and our denying it,
till they have proved what they affirm. The second Argument is a mee^ calumny,
that she obtrudes new Creeds, and unjustly excommuicates those who will not
receive them.

At the third blow he lays the Axe (as he says) to the root of Schism; but,
if I understand his words, it is to his own legs. The Papacy (says ^ee) qua
talis, which he interprets, as it is maintained by many. Goodnight my Lord of
Londonderry, for certainly your wits are in the dark. If you once begin to
say, as it is maintained by many, you imply, it is not maintained by all, and
therefore not the Papacy qua talis, for so Catholics have not the least
difference amongst them. If you will dispute against private Opinions, cite
your Authors, and argue against them, not the Church, whose belief is
contained in the Decrees of Councils, and universal consent of Fathers and
Doctors.

His fourth Charge is, that the Popes hold themselves to be Bishops of every
particular See; which is a more gross and false imputation than any of the
rest. Other two branches he offers at, but confesses them not to be decided in
our Church, and therefore can make nothing for him.

His ninth Chapter pretends to solve the Romanists Arguments; and first that
grand one of Schism; which he maintains to be so clearly unimputable to
Protestants, that he says they hold Communion with thrice as many Christians
as we do. And truly, if by Christians, he means those who lay claim to the
name of Christ, I neither deny his answer, nor envy him his multitude; For
M^^ichees, Gnostics, Carpocratians, Arians, Nestorians, Eu^y^hians, etc.
without number, all ^surp to themselves the honor of this Title; and I most
faithfully protest, I do not think his Lordship has any solid reason to refuse
Communion to the worst of them. But if he means by Christians, those, who
never changed the doctrine which their Fathers taught them, as received from
the Apostles, so let him show me one, who is not in communion with the Roman
Church, and I also shall be of that one's Communion.

The second Argument he undertakes, is, That Protestants admit not the Council
of Trent. To which he replies, it was not General, because the Heretical
Patriarchs were not called; many Bishops were absent; too many Italians there;
fewer Bishops present at the determination of weightiest Points, than the King
of England could assemble in a month. What trivial stuff is this? Is not a
Parliament the General Representative of the Nation, unless every Lord, though
a known and condemned Rebel, be summoned? or unless every Member, that has a
right to sit there, be present? Who is so impertinent, as to quarrel at the
generalness of a Parliament, if some Court* Lords be admitted to their Voices?
or if the number of Voters in some Parliaments be fewer than in others? What Is
this to the purpose, if none that have a true right, be excluded? Yet these are
the grand Exceptions; only in some words, wherein he expresses his anger,
Passion made him quite forget they might possibly be retorted upon his own
condition; else what a blindness is it to call the Bishops of Italy, hungry
parasitical Pensioners? It seems, my Lord, you keep a good Table, speak the
truth boldly, and have great Revenues, independent of any.

As for the instance of the French Churches non-admittance of the Council of
Trent, your self confesses it is there received for matters of doctrine; and I
confess, that for other Canons, the execution of them may be omitted, unless
the true Superiors press their observance.

Secondly, he says it was not free; A false and injurious calumny, taken out
of Sleidan, accounted by our part a frank liar and forger.

Thirdly, he seigns an Objection to himself, their breaking from the
Patriarchat, which already we have cleared, is not the question, and himself,
though weakly and sillily, endeavors to prove cannot stand with the claim of
Papal Authority from Christ. After these, he descends to consider such of our
Arguments as he is pleased to think of lesser importance.

As first, That Protestants have no Clergy; because no Priests: For the notion
of a Priest is to be a Sacrificer, and their Reform renounces all truly called
Sacrifice. This he hides in obscure and common terms of matter and form, and
shuffles likewise certain common words in Answer.

Secondly, because their Ministers, whom they term Priests, were made by no
Bishops. The Controversy is largely treated by Doctor Champney against Mason.
He answers it with childish and impudent words. Father Oldcorn, whom he cites,
was known to be a weak and timorous man, who might be easily surprised. I
could never hear, that any Catholic, esteemed judicious, was ever admitted to
a free perusal of their Registers; but know well, that the Contemporaries
protested against any lawful Ordination of their first Bishops, and were
answered by silence. He says they hold no spiritual Jurisdiction from the
Crown; But the Statutes of the Nation, and their own Oaths say the contrary.
Let him dispute it with the Lawyers.

The tenth Chapter contains what he expects to be the result of his Book. He
first complains of hard usage, and thinks the very Turk not so cruel as those
who now persecute Protestants in England. Truly no good man, I believe, wishes
his Party harm; But me thinks he might remember, they suffer not so much as
themselves have done in their Reign, against those, who, in respect of them,
were Aborigines; whose possession was the same that Christian Religion had
among us; And would to God, they could, even now be quiet and friendly, when
they are in eadem damnatione; Prelacy, as well as Popery, being voted damnable
Heresy by the late Parliament,

It Is true, their Religion, as considered including Episcopacy, is cast out of
the Land; but then how comes Episcopacy to be essential to their Religion? Have
not the Bishops always professed themselves of the same Communion with the
Huguenots of France, the Zuinglians of Switzerland, etc. who hold Episcopacy
abominable? The persons of such Bishops as reside in England, and are accused
of nothing but Episcopacy, live free and secure, enjoy their whole Estates,
except what belonged to their Dignity, and have no Oaths imposed on their
Consciences. Were Catholics permitted this liberty, I am* confident you should
seldom be troubled with hearing their complaints of Persecution; and yet on
all occasions you are still upraiding the liberty given to Papists, which is a
mere blindness of malice. Do you not see all the Catholics of England, such as
never engaged in the war, are, purely upon the score of Religion, at this day
sequestered, and two thirds of their Estates taken from them? Do you not see
our Priests, when discovered, proceeded against as Traitors? is it not enough
to satisfy your* uncharitable eyes, that so many of them have been hanged,
drawn and quartered for their Religion*

Are these the men that pretend moderation, and all day long cry up brotherly
Charity? I will offer ther^ this bargain, in the name of all the Catholics of
England, who I am persuaded will readily subscribe the Contract. That two
indifferent persons read over all the Statutes made since the Reformation, and
every where, in stead of Papist, write Protestant, with this mercy too, that
the execution shall be now and then interrupted, and a condemned Minister
sometimes have reprive* nay, and more than we can obtain of them, they shall
enjoy all the privileges of Papists, without the least envy from us. If they
refuse this fair offer, let them never hereafter be so impertinent as to
repine at our liberty, and with the same breath complain of their own
sufferings.

As to his desirable intention of Unity in the Church; First I could wish they
would let real Charity take root in their hearts. Secondly, not think the
misdemeanors of some Popes a sufficient warrant to break the Unity of the
Church. Thirdly, to receive the root of Christianity, that is, a practical
Infallibility in the Church, the ready and only means to know the truth of
Christ's Law; which being denied, there is no Religion left in the World.

This is that which is chiefly required, without this, how muchsoever we have
Christ in our tongues, we are Atheists in our hearts, proud Luciferian
Erecters of our selves above all that is called God, Judgers of Christ and his
Law, not obeyers and servants. This is that which only can make a
Reconciliation both in Doctrine and Government; and, as long as it is
neglected, all we endeavor toward peace, is labor cast away. If truly and
cordially he, or any other study means for peace, let them endeavor it so as
to leave a Religion and a known Law of Christ, and an open method of coming to
it in the World. Otherwise all lovers of Christ and Christianinity can have no
share or participation with them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 1. Parricide. p. 8. l. 9. Nice. p. 18. l. 31. self-acknowledg'd.
p. 33. l. 10. Pope. p. 37. l. 1. Sect. 6. p. 40. l. 8. other Crew. p. 67. l.
34. this. p. 68. l. 3. given by. p. 88. l. 11. Premises. p. 96. l. 9.
alleging. p. 101. l. 32. called. p. 105. l. 22. solved. p. 110. l. 21. which
can. p. 115. l. 2. quaere the Title in the Table. p. 118. l. 34: shows it. p.
119. l. 4. Patriarchs. l. 24. the Novel. p. 123. l. 30. be one man or one horse
p. 143. l. 3. did it not. p. 147. l. 5. by some p. 157. l. 29. rake. p. 162. l.
21. Arch-Heretick. p. 163. l. 10. Quid. p. 199. l. 3. their su- p. 210. l. 20.
which. p. 217. l. 24. flagrant. p. 223. l. 31. on any. p. 223. l. 13* it in. p,
256. l. 1. by your. p. 259. l. 20. as they. p. 280. l. 2. in that. p. 288. l.
20. of your. p. 312. l. 29. in his.


